in): Th

adopter
ie Secre
on the
:onsulta
the nexl
held al

TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING: 1 MAY 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l41 8/Rev.l)

........,... ........... ..

Pay

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . , . . , . . . . . , . , . . . , . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . .

2

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8560);
(bl Report of the Secretary-General under General Assembly resolution
2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem (S/81 46) . . . . . . . , . , . , . . . . . . . . . .

2

S/PV.1418

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTEENTH

Held in New York on Wednesday,
President: Lord CARADON
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland),

4. I would not wish to miss this opportunity to say today
that those of us who have worked day by day with
Mr. Goldberg greatly respect his persistence and his fairness.
It would be impudent for me to enlarge on his qualities, his
skill as a negotiator, his perseverance as a conciliator, and
his wisdom as a Judge. We have been privileged to work
with an outstanding American who has brought to our
labours and our relations three gifts all too rare in public
life: the gift of magnanimity, the gift of devotion to
principle, and the gift of generosity and friendship. We
mourned his great predecessor, we shall welcome his
experienced successor, and we shall sorely miss him. I
extend to him my most sincere affection and admiration.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l41 g/Rev.l)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
The situation in the Middle East:
(n) Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8560);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under General
Assembly resolution 2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem (S/8146).

5 r Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): Mr. President, the more than generous tribute that you have just
pronounced means more to me than I can say or adequately
respond to. In attempting to respond to it, I believe I must
address not one person but three.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

1. The PRESIDENT: First of all, I wish on behalf of all
members of the Council to express our gratitude to
Ambassador Malik. We thank him for the able and
impressive way in which he has conducted our deliberations
during April. He has done so with robust vigour and
forthright directness, qualities which we expect from his
proud native land of the Ukraine, It is a privilege to succeed
him, and I am very glad to do so on the first of May, a day
of special significance to all socialists, a very good day for
one socialist to hand over to another. It will be my humble
endeavour to live up to the standards which he has SO
signally set.

6. First, I must address my dear personal friend Lord
Caradon, whom I got to know when I came to this Council
three years ago and whose wisdom and kindness and
optimism have sustained and cheered me during many a
difficult time. Let me express my warm thanks to you, Sir,
and the hope that my departure from the United Nations
will not require me and my wife to depart from the
pleasure of your friendship and that of your charming and
beautiful wife.
7. Next, I must addressthe distinguished representative of
the United Kingdom. Let me say how much I have iearned
to admire the outstanding service which I have seen you,
Sir, render in this Council, not only to your great country,
to which, as the world knows, my country is bound by the
strongest ties of common tradition and affection, but also
to the Council itself in all its work. I am sure I can speak
for every member of the Council when I say that all of us
have benefited and learned ftom your diplomatic skill, your
wisdom, your kindly wit-which you have again displayed
today-your sense of proportion and, always, your unfailingly generous and patient disposition. You, Mr. President,
as the representative of your country, have truly set an
example for all of us as a model of what a United Nations
dipIomat ideally should be.

2. It has always been a comfort to me in this Council to be
so well supported on the right and on the left. If I want
conservative advice, I can turn to the distinguished Soviet
Ambassador on my right, knowing there is nothing so
soundly conservative as a good Communist. If I want to
refer to the highest liberal traditions, I can turn to
Ambassador Goldberg on my left. I am particularly glad
that in this month I can continue to do so, in spite of the
sad news that Ambassador Goldberg will soon be leaving US.
3. Before we become immersed in the business of the day,
allow me to say a very respectful word about Ambassador
Goldberg’s contribution here at the United Nations. He
came to us from the calm cool of the Supreme Court. He
did not despise the descent into the confused heat of the
arena of international controversy. It was a courageous
decision. A resignation from the, Supreme Court is the
.’

1 May 1968, at 3 p.m.

nearest thing they have in this country to the renunciation
of a peerage, in mine. He came to us with the highest
reputation, from the highest judicial position in his country, and here, in the turmoil of our disputes and conflicts,
he has added to that enviable reputation.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern IreIand and United States of America.

2.

MEETING

8. And finally, Mr. President, I must, in response, address
a few words to you in your capacity as President of the
1

Security Council. The fact that you said what you did from
that Chair means a great deal to me additionally. Above and
beyond the differences between Governments which it is
our duty to try to harmonize, I have in three years learned
that we have at this Council table a tradition of mutual
forbearance and mutual respect, developed over the years in
the service of the Charter. There is here, although sometimes the world does not recognize it sufficiently, a sense of
common purpose to subdue the conflicts of nations to the
Charter’s great purposes. I profoundly believe in that
tradition and that sense of common purpose and I believe it
is one of the great, priceless possessions of the world
community in this troubled age; indeed, I believe the
common purpose which is developed in this Council is one
of our best hopes for the future, for our children and our
children’s children,
9. I have been privileged to serve in the company of able
colleagues here in the Council and at the United Nations,
and I shall always regard it as one of the highest privileges
of my life. It has been an equally high privilege to serve
with our Secretary-General, who sets an example for all of
us and for all those who have been recruited in the great
tradition of the international civil service to serve the cause
of peace.

16. At the last meeting of the Security Council [1417th
meeting/, following a request for clarification from the
Algerian delegation, the President said that at our next
meeting-the meeting we are now holding-the
Council
would take up the entire question of Jerusalem as requested
by the Jordanian representative.
17. Referring to resolution 2254 (ES-V), adopted by the
General Assembly at its fifth emergency special session on
14 July 1967, I see that paragraph 3 “requests the
Secretary-General to report to the Security Council and the
General Assembly”. That report of the Secretary-General
appears in document S/8146 of 12 September 1967.
Accordingly, my delegation wonders whether it would not
be appropriate for the Council to include in its agenda the
Secretary-General’s report I have just mentioned, which was
submitted in pursuance of General Assembly resolution
2254 (ES-V).
18. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Algeria first of all for his kindly reference to myself, and 1
refer to the proposal which he has put before us, which is in
regard to the report of the Secretary-General [S/8146]
under General Assembly resolution 2254 (ES-V) relating to
Jerusalem. As the representative of Algeria has made clear,
the Secretary-General was requested to report both to the
Security Council and to the General Assembly on the
situation in Jerusalem, and Mr. Thalmann’s report was duly
circulated accordingly.

10. I shall be leaving here at the end of the month,‘but
your remarks, Mr. President, have called forth from me this
expression of goodwill to all of my colleagues here. I
sincerely wish them Godspeed in the most difficult task in
which they are engaged, the task of bringing nearer to
fruition the great goals of the Charter.

19. I would, therefore, wish to consult the Council on the
proposal which the representative of Algeria has put before
us; and specifically to inquire whether any objection is
raised to adding to our agenda the report to which he
referred? if there is no comment from members of the
Council, I shall take it that there is no objection to the
addition to the agenda which has been proposed.

11. I thank you again most profoundly, Mr. President,
Adoption of the agenda
12. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Algeria on a point of order.

The agenda, as amended, was adopted.

13. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated porn
French): Before I explain the point of order which my
delegation wishes to raise, perhaps you will allow the
representative of a young socialist revolution to join our
President, himself a democrat and socialist, in paying a
tribute to the distinguished representative of the socialist
October Revolution.

The situation in the Middle East:
(al letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordawaddressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8560);
161 Report of the Secretary-General
under General
Assemble resolution 2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem
(S/8146)

14. My delegation is also happy to greet you, Mr. President, on the occasion of your taking that office. We have
no doubt that under your enlightened and good-humoured
direction we shall make considerable progress in the many
tasks with which the Security Council will have to cope
during the month of May.

20. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken previously I propose now, with the consent of the
Council, to invite the representatives of Jordan and Israel to
take places at the Council table in order to participate,
without the right to vote, in the Council’s discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Farra
(Jordan) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Council table.

15. My delegation would like to draw the Council’s
attention to the fact that the provisional agenda, as it
appears in document S/Agenda/l418/Rev.l dated 30 April
1968, includes the letter dated 25 April 1968 /S/&i601
from the Permanent Representative of Jordan addressed to
the President of the Security Council. The last paragraph of
that letter calls for an urgent meeting of the Security
Council to consider the situation in Jerusalem and to take
effective measures to remedy that situation.

21. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now continue its
consideration of the question before it, The first speaker is
the representative of Jordan, on whom I nob call.
22. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): We are gathered here today
to consider the situation in Jerusalem and the continued
2

Israeli violations of United Nations resolutions. My Government has requested me, as a matter of urgency, to inform
the Council that it has irrefutable evidence that the Israeli
authorities are intent on going ahead with their military
display in Jerusalem, in defiance of resolution 250 (1968)
adopted by the Council on Saturday, 27 April 1968.

twenty years of existence. Israel, which the Zionists have
established to tell the Jews of the world that they do not
belong to any community or owe allegiance to any country
except a Jewish State, has never lived up to the Charter
obligations of a Member State. Its responses to the United
Nations recommendations and resolutions on Palestine have
consistently ranged from utter deceit to outright defiance
and contempt, depending each time on the circumstances
of the particular situation.

23. This intention has already been made clear to the
Council by Mr. Tekoah and by the fact that on Monday last
a full-dress rehearsal of the military parade intended for
Thursday was held in Jerusalem. The parade went over the
nine-kilometre route as all roads into the city were closed,
Moreover, Israel openly rejected the Council resolution
250 (1968) unanimously adopted last Saturday which
called upon Israel to refrain from holding its military
demonstration in Jerusalem. That rejection was confirmed
in a letter sent to the Secretary-General by the Foreign
Minister of Israel.

27. The New York Times in its editorial yesterday quite
rightly. said that “Thursday may become a day of sorrow
for Israel’s friends abroad if the Israelis persist in their plan
to parade through East Jerusalem in defiance of the
resolution unanimously adopted last weekend by the
United Nations Security Council”. Yes, Thursday will be a
day of sorrow for the friends of Israel. We emphasize the
point that those friends share the responsibility for what is
happening because to a great extent they helped bring
about a situation which is now creating a tragic atmosphere
in the City of the Prince of Peace. The City of Jerusalem
was always a centre of peace, spiritual values and inspiration for all faiths and all nations. Now it is a base for
military demonstrations and provocations. With the rumbling of tanks, roaring of planes and arrogant display of
brute force, which is most regrettable, the friends of Israel
are expected to take more effective steps to help the
Council remedy this most unfortunate situation and help
genuinely-and I underline the words “help genuinely”-to
bring peace to the land of peace.

24. My Government is still hoping that the Security
Council will take adequate steps to remedy the new
situation created as a result of the utter contempt shown by
the Israeli authorities for the Council’s decision. We come
to the Council because we have all faith and confidence in
the United Nations, and in the Security Council which is
primarily responsible for the maintenance of peace and
security. We have confidence in our able and dedicated
Secretary-General. We therefore appeal to the Council to do
everything possible to prevent further deterioration of an
already explosive situation. We appeal to the Sec-etaryGeneral to use his authority to stop the Israeli demonstration of military force in the City of the Prince of Peace. I
urge you, Mr. President, on behalf not only of my
Government but of my people, to use your authority and
put your weight behind another attempt to emphasize to
Israel the dangerous consequences of the course it is now
following in utter contempt of world public opinion and
United Nations authority.

28. Surely, we agree with The New York Times that unIess
the contemplated Israeli provocation is stopped, Thursday-tomorrow-will
be a day of sorrow for every friend of
Israel, because Israel is indeed embarrassing its friends. It is
not enough to call the day on which Israel carries out its
military demonstration in defiance of Security Council
resolution 250 (1968) a day of sorrow: it should be called a
day of examination of conscience.

25. Three days have passed since the Council unanimously
adopted its resolution calling upon Israel to refrain from
holding its military demonstration in Jerusalem. The Israeli
rejection of that decision makes it very clear: first, that
Israel is deliberately and with premeditation obstructing all
peaceful efforts which, according to our Secretary-General,
were going forward to find a peaceful settlement of the
problems in the area; second, that the Israel authorities are
intentionally
and with malice aggravating tension and
cultivating a situation fraught with danger; third, that the
Israeli authorities arrogantly and with contempt defy and
undermine the authority of the Security Council; fourth,
that the Israeli authorities, which invaded Arab territories
and in a sneak attack occupied Arab lands, are now turning
to declare war against the Security Council, the Charter of
the United Nations, its values, and everything called law
and order.

29. Mr. Tekoah went so far as to claim that the Israeli
demonstration of military force on 2 May will be shared by
men of goodwill everywhere. Undoubtedly the world
abounds with men of goodwill who cherish peace and
uphold the cause of justice. In this very Chamber the
representatives of more than three quarters of the population of the world have opposed the subjugation of the City
of Jerusalem. But the Israelis do not mind distorting
everything to serve their political ends. To them, whatever
is in harmony with their objectives is right and accepted
and whatever is in discord with them is wrong and rejected,
even if all mankind thinks otherwise.
30. The Arabs have now been the custodians of the Holy
Places, including the Jewish Holy Places, for many centuries, and until the Zionists came to spread their false and
sIanderous allegations there was no cause for complaint.

26. Until the creation of Israel in 1948 by the United
Nations itself, at the expense of the Arab people of
Palestine, it was hardly thought possible that any conduct
contemptuous of the Organization, the rule of law and the
norms of morality and decency would be allowed to prevail
with impunity. Yet all this has been and still is the general
pattern characterizing the behaviour of Israel throughout its

iI. In 1854. when the Crimean War broke out, feuding
church groups entrusted the keys to the Church ofthe Holy
Sepulchre, which is the site of Christ’s crucifixion and
burial and is holy to all Christiandom, to a Moslem Arab
family, the Nusseibah family. The Nusseibahs have kept
that trust with the continued consent of all churches to the
3

present day. That is the same Nusseibah family of Jerusalem of which Mr. Tekoah said on 27 April when speaking of
the Arab women demonstrating in Jerusalem against the
Israeli military demonstration: “Some of them, like Miss
Saidi Nusseibah, sent especially for that purpose from the
east bank by the Jordanian authorities” /141&h meeting,
para. 801. The keys to the Holy Sepulchre are still
entrusted to Moslems,to the Nusseibahfamily, which
comesfrom Jerusalemand not from the eastbank. I have
pictures here of the demonstration to which Mr. Tekoah
referred, saying that only fifty women had participated,
with the leadercomingfrom Amman. With your permission, Mr. President,I shouldlike those picturesto bemade
availableto the membersof the Council so that they can
seefor themselveswhat the demonstratorswent through,
the actsof persecution,the part played by Israeliforce, in
the city of peace.Thosepictures alsoshowthe signscarried
by the ladiesof Jerusalem.Members of the Council are
entitled to look at thosepictures and comparethemwith
the figuresgivenby Mr. Tekoah the other day.I havethem
availablehere.1
32. The King-CraneCommission,sent by PresidentWilson
of the United Statesto carry out an investigationon the
spot of the question of who was the most eligible
custodian,stated:

particularly through the good offices of the Security
Council and the Secretary-General,to refrain from holding
their military demonstrationin Jerusalem.Israel haspersistedin its rejection of the resolution and, ason previous
occasions,
hasnot respondedto the Council’scall or heeded
its pleas.Instead,tanks and other heavy vehicleshavebeen
rumbling through the streets of Jerusalem, since the
beginningof this week, in preparationfor the big displayof
Israel’spotential for aggression.It is now an acceptedfact
that the military display will take place in Jerusalem
tomorrow, despitethe Council’s call for its cancellation,1s
this to be allowed to passwith impunity, or will the
Council face up to its obligationsunder Chapter VII of the
Charter, which wasintended specifically to copewith such
brazen acts of defiance of the rule of law and the United
Nations?
34. The attention not only of Jordan, not only of the
Arab States, not only of the Christian and Moslemworlds,
not only of the smallPowers,but alsoof peoplesall around
the world is now focusedon you. Whether Security Council
resolutionsare to be taken seriouslyor not will dependon
your decision.

35. Israel obviously seesno room for United Nations
peaceful efforts in the area and its representativein the
“With the best possibleintentions, it may be doubted United Nationshasclearly stated that it would not tolerate
as
whether the Jewscould possiblyseemto eitherChristians any interferencein Jerusalem,which it already considers
a
matter
of
internal
jurisdiction.
or Moslems proper guardians of the holy places,or
custodiansof the Holy Land as a whole. The reasonis
this: the placeswhich aremost sacredto Christians-those 36. In July 1967, Israel did not feel that the time had
come to declare openly the annexation of Jerusalemand
having to do with Jesus-and which are alsosacredto
Moslems,are not only not sacredto Jews,but abhorrent informed the Assemblythat the stepsthat had beentaken
to them. It is simply impossible,under those circum- related to nothing more than the integration necessaryto
secureadministrative measuresdesignedto render to the
stances,for Moslemsand Christians to feel satisfiedto
have theseplacesin Jewishhands, or under the custody Arab inhabitants servicessuch as water, electricity, civic
of Jews.There arestill other placesabout whichMoslems co-operation, social welfare and education. On 27 April
1968, somenine months later, Mr. Tekoah unveiled more
must have the samefeeling. In fact, from this point of
completely the true intention of his Government and
view, the Moslems,just becausethe sacredplacesof all
warnedthe Council not to intervene in Jerusalemassucha
three religions are sacred to them, have made very
measuf&‘wouldbe construed asintervention in the internal
naturally much more satisfactory custodiansof the holy
affairs of Israel.Naturally we did not believethe representaplacesthan the Jewscouldbe.“2
tive of Israel last July, and we warnedthe Assemblyof this
In that finding by a responsible
American Commission
sent Israeli deceit &d policy of gradualexpansion.We did that
becausewe are very familiar with Israelitactics of attaining
by PresidentWilsonof the United Statesliesthe answerto
the Israel allegations.Is that finding of the Commission their objectivesin stages.
sufficient to put an end to all the Israeli distortionsand
fabrications?
37. At one time the Zionist leadersdeclaredtheir intention was, in the words of the Balfour Declaration,limited
33. Israeli behaviourand irresponsiblepracticesall along to a national home for the Jewish people in Palestine,
have createdthis tragic story of Jerusalemtoday. The Holy
without prejudice to the rights of the lawful inhabitants.
City of Jerusalemechoingthe tread of the Zionist armed Once that step had been taken, the Zionists unfolded yet
forces: that is the situation the Council tried to preventby
another page of their sinister programme and a new
unanimouslyadopting resolution 2.50(1968) o? 27 April,
demand,for a JewishState, was made.They werecontent,
And although Mr. Tekoah, aswell ashis ForeiggMinister, they said,with partition. When that stepwasattainedthey
has rejected the resolutionoutright we still entertain the worked f’or a third stage of their expansion. Thus they
hope that the Israeli authorities will be prevailedupon, encroached on more lands and expelled more people.
Today’s stage involves, Jerusalem,a question which the
Security Council is now considering.Through Jerusalem the
1 Seedocument
S/PV.1418/Add.l.
Israelisaim at strengtheningtheir hold on the whole west
2 See United States Department of State, Papers Relating to the
bank of Jordan. They have already enlargedthe Jerusalem
Foreign Relations of the United States: The Paris Peace Conference
areathrough legislationto include severalArab villagesand
1919, vol. XII (Washington, DC., Government
sprinting Office,
19471, p. 794.
areasin order to provide more land for Jewishsettlements.

4

38. The facts of the case are well established, and a
conclusion should not be hard to reach. However, we feel
there is reluctance on the part of some Powers in
attempting to help the Council take adequate measures.
39. We of Jordan are of the opinion, which is shared by
marry Members of the United Nations, that such reluctance
is unwarranted and damaging to the prestige and authority
of our Organization. What are the reasons for this reluctance, or, to use a better expression, sheer inaction? It
cannot be argued that it was dictated by practical wisdom.
It cannot be argued that the reason is concern for the
success of the mission of Mr. Jarring, which is being used
time and again as a screen to conceal certain aims and
intentions, Obviously it is not the Jarring mission, nor is it
practical wisdom, which causes the inaction of certain
Powers, Plainly and simply, it is political expediency which
is followed, unfortunately, without regard to legitimate
Arab rights.
40. My country has declared from the outset that it will
lend all its support to help in the success of Mr. Jarring’s
efforts to bring peace and security to the area. Consequently we have refrained and continue to refrain from any
action that would jeopardize any peaceful attempts in the
area. To strengthen Mr. Jarring’s hand will require, especially of the big Powers, ensuring that no violation takes
place in Jerusalem which would lead to a change of the
sptus quo in Jerusalem, and as such violate the United
Nations resolutions. Indeed, failure to take positive action
is one sure way to undermine the Jarring mission. The
Council’s inaction will certainly play into the hands of the
Israelis and help the Israeli authorities to impose their
military solution.
41. Let me reiterate that the Foreign Minister of Israel has
submitted a letter which reveals Israel’s complete departure
from all the positions taken by members around this table,
reflecting the unanimous sentiment in the Council. None of
the members who spoke failed to refer to the provocative
nature of the parade, The United States and Brazil, which
did not speak at the last meeting, supported resolution
250 (1968) and therefore endorsed all the findings of the
Council. We are grateful that there was unanimity in the
Council. That being the case, how can this demonstration
of the power of the Israelis be interpreted other than their
intention to further the impression of their conquest, to
boast of their military victory and defiance of religious
values? It is certainly not a thanksgiving ceremony but a
crude military victory parade. What difference is there
between this and the parade of the Nazi troops in Vienna in
March 1938 after the occupation of Austria, intended to
further the impression of conquest-both aimed at demonstrating crude military victory and both condemned,
denounced and deplored by world public opinion? World
public opinion has also denounced the provocative and
contemptuous behaviour of both movements, Zionism and
Nazism.
42. What could be worse than holding a strictly military
demonstration in the very shadow of the Holy Places of the
Old City? Most of this demonstration of power is going to
take place tomorrow in the Old City, and the main
reviewing stand will also be in the Old City, the Arab City
of Jerusalem.

43. I have dwelt on one phase of the item before the
Council, namely, the Israeli military demonstration, because of the new situation resulting from the Israeli refusal,
rejection and defiance of Security Council resolution
250 (1968). This calls for re-evaluation by the Council.
Perhaps there is still hope for stopping the parade. Perhaps
there is some way to prevent further deterioration of the
situation. We shall have more to say at a later stage on the
other phase of this item.
44. The PRESIDENT:
Israel,

I call on the representative of

45. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr, President, permit me to
extend to you my delegation’s greetings and to assure you
of our highest esteem. I should like also to express to the
outgoing President my respect for the manner in which he
conducted the debates in which my delegation participated.
46. The situation in the Middle East requires understanding between the parties, not vituperation. It calls for patient
and steadfast efforts towards peace, not for public acrimony.
47. It is in this spirit that I should like to read the ml1 text
of the letter dated 30 April 1968 addressed by Israel’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs to the Secretary-General:
“I have given careful attention to your cable to me of
27 April 1968 and to your report to the Security Council
of 26 April (S/8561). The concern which you and
members of the Security Council have expressed derives
from the apprehension that the parade in Jerusalem on
2 May 1968 may ‘aggravate tensions and have an adverse
effect on a peaceful settlement of the problems in the
area’.
“The Government of Israel sincerely desires to alleviate
tensions and to promote a peaceful settlement of the
regional conflict, It is our considered judgement that the
ceremony of 2 May need not, and will not, have the
adverse effects which have been predicted in some
quarters. We base this confidence on considerations which
I now submit,,through you, to the understanding of the
Security Council and of peace-loving mankind.
“The intention to hold a ceremonial parade in Jerusalem on the anniversary of Israel’s independence has been
a matter of public knowledge for several months. The
plan evoked no spontaneous concern throughout the
world. But for Jordan’s recent representations to you and
to the Security Council this brief and moving ceremony
would have taken its tranquil course without arousing any
international anxiety. A study of the Jordanian representative’s address on 27 April confirms that his Government’s objection is based on implacable hostility, not on
a disinterested concern for regional peace or international
harmony. His aim is not to alleviate tension but to create
it. And his protest would have been registered no matter
what form, dimensions or route the parade had taken.
This is fully confirmed by his complaint in May 1967 in
the different circumstances then existing.
“A decision to hold a ceremony of thanksgiving and
deliverance at a considerable distance from the ceasefire

line does not violate any principle of international law.
Such a ceremony creates no new situation. It leaves the
position in the area unchanged. It endangers no lives. It
injures nobody. It threatens no civic interests. And it has
no relation to the duty of Middle Eastern States to
negotiate agreements on the establishment of a just and
lasting peace.
“The innocuous nature of the ceremony does not of
course detract from its historic scope. The past year has
been charged with deep emotion for the citizens of
Jerusalem. On 5 June 1967 Jordanian forces opened an
unprovoked assault on the city’s streets and buildings
with the aim of spreading bloodshed and havoc far and
wide. This attack wasordered after a messagehae reached
King Hussein through a United Nations emissary proposing mutual abstention from hostilities in Jerusalem and
elsewhere. The appeal was turned aside. From gun
positions, sacrilegiously established in the Holy Places,
Jordanian forces rained death and destruction on our
streets and homes. Hundreds of our dead and wounded
bear tragic witness to the results of this wanton assault.
All our citizens know that their families, children and
homes have this year been saved from the brutal
destruction for which neighbouring Governments hoped
and worked. For the second time within two decades
Jordan last year attempted to convert the Holy City into
a scene of carnage. Ancient Hebrew words come vividly
to life:
‘Jerusalem remembereth
“‘In the days of Her affliction and of Her anguish
“All Her treasures that She had
‘%rom the days of old,
“Now that Her people fall by the hand of the adversary,
“And none doth help Her:
‘&Theadversaries have seen Her
“They have mocked at Her desolations. . .
“Zion spreadeth forth Her hands,
“There is none to comfort Her.

“Israel cannot forget that the complaint is brought by
the Government which sought to drown Jerusalem in fire
and blood; which has banished and separated Jews from
the oldest of all the Holy Places; which destroyed
thirty-four Jewish houses of worship; which uprooted and
publicly defected tombstones on the sacred Mount of
Olives. The silence and inaction of all international organs
in face of these outrages will long disturb those who, in
future years, come to write the moral history of our
generation.
“But to those in the Security Council and elsewhere
who sipoerely revere Jerusalem’s peace I am authorized to
bring the following words of reassurance.
“First, the anguish of the past year in Jerusalem
fortifies our resolve to strive for the elimination of
tension and violence in the Middle East. The most urgent
concern is to strengthen the cease-fire by outlawing the
organized terrorism now proceeding from Jordanian soil
with ‘the aid. and support of the Jordan Government.
Israel will honour the cease-fire on the basis of reciprocity
as the starting point in the quest for peace.
“Second, we shall steadfastly maintain our pursuit of a
peaceful settlement of the Middle Eastern conflict. The
key lies in the promotion of negotiations which, in this as
in all conflicts, is indispensable for any relief of deadlock.
This very day I have continued contact with your special
representative in an effort to promote a peaceful and
accepted settlement which is the Security Cauncil’s
declared and cherished aim.
“Third, while I have spoken of Jerusalem’s special and
unique place in Israel’s history, we are deeply aware of
the universal interests which are concentrated in the city:
the equal protection of the Holy Places and houses of
worship; the assurance of free accessto them; the daily
intermingling of Jerusalem’s population in peaceful contact; the removal of the old military barriers; the care of
ancient sites; the reverent desire to replace the old squalor
and turmoil by a harmonious beauty-all these changes
enable Jerusalem to awaken from the nightmare of the
past two decades and to move towards a destiny worthy
of its lineage. I reaffirm Israel’s willingness, in addition to
the steps already taken for the immunity of the Holy
Places, to work for formal settlements which will give
satisfaction to Christian, Moslem and Jewish spiritual
concerns. Israel, unlike previous governments in the city,
does not wish to exercise exclusive and unilateral control
over the Holy Places of other faiths. Accordingly, we are
willing, as I stated to you on 10 July 1967 (S/8052), to
work out arrangements with those traditionally concerned, which will ensure the universal character of the
Christian and Moslem Holy Places and thus enable this
ancient and historic metropolis to thrive in peace, unity
and spiritual elevation.” (S/8565./

“Jerusalem was delivered from this agony by the
sacrifice of young and selflesslives. Since last June a new
and hopeful epoch in its history has begun. Where there
has been hostile separation there is now harmonious
union; where there has been constant threat of violence
there is now civic peace. Above all, for the first time in
twenty years Christians, Moslems and Jews now have
equal accessto the sanctuaries of their faith. The reunion
of the Jewish people with the relic of its ancient glory at
the Western Wall has stirred deep spiritual memories,
Nobody with a sense of historic imagination can stand
unmoved before the poignant dignity of this event.
“It is this deliverance from peril to salvation that the
people of Jerusalem wish peacefully to celebrate on
2 May. They wish to address their tribute to those who
gave their valour and sacrifice in their defence. And when
this tribute has been paid the people of Israel will turn
from the memory of past danger to the hopes and
challenges of future peace.

48. The representative of Jordan has told the Council that
he expects it to take further action on the question of the
parade in Jerusalem. I presume that the Jordanian representative would wish to ‘advise the Council why it should
attach a greater significance to the resolution of 27 April
(250 (19681.l cm the parade than to the Security Council

“Tension in this area springs not from peaceful ceremonies within cease-firelines, but from terrorist acts across
them.
6

and General Assembly resolutions on vital questions of
peace and security in the Middle East, resolutions which
Jordan and other Arab States have refused and continue to
refuse to implement.

assumed the responsibility for safeguarding those bodies
and ensuring their proper functioning.
55. The fact that the Zionist authorities today &&in to
have recourse to the bodies provided for in the Armistice
Agreements is something which concerns them alone. The
normal application of the relevant rules of international law
cannot be disturbed by the whims of those who apply the
law only when it works in their favour.

49, The attention given to, and the handling of, the
Israeli-Arab problem in the Security Council during the
period of the twenty-year Arab war against Israel is a
matter of record. I doubt very much whether it is necessary
to add to it.

56. Having been brought into being, albeit subject to
certain conditions, under the auspices of the United
Nations, Israel is today pursuing its measures for annexation and for the expulsion of the indigenous inhabitants of
the City of Jerusalem and engaging in illegal acts of
expropriation which are the logical consequence of its
continued policy of armed aggression.

50. Mr.

BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated jkoom
French): The Council is once again examining the question
of Jerusalem, and the reason for that is certainly the recent
provocative decision of the Israeli authorities to hold a
military parade which will passthrough the Arab quarter of
Jerusalem.
51.. Of course, the parade itself is not the problem with
which we have to deal. As the Council has clearly specified,
the real problem is that such a parade represents a flagrant
and deliberate violation of United Nations resolutions
regarding the status of Jerusalem. The situation thus
created is extremely serious; but we must face the fact that
it is so mainly because of the failure of the United Nations,
and more especially of the Security Council, to see to the
impIementation of its resolutions with regard to Palestine,
and particularly to Jerusalem.

57. In paragraphs 1 and 2 of resolution 2253 (ES-V), and
in paragraphs 1 and 2 of resolution 2254 (ES-V), adopted
by the General Assembly at its fifth emergency special
session, the international community clearly proclaims its
opposition to these measures. Today the Security Council
must comply with the wishes of the General Assembly as
expressed in those two texts. It must decide upon the
measuresto be taken to ensure respect for the decisions and
authority of the Organization and to prevent a fait
accompli in Jerusalem from frustrating the one inevitable
solution.

52. Obviously, the primary cause of the situation with
which we are faced is the fact that Israel has always
displayed open comtempt for the recommendations, resolutions and decisions both of the General Assembly and of
the Security Council, following what has now become a
classic pattern.

58. In fact, a new fait accompli is taking place before our
very eyes and, step by step, the Tel Aviv authorities. are
instituting what they believe should be Jerusalem’s permanent status. Although no spectacular measures have as yet
been applied, progressively but ineluctably a qualitative
change is taking place in the status of Jerusalem. It would
be deplorable if the Council, or the United Nations in
general, were to react only after the Zionist authorities had
confirmed their hold upon the city by annexing it once and
for all. Here again, Rhodesia provides a meaningful example, for by not having acted in time the international
community must submit to a fait accompli, It is obvious
that this diktat cannot affect the legitimate inhabitants of
the city or the patriots of Palestine and that, far from
preventing conflict, inaction can only strengthen the resolve
of the resistance fighters in Palestine to win back their
rights.

53. First, there is provocation by Israel, which brings in its
wake the adoption of various resolutions or decisions. In
the second stage, Israel deliberately violates these resolutions and creates a tension leading to war. The third stage is
the creation of a de facto situation favourable to Israel and,
finally, the calling into question of previous resolutions.
The same pattern is repeated at regular intervals, so that we
are now once again witnessing Israeli acts of provocation
and violations of the General Armistice Agreement, permitting the creation of a new de facto situation and
providing an opportunity to call into question the Armistice Agreement and all the relevant United Nations
resolutions.

59. A dilatory attitude in this matter will not, in any case,
cause any of the interested parties to renounce their
position; it will only make it more difficult to reach an
appropriate long-term solution.

54. Whether Tel Aviv likes it or not, Armistice Agreements
do exist which define Jerusalem’s status. None of Israel’s
claims, here or elsewhere, has any basis, and the settlement
of immigrants in the city by the Zionist authorities to the
detriment of the indigenous population is only designed to
complicate the search for a final just solution and, in some
measure, to allow the Israelis to convince themselves of the
permanence of their presence in the occupied Arab territories. Israel pretends to believe that the Armistice Agreements were concluded outside the United Nations, whereas
in fact they were drawn up under the latter’s auspices. The
United Nations saw to it that the Agreements contained
certain provisions relating to the ad hoc bodies which were
to implement them. In doing so, the United Nations

60. I repeat, the annexation of the City of Jerusalem is the
chief and immediate objective of Israel’s policy, which is
based on the principle of territorial expansion. All the
recent events in that region provide ample proof that this is
a real objective, for the Israeli authorities are following a
pre-conceived plan to replace the indigenous population of
Jerusalem by a foreign population. Every day the pressand
radio inform us of measures taken to that end, either
through the expulsion of the indigenous inhabitants and the
expropriation of their lands or through the building of
reception centres to house the new immigrants.
7

68. The present situation being what it is, the Council
must consider immediate action in the light of the
problem’s two aspects.

61. Of course, following the logic of their policy of
annexation, the Zionist authorities today feel the need to
give some legal basis’ to their acts of spoilation. In this
connexion, I should like to point out a curious
aspect of
the statements made two days ago by the Tel Aviv representative, who alluded to “self-determination”.
We for our
part do not believe that the allusion was fortuitous.

69. First, the Council must enforce respect for its decisions. The Israeli authorities have made it clear that they
reject outright resolution 250 (1968) which the Council
adopted on 27 April 1968. This is an obvious challenge to
this body, which must therefore condemn Israel’s attitude
of obstinate refusal and consider suitable measures to deal
with it.

62. On the one hand, we are witnessing a systematic
policy of expropriation and expulsion, both in Jerusalem
and in the rest of Palestine; on the other hand, we see the
continuation and intensification of a campaign to increase
the immigration of Jewish settlers, chiefly from the western
countries, a campaign which has been initiated for reasons
in keeping with the logic and structure of Zionist society;
and now for the first time, as I have just pointed out, we
have heard the representative of the Israel authorities refer
to self-determination.

70. Secondly, the Council has before it the entire question
of Jerusalem, and we consider that the Council should
determine its action in the light of the following facts: first,
Israel’s occupation of Jerusalem was brought about by
armed aggression; secondly, since the occupation of the
city, the Israeli authorities have put into effect measures for
annexation and expropriation,
on the one hand, and
expulsion of the native population, on the other. Such open
aggression deserves the Council’s most categorical condemnation, since under the Charter territorial conquest by force
is inadmissible and all the steps taken by the Israeli
authorities with the aim of changing the legal status of
Jerusalem are invalid. Finally, the Council must issue’ a
serious warning to Israel not to continue its policy of
annexation.

63. Does this mean that after having shown contempt for
so long for the resolutions, recommendations and decisions
of the United Nations, Israel is at last coming round to the
recognition of the basic principles of the United Nations,
and particularly that of the right of peoples to decide their
own future? After having ignored self-determination for
twenty years and having from the very outset deprived the
people of Palestine of the natural and exclusive exercise ‘of
that right, does Israel, now that it has destroyed the sacred
entity represented by Palestine and the Palestinians, intend
to invoke the self-determination, independence and integrity of the usurpers?

71. Today, when the international community has become
aware of the seriousness of the problem posed by Israel and
of the machinery which Israel set in motion and which may
shake the authority and prestige of the United Nations, the
problem of Jerusalem goes beyond a violation of the city’s
status and becomes a real test of strength: either the
Council will take the adequate and effective measures
required and the international community will not lose
faith in the possibility of a solution in keeping with the
doctrine, spirit and philosophy of the United Nations; or
else, on the contrary, the Council will take unworkable
decisions, in which case the international community will
realize that here, as in many other places in the world, only
the re-establishment of a balance in favour of the Palestinians-the kind of balance that exists in Viet-Nam today
and will exist in South Africa and Rhodesia tomorrow-can
give renewed vigour to the particular conception of
international life and relations to which we adhere.

64. Thus, after having witnessed the reign of terror which
has lasted for years in various parts of Palestine and which
has become even more acute in the recently occupied
territories, we must now expect, especially with regard to
Jerusalem, that Israel will put an end to this problem by
organizing, either under the auspices of the United Nations-something Israel doubtless would like, but does not
count upon-or on its own, a so-called referendum, which
would be imposed on us and whose aim would be to settle
the fate of Jerusalem once and for all.
65. Need I say that such an operation would be null and
void in the eyes of the international community, and that it
is the Council’s duty to warn the Israel authorities against
such a step, the preparations for which are now nearly
complete?

72. Mr. Y. A. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Before proceeding to my
statement on the substance of the question under discussion, Mr. President, I should like to avail myself of the
opportunity you have kindly afforded me to express my
gratitude for the words you addressed to me.

66. If the right of self-determination is one day to be put
into practice, that can only be done by consulting the true
inhabitants of Palestine, including the people of Jerusalem,
and not an imported population. The examples of Gibraltar
and of Rhodesia should teach us something in this respect.
67. In short, the Council must face up to two facts: the
situation in Palestine shows that henceforward the chances
of reaching a settlement are very slight, owing to Israel’s
expansionist policy; and no fait accompli resulting from that
policy can or will be accepted. With those two ideas in
mind, the Security Council should now focus its attention
on the central problem, that is, the urgent need to persuade
the aggressor to withdraw its troops from the occupied
territories, that being a sine qua non condition for the
restoration of peace in the Middle East.

73. From what I have been told of you and your career, I
am inclined to believe that you combine the liberalism of a
Labourite with the conservatism natural to a lord. I
therefore have confidence that in carrying out the lofty and
honourable mission of President of the Security Council
YOU will not find it necessary to turn either ,to the left or to
the right.
74. At this stage the Security Council is facing two very
important issues of great importance for the cause of peace,
8

not only in the regions directly involved but also in the
world at large. I have in mind the problem of the Middle
East, particularly the situation in Jerusalem. The second
issue is that of Southern Rhodesia. I should like to express
the hope, Mr. President, that under your Presidency both of
these problems will be solved through a greater application
of socialist, rather than conservative principles.

action by the Foreign Minister of Israel? I do not think
there is anyone at this table who would, although there
may be one or two exceptions.
79. It is quite clear that such assertions are related to the
design of the Foreign Minister of Israel and the Tel Aviv
Government to consider the cease-fire line as a final frontier
between Israel and Jordan, This cannot be apprehended or
qualified other than as a new instance of the expansionist
policy of the Government of Israel, which considers the
occupied part of Jerusalem as Israeli territory. The Security
Council must firmly reject this interpretation of the
cease-fire line put forth by Israel and the Foreign Minister
of Israel inasmuch as the resolutions of the fifth emergency
special session of the General Assembly on 4 July and 14
July 1967 [22.53 (ES-V) and 2254(ES-V)]
clearly and
definitely requested Israel to rescind all measures which
would alter the status of Jerusalem.

75. As for Mr. Goldberg, I believe that it is rather
premature at this time to take leave of him. As far as we
know, Mr. Goldberg will continue to be our colleague in the
Security Council and in the General Assembly for a
considerable period of time, and we shall have an opportunity later to say some kind words about him as well.
76 At the request of Jordan the Security Council has
under consideration the question of the situation that has
arisen in Jerusalem as a result of Israel’s aggression against
the Arab States and the subsequent rapacious acts of the
Israel authorities in that city. The attention of the United
Nations and of world public opinion has long been focused
on what is happening in that city under the conditions of
foreign occupation.

80. The Israeli Government knows full well that none of
the decisions of the United Nations and the Security
Council give it the right to play the master and to hold
military parades in the Jordanian sector of Jerusalem. In
taking such actions, the Israeli Government clearly has in
mind that a show of military might will support its
annexation of the foreign soil which it has forcibly seized in
Jerusalem.

77. At its 1417th meeting on 27 April 1968, the Security
Council considered only part of the problem posed by the
situation in Jerusalem, namely the hostile and provocative
intention of the Israeli authorities to hold a military parade
in the Jordanian sector of the city on 2 May. Realizing, for
very good reasons, that the intended parade was a provocative act that would complicate the achievement of a
political settlement in the Middle East, the Security
Council, at that 1417th meeting, unanimously and rightly
adopted resolution 250 (1968) calling on Israel to refrain
from holding the military parade in Jerusalem and thereby
to avoid complicating the situation in the Middle East. An
urgent appeal to the same effect was likewise addressed to
the Government of Israel by Secretary-General U Thant, on
20 April 1968, in a note dealing specifically with this
matter [see S/8561, para. 31. The representative of Israel,
however, in response to the Security Council’s resolution
and the Secretary-General’s note, has in the course of that
very meeting of the Security Council defiantly and cynically stated that Israel does not recognize the resolution of
the Security Council and will not give up its hostile and
provocative intention to hold a military parade in the Arab
part of Jerusalem. This is a challenge not only to the
countries of the Arab world, but to the United Nations as
well. Following this, the Prime Minister of Israel came out
with a similar statement,

81. Nor can we fail to note the following point. In the
Israeli Foreign Minister’s letter, which in a defiant tone
disregards the decisions of the Security Council, an attempt
is made to accuse other countries-Arab
countries-of
disregarding the appeals of the United Nations. This is a
well-known tactic: to accuse others in order to hide one’s
own guilt.
82. A third aspect of the letter also calls itself to our
attention. Although he is obliged to recognize in the letter
that the aim of the Security Council is to secure a peaceful
settlement in the Middle East, the Foreign Minister of Israel
refrains from officially stating that Israel, too, holds this
aim. Moreover, in this official communication from the
Israel Foreign Minister there is still, as in previous official
communications and statements of the Israeli Government,
no indication that Israel recognizes Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 and is ready to
proceed to its implementation, including the withdrawal of
Israeli armed forces from Arab territories, as required under
that resolution.
83, It is well known that the United Nations and one of its
principal organs, the General Assembly, by an overwhelming majority of the votes cast by Members of the
Organization, categorically condemned-as did world public
opinion-the arbitrary and lawless activities of the Israeli
authorities and the Israeli Parliament in changing the status
of Jerusalem. The fifth emergency special session of the
General Assembly categorically condemned those actions in
the special resolutions to which I have already referred, and
demanded that Israel rescind any measures it had taken to
change the status of Jerusalem. The record shows that more
than a hundred States Members of the United Nations
voted for those resolutions. This is clear and convincing
evidence of the position taken by the United Nations in this

78. NOW we are presented with an official document
signed by the Foreign Minister of Israel in which the Israel
Government officially expresses the same position [see
p~‘ra. 47 above]. In this letter a futile attempt is made to
justify the holding of the military parade in Jerusalem, on
the grounds that this provocative military demonstration
planned by the Israeli authorities will take place at a
considerable distance from the cease-fire line and that the
holding of the parade will not, so they say, lead to
increased tension in that part of the world, Which of the
members of the Security Council that voted for resolution
250 (1968) appealing to Israel to refrain from this provocative action would agree to the interpretation given to this
9

the permanent members of the Security Council, may find
it necessary to adopt in accordance with the Charter in
order to prevent such a course of events in the Middle East
and to curb the aggressors.

matter, a position of absolute condemnation of the illegal
activities of Israel in this connexion.
84. The Israel Government, however, disregarded the
resolutions of the General Assembly and thus hurled a
challenge in the face of the United Nations and world
public opinion. Literally a few days after the adoption of
these resolutions, the Prime Minister of Israel stated, after
Israeli troops had seized all the territory of Jerusalem, that
this question was not subject to further discussion. This is a
statement devoid of all foundation, and it cannot fail to
arouse the indignation and condemnation of the United
Nations of all those States Members of the Organization
which voted in favour of the two General Assembly
resolutions.

89. The fundamental and principal condition for a Middle
East settlement, as is reflected in Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, is the immediate
withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from all occupied Arab
territories. In this connexion, the Soviet delegation once
again would like to reaffirm the position of the Soviet
Union, That position is that the aggressor, Israel, must
vacate all Arab territories which it has seized and withdraw
its troops to the 5 June 1967 line. This is the principal and
primary precondition for a political settlement in the
Middle East.

85. In October last year the Israeli Foreign Minister also
came out with similar statements. He made a statement in
Washington, defying the United Nations. Seconding him,
the Ambassador of Israel to the United States, General
Rabin, who had been the Chief of Staff of the armed forces
of Israel before he was appointed to his diplomatic post,
recently made a similar statement in Washington. He made
it abundantly clear that Israel would keep the occupied
Arab territories for ten to twenty years and would not give
up an inch of what it had gained. These bellicose and
aggressive statements by the Foreign Minister of Israel and
the Israeli Ambassador to the United States were made in
Washington, as I have said. Apparently, in making those
statements both speakers counted on the sympathy of the
audience they were addressing.

90. The Israel aggressors are mistaken in believing that
they have superiority in military strength. If they do not
vacate the occupied Arab territories, they will be making
the greatest mistake in the history of their State. The
people of Israel would not forgive their Government for
such a mistake.
91. Mr, GOLDBERG (United States of America): I take
hope from Ambassador Malik’s promise that he will have
the opportunity to say complimentary things about menot now, to be sure, but before I leave. Since I shall be here
for four weeks more it would be obviously too much to
expect that he will say only complimentary things about
me throughout that entire period, but I am reassured by his
remarks today that there is hope that I shall end on that
note.

86. At a previous meeting of the Security Council the
representative of Israel repeatedly said that the Arab
population of the occupied territories, in his view, enjoyed
civil rights and freedom. He tried in vain to represent the
Israeli aggressors and occupiers as little short of benefactors
to the Arabs living in the occupied territories. But not one
whose homeland has been subjected to foreign occupation
can ever believe such assertions.

92. It is the profound conviction of the United States that
what is imperatively required is peace in the Middle East,
the establishment of a just and lasting peace. Not further
invective, not further charges and counter-charges, not the
one-sided recalling of certain resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly and the ignoring of
others; conciliation, impartiality and magnanimity are the
needs. Co-operation with the Secretary-General’s representative, Mr. Jarring, in his difficult peace-making endeavours
is a necessity. Surely, any objective person listening to our
debates must come to the conclusion that we are dealing
too much with a tortuous and tragic past. The time is
overdue to deal with the present and to look forward to a
hopeful and better future.

87. It is the duty of the Security Council to demand that
Israel should cease such unlawful activities in Jerusalem; I
refer in particular to its intention to stage a military parade
and a military demonstration, It is essential to put an end
to this situation in which Israel brazenly disregards the
United Nations and the decisions of its principal organs.
The statements by Israel’s leaders with regard to Security
Council resolution 250 (1968) forbidding them to hold a
parade in Jerusalem are further confirmation of the fact
that Israel’s extremists pay no heed to world public opinion
and the decisions of the United Nations, We are convinced
that under the United Nations Charter, the Security
Council is able to take this over-weening aggressor to task.
The Council cannot tolerate disregard for its decisions, and
it is obligated to do its duty in eliminating the consequences of Israel’s aggression and the restoration of peace
and security in the Middle East. If it fails to do so, the
peoples of the world may be faced with more far-reaching
crimes on the part of the aggressor, the pernicious effects of
which would be difficult to predict.

93. My Government has repeatedly pointed out our
concern about the status of Jerusalem, that Holy City
sacred to Moslems, Christians and Jews, and we have
likewise pointed out what is an obvious fact: that a just
settlement of the status of Jerusalem is inseparably connected with other aspects of the problems which still defy
solution. That is not just the observation and conclusion of
my Government; that is the clear import of the unanimous
resolution of 22 November 1967 [242 (1967/j adopted by
the Security Council.
94. There is one overriding lesson to be learned from the
history of .the Middle East since 1948 and from the
Council’s efforts to deal with the situation there during the
past two decades: peace will not and cannot be achieved by

88. The Soviet Union is prepared to take part in any
measures which the Security Council as a whole, including
10

,

a patchwork of resolutions adopted in the Council dealing
with one or another, of the symptoms of tension and
discord. Some of the resolutions have been adopted; some
have been vetoed; some have been complied with and some
ignored or disregarded by both Israel and the Arab
countries. This piecemeal approach has been tried in the
Council time and again, and the approach has failed time
and again. It has failed partly because it sought to deal with
the symptoms of trouble, not the source of trouble, and
partly because the Council’s appeals, decisions or resolutions have fallen upon ears made deaf, both Arab and Israeli
ears, by years of conflict and hostility. We are afraid that
we are on the verge of drifting into the same situation
again.

99. The PRESIDENT: The list of speakers for this
afternoon is exhausted, but I have two requests to speak in
exercise of the right of reply. First, I call on the
representative of Jordan.
100. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I intend only to answer a
single question raised by the representative of the United
States and earlier by the representative of Israel. A few
moments ago we heard a reference made by the representative of the United States to charges and counter-charges. He
said that some parties referred to one resolution and
ignored others. The Israeli representative said: “I presume
that the Jordanian representative would wish to advise the
Council why it should atta’ch a greater significance to the
resolution of 27 April on the parade (250 /1968)]“-that
is, the resolution adopted last Saturday-“than
to the
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions on vital
questions of peace and security in the Middle East” [see
para. 48 above],

95. The basic grounds for concern and care among all
members of the Council and of the international community should continue to be to foster the success of the
peace-making process. the Council set in motion in November 1967. I refer, of course, to the effort of Mr. Jarring,
who has been trying against the greatest of odds to fulfil
the mandate given him: that of promoting agreement on a
just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

101. In the first place, let me say that the delegation of
Jordan never has referred and never will refer to one
resolution, ignoring others. We refer to all resolutions. We
reaffirm our adherence to every single resolution, whether
adopted by the Security Council or the General Assembly.
We adhere to the Security Council resolution [62 (lP&)]
which called for the adoption of the Armistice Agreement;
we abide by it. We reaffirm our adherence to the Armistice
Agreement; we abide by it. Let it not be said that we are
referring to one resolution and ignoring another.

96. The history and experience of the last twenty years
demonstrates that the Council, despite the best will and
despite its best efforts and wisdom, cannot impose the
terms of a peace settlement upon the parties. The Security
Council has tried to do so with the active support of my
Government. We have not succeeded. As I said on 22
November last (1382nd meetingJ, we embarked upon a
new approach to engage the parties themselves in the
peace-making process with the help of a United Nations
representative. If we are to avoid repeating the errors of the
past and serve the cause of peace, in which the peoples of
the Middle East of all its countries, more than anyone else,
have such a precious stake, our duty is to keep our minds
focused constantly on the ultimate objective: the success
of
Mr. Jarring’s
mission-and
I quote resolution
242 (1967)-“to
establish and maintain contacts with the
States concerned in order to promote agreement and assist
efforts to achieve a peaceful and accepted settlement in
accordance with the provisions and principles in this
resolution”.

102. But let the Israelis come here and show that they
adhere to all United Nations resolutions, whether adopted
by the General Assembly or the Security Council-the
resolution calling for the Armistice Agreement or the
Armistice Agreement itself. When Mr. Tekoah speaks about
my attaching importance to the 27 April resolution and
ignoring ,others, this has no foundation. We have abided by
all resolutions. The Council will recall that it was the
delegation of Jordan which, on 23 March 1968, challenged
Mr. Tekoah to accept the resolution of 22 November 1967
(242 (19671, to which reference was made by the representative of the United States, and announce his Government’s
agreement to $plement that resolution. You all remember
what the answer was: “we do accept the goal of the
Security Council resolution of 22 November 1967 to
establish a just and lasting peace by agreement” [1406th
meeting, para. 521.

97. It is only by so doing that we shall be successful ir
replacing relations based on the premise of a temporary
respite in hostilities by relations based upon
mutual
tolerance and a mutual willingness to accept one another
and to live in peace, permanent peace. Our every move
must be measured against that standard. It is not an
exacting or unreasonable standard. It asks no more of the
parties in the Middle East than we expect of Members of
the United Nations in other areas of the world. Our debate
should be in that spirit.

103. The Council will recall that on that very day from
this seat I challenged Mr. Tekoah to come before you and
say openly and clearly that he would accept your unanimous decision of 22 November 1967. ~The Israelis refrain
from implementing resolutions. For twenty years, despite
United Nations resolutions, they have refused repatriation
of the legitimate people of Palestine simply because of their
religion, simply because they are GentiIes and the Israelis
call for a State for the Jews only. Having done that as
regards all the resolutions, they do not come here with
clean hands; they cannot preach about resolutions which
they have not implemented nor announced their willingness
to implement.

98. Our objectives should be without malice to ‘manyof the
countries in the area and with magnanimity towards all of
the countries in the area to help bind up the wounds of the
tragic conflicts, recent and past, and to achieve a just and
lasting peace between the countries in the area which will
contribute so much to the peace and well-being of nations
and peoples throughout the world.

104. We ask sincerely that the Israelis should, by their
behaviour in this Council and by acts and deeds, show a
11

.

‘8
“

genuine desire to do what we have announced: adhere to all
resolutions without exception, accept the resolution of 22
November 1967, accept and implement the resolution
unanimously adopted by the Council on 27 April 1968.
When I refer to the 27 April resolution, I am not standing
alone; I am reflecting the will announced by the Security
Council unanimously, I am guided also by a statement
which the Security Council has endorsed, namely, that the
holding of the parade will increase tension and also-and
this is a reminder to the United States, which endorsed the
resolution-that
it will affect the efforts for peace now
going on in the area. So when I insist on that resolution, I
am trying to save something which the Security Council
itself has endorsed. No member of the Council accepts the
idea that military force should be substituted for resolutions of the Security Council.
105. As long as Israeli troops remain in our area, occupying our territory, to which their only claim is that of
military force, and as long as they refuse to accept the
resolution prescribed by the Council for peace, in all
honesty and sincerity, how can there be a possibility of
peace? I feel sorry for Mr. Jarring. He is doing constructive
work. Who is obstructing his efforts? The one who is
asking the Council to help Mr. Jarring or the one who is
committing the acts in the area to obstruct his constructive
efforts? If we are going to look not to the past but to the
future, are we to consider Council’s resolution of 22
November 1967 part of the past or of the future? If it is
the past giving guidance for the future, we have to speak
about it. If we are expected to forget about it, let us know.
Resolution 237 (1967) was also adopted by a unanimous
vote and it called on Israel to ensure the welfare and
security of the inhabitants of the occupied area. Israel has
not abided by the Council’s will. People are being expelled
every day. It was also unanimously requested that the
inhabitants be permitted to return. Israel is not permitting
them to return. Yet in its statement this afternoon Israel
says that I am referring to one part and ignoring the other.
That is not the case. The delegation of Jordan has a clear
stance. It is on record. Mr. Jarring, in making his contacts,
received the answers of the Arab Governments which he
contacted. We have made our stand clear in official
documents. I sincerely hope that the Security Council will
provide an adequate and effective remedy in regard to this
issue.

Arab States of non-compliance with a long list of United
Nations resolutions. These are not accusations; these are
facts which constitute part of the United Nations record.
As the Soviet representative undoubtedly recalls, there was
a time when the Soviet Union was not loath to point this
out with force and conviction in United Nations organs.
The subsequent change in the Soviet attitude towards these
facts cannot, of course, affect their truth or their validity in
the present deliberations.
109. Mr. President, I was greatly impressed by the sudden
solicitude displayed by the Algerian representative for the
moribund Armistice Agreements under which Israel and the
Arab States had undertaken to conclude treaties of peace a
long time ago and which the Arab States themselves
destroyed. On the eve of the June hostilities-on 4 June
1967-when the Arab States were about to launch their
final onslaught against Israel’s existence, President
Boumedienne, privy to the Arab plans of aggression,
declared: “The true freedoms of the entire homeland must
be won through the liquidation of the State of the Zionists
and the expulsion of the Americans and the British from
the area.” Three months later, on 15 September 1967,
President Boumedienne stated: “The liquidation of Israel is
the only solution.” As is generally known, Algeria till now
refuses to accept the cease-fire established by the Security
Council, despite the communications addressed to it by the
Secretary-General. Algeria continues to give support to and
train terrorist units which carry the war into Israel
territory.
110. I have already drawn the attention of the Council, at
the 1417th meeting, to the fact that Algerian policy and
actions of war are in flagrant violation of the provisions of
the United Nations Charter and that Algeria’s membership
in the Security Council is not in conformity with Article 23
of the Charter. I trust that members of the Security Council
understand that the presence in this organ of States such as
Algeria cannot but detract from the political, moral and
juridical value of our deliberations and affect the validity of
resolutions adopted by the Council.
111. In declarations and statements made publicly and to
Mr. Jarring, my Government has indicated its acceptance of
the Security Council resolution [242 (1967)] for the
promotion of agreement on the establishment of a just and
durable peace. I am also authorized to reaffirm that we are
willing to seek agreement with each Arab State on all the
matters included in that resolution, More recently, we have
accepted the proposal of Mr. Jarring to bring about
meetings between Israel and each of its neighbours under
his auspices and in fulfilment of his mandate for the
purpose of reaching a peaceful and accepted settlement, No
Arab State has yet accepted this proposal. The Arab
Governments continue to assert that they are bound to the
Khartoum conference resolution which says: “No negotiations with Israel, no recognition of Israel, and no peace
with Israel”. Their policy is in flagrant contradition of the
spirit and the terms of the resolution which they pretend to
accept.

106. These questions are not before the Council at this
stage but they have been injected-I do not know why-and
I have to answer them to keep the record straight. What is
before the Council now is the provocation of tomorrow’s
parade. What is before the Council, to come at the second
stage, is the situation in Jerusalem.
107. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Israel, who wishes to exercise the right of reply.
108. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): It is with regret that I flnd
myseIf compelled to make again an observation on the
Soviet representative’s statement. I can assure him that
whenever his statements become based on equality of
treatment and fairness of judgement I wilihave no need to
do so. The representative of the Soviet Union referred to
the fact that, as he expressed himself, Israel accuses the

112. Will any Arab representative specifically and unequivocally declare that his Government is prepared to establish
a just and lasting peace with Israel, to promote agreement
12

with Israel on a peaceful and accepted settlement, to
recognize Israel’s sovereignty, independence and right to
live within secure and recognized boundaries to be worked
out as part of the peace-making process, and to meet with
Israel’s representatives under Mr. Jarring’s auspices?
113. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Algeria in exercise of his right of reply.
(Algeria) (truns2ated from
114. Mr. BOUATTOURA
fienchJ: The monotonous repetition of the baselessaccusations levelled by the spokesman for the Zionist authorities
do not, of course, make any impression or any impact, on
the Algerian delegation at any rate.
115. I presume that the spokesman for the de facto
authorities ensconced in Palestine has been trying, since
coming to represent them in the United Nations, to practice
the old Goebbels technique of constantly and Indefatigably
repeating the same cliches, My delegation and my Government have explained their position in every discussion of
the Palestine problem. I think there is little to add, in
clarifying Algeria’s ‘permanent and consistent position with
regard to the Palestine problem, since that position rests
solidly on the past experience of the Algerian people, It is
out of loyalty to our history that we have adopted this
position on the Palestine problem. It is out of loyalty to
our position on problems related to colonization, whether
in Palestine, South Africa, Rhodesia or elsewhere, that we
have adopted this particular stand and I must add, in all
modesty, that the Algerian people is proud of it.

States-to which we are grateful-against whom charges
should be brought for having elected Algeria to the Security
Council. If we ‘are to follow the bizarre logic of the
spokesman for the Zionist authorities, then that huge
majority has violated the Charter in electing Algeria. That
huge majority elected Algeria in order to threaten world
peace. That huge majority elected Algeria to jeopardize and
undermine the prestige and authority of the Security
Council. This seems to. be the reasoning of the Zionist
spokesmen, We know that our contribution is a very
modest one, but asyou all know, we are doing our best.
119. As to the validity and effectiveness of the decisions
which the Security Council has taken with the doubtless
minimal participation of the Algerian delegation, I leave
that to the real members of the Security Council to judge.
They know better than anyone the value and validity, the
effect and the impact of the decisions they have to take.
120. With regard to assistanceto liberation movements,
here again we are, or try to be, true to ourselves. While
some helped the Algerian people to recover their national
independence, the Zionist leaders, including high officials,
gave notorious assistance to the well-known secret army
organization that sowed terror among the Algerian population. We have aided, are aiding and will continue to aid all
movements of national liberation, whether in Palestine,
South Africa, Rhodesia or anywhereelse.
121. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Jordan who has asked to exercisehis right of reply.
122. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I have raised the question
about the acceptance and implementation by Israel of the
Security Council’s resolution of 22 November 1967. I have
received only an evasive or qualified answer. That is not
unusual because I had a similar answer earlier. The
resolution is very clear. It has specific paragraphs. It calls
for specific action, and the first step is acceptance and
implementation of the resolution in toto. Specifically,
paragraph 1 calls for withdrawal. I heard nothing from the
Israeli representative about this question. However, I shall
not waste the time of the Council in dwelling on this,

136. We have said time and time again that we stand for
the liquidation of the Zionist regime, just as we stand for
the liquidation of the apartheid regimes in South Africa and
Rhodesia.
117. To listen to the spokesman for the Zionist authorities, one would think that it is Algeria which is in the dock
in the Security Council. We are met here as a result of a
complaint brought by Jordan against Israel. Ever since
1962, when Algeria became independent, no one has
complained of Algerian policy. Algeria has not threatened
world, peace. It is Israel which has again and again
threatened the peace of the world, and that is the problem
with which we are faced today. Algeria presents no problem
to the Security Council. If the Security Council is continuously in session, if the General Assembly is continuously in
session, if public opinion has lost all hope of finding a
solution and is concerned about the authority of the United
Nations and the future of the world, the one and only
reason has been, is, and will continue to be the behaviour of
the Zionist authorities.

123. The PRESIDENT: I have no other requests to speak
this afternoon and it is, consequently, necessaryto consult
the Council about our further work. I have received a
request for a meeting of the Council on this item tomorrow
morning and I have consulted the members. Most members
agree with that request. Therefore, unless any objection is
raised, I shall announce that the Council will meet on this
subject tomorrow morning at 10.30.
124. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
French): I apologize for speaking yet again, but I shall be

118 I Regarding Algeria’s admittedly modest participation
in the work of the Security Council, the representative df
the Zionist authorities has repeated what he said at the last
meeting, namely, that Algeria should not be a member of
the Security Council. He said that our membership was a
violation of Article 23 of the Charter which lays down that
the non-permanent members of the Security Council shall
be elected by the General Assembly, “due regard being
specially paid, in the first instance to the contributions of
Members of the United Nations to the maintenance of
international peace and security”. I replied then, and I
should hardly need to repeat, that it is the 110 Member

very brief. In the course of his first statement, the
Jordanian representative referred to some photographs
which had been discreetly circulated among Council members. I wonder if it would be possible for the necessary
arrangements to be made to have the photographs
appended to the record of this meeting.
12.5. The PRESIDENT: I am not sure what our practice is
in such matters, but I shall consult the Secretariat and
report tomorrow morning to the representative of Algeria.
The meeting rose at 6.5 p,m.

13

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS
may
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to; United
Nations,
Soles
Section,

throughout
New
York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les publications
d6positoires
du
Nations

Unies,

KAK

llO~-IY’illTb

des
monde
Section

LES PUBLICATIONS
Notions
entier.

DES NATIONS

Unies
sent
Informez-vous

des ventes,

W3AAHIlR

New

York

UNIES

en vente
dans
les librairies
et les agences
auprbs
de votre
librairie
ou adressez-vous
6:
au Genhve.

OPTAHHSAUHH

06bEAHHEHHblX

Opmnrwnl~nn OCzr~numr,rs

ilrCIITI'THtlS
Mtlra:lllllC
IlpO~tliliC

110 Ili'CS ~.UilOlKlS
-rlIllM.
IhlJOAHTC
Nl@lUll~ll
06 II:1~llllllJlX
IIJII lllIUlllTC
110 ll;r~lN'~:
OprannaayiH O~~~,~IIII~IIIII~I~
ll3~klllllfi,
HhlO-rlOl)Ii
Il.11 &!llCDlL

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

IIalluil ~~oitillo KyLIlITb

HAl#fi

113~111J11J1

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicociones
de las Nacloner
Unidas
ertdn
en tadas
partes
del munda.
Conrulte
a IV librero
Venlas,
Nuevo
York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

n Iillll;KllldS

3Iara31max II

ll JllllIIC31
IilllIiliIIO)I
1Iaqi11"1.
Ccii~ui~

~0

y casas distribuidoras
Unidos,
Secci6n

de

UNIDAS

en vento en librerids
o dirijose
a: Nacioner

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

35625~September

1972-2,100
