S/PV.7154

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7154th meeting

Sunday, 13 April 2014, 8 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Nigeria)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Llanos
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Maes
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/264)

14-29848 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1429848*

Ukraine

S/PV.7154

The meeting was called to order at 8.05 p.m.

to reclaim Sloviansk, a day after it was overrun by proseparatist activists, whom the United Nations human
rights monitors on the ground have described as wellarmed and well-organized militiamen.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/264)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Fernandez-Taranco.
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: Once again, since the
last briefing to the Council, presented by the SecretaryGeneral on 28 March, the situation regarding Ukraine
has seriously deteriorated. This is now the tenth time
that the Council has addressed the issue. The General
Assembly also took up the matter on 27 March (see
A/68/PV.80).
Following close to two weeks of relative calm,
starting on 6 April armed individuals and separatist
groups began to seize Government buildings and
confiscate lethal weapons in Donetsk oblast of Ukraine,
including in the cities of Donetsk, Lugansk and
Kharkiv. The individuals involved called for secession
from Ukraine and for joining the Russian Federation. In
Donetsk, some of these individuals declared a People’s
Republic of Donetsk.
It has now been reported that there have been at
least five new cities in eastern Ukraine targeted by
uprisings and seizures of Government buildings in
the past 24 hours, including the towns of Sloviansk,
Kramatorsk and Druzhkivka. United Nations monitors
have reported a consistent reinforcement of barricades
and armed civilians on both sides. They also sighted
armed militiamen with AK-47s, machine guns and
sniper rifles. United Nations monitors have also
reported duelling rallies in Kharkiv today, resulting in
injuries to some 50 persons. On the eve of 13 April,
authorities in Kyiv launched an “anti-terror” operation
2/17

13/04/2014

As of 13 April, at least one Ukrainian officer has
been killed in a gun battle; however, the exact number
of casualties in the skirmishes remains unknown.
Numerous others have been reported wounded.
Also today, Ukraine’s acting President, Oleksandr
Turchynov, signed a presidential decree, giving the
self-declared separatists until 6 a.m. Kyiv time to give
up their weapons in order to avoid prosecution. The
President further declared in a televised address to the
nation that if illegal activities were not halted, a fullscale operation involving the Ukrainian army would be
launched.
The Russian Federation has publicly stated on
several occasions that it would be “forced to act” if
Kyiv were to employ force against demonstrators
in the East. The situation is therefore now more
combustible than ever. The Secretary-General and the
United Nations remain committed to the pursuit of a
peaceful solution to this ever-deepening crisis. The
Secretary-General has continued to speak out for the
exercise of maximum restraint by all concerned and
strict adherence to international law. He also continues
to urge all others with influence on the situation to
immediately and publicly call for restraint and a return
to calm. The Secretary-General further appeals for
direct and constructive dialogue between the parties,
and between Kyiv and Moscow, to de-escalate the
situation and address all differences.
It has become painfully evident that the Ukraine
crisis will continue to deepen if intensive efforts are
not urgently made by all concerned to de-escalate
the situation. At this moment, Ukraine teeters on the
very brink. However, it is not just Ukraine that will
suffer from a scenario where the likelihood of further
bloodshed and violent clashes grows by the hour. Russia,
which shares a long border area with Ukraine as well
as the broader European region, faces a spillover effect
of potentially severe consequences. Such scenarios
will also have repercussions for the entire international
community.
The President: I thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.

14-29848

13/04/2014

Ukraine

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation has called for this
emergency meeting of the Security Council because
of the serious dangerous evolution of the situation in
south-eastern Ukraine. We have pointed out on several
occasions, including in this Chamber, that the reckless
actions that led to the coup d’état by the self-proclaimed
Kyiv authorities threaten to definitively destroy the
fragile mosaic of Ukrainian society. The authorities
do not wish to listen to those who do not accept the
imposed dominance of Kyiv by national radicals and
chauvinistic, Russophobic and anti-Semitic forces,
whom they perceive as a threat to their human dignity
and to their very lives.
Grotesque Russophobia and entrenched hatred have
become the norm in the Verkhovna Rada as well. A
few days ago, a member of Parliament belonging to the
chauvinist Svoboda party said this about the Russianspeaking inhabitants of Ukraine:
“I would have acted much more harshly. I would
simply have shot them. The enemy is prevailing in
our land. They should have been chased out in 1654.
These creatures deserve only one thing — death.”
It should be noted that this was said by a woman. We
can only imagine the thoughts that must be churning
in the minds of her brutal fellow partisans. And that
is not even the most radical group on the Ukrainian
political spectrum. Should we be surprised that the
peaceful political protects and the call by the people of
south-eastern Ukraine for their aspirations to be heard
have been met by the Rada with draconic laws entailing
long-term prison sentences for separatism?
The events of the past two days have shown that,
following our many calls for the organization of
inclusive national political dialogue, a measure of
common sense has prevailed in Kyiv. Prime Minister
Yatsenyuk went to Donetsk; although he did not meet
with the protesters, he did say the right things about
dialogue, decentralization and his desire to find a way
out of the problem.
What is the situation today? We have been told
that restraint will be exercised and a peaceful solution
found to the situation that takes into account the
opinions of the various groupings of the Ukrainian
population. That has been confirmed by our Western
interlocutors. However, on 13 April the Verkhovna
Rada-appointed President Turchynov stated that the
Ukrainian Security Council had decided to launch a

S/PV.7154

full-scale anti-terrorist operation, including the use
of the armed forces. However, unlike the Maidan
demonstrators, the protesters have terrorized no one,
have used no bulldozers against the authorioties, and
thrown no Molotov cocktails. It is no coincidence
that law-enforcement officers were present among the
Maidan protestors.
Now the Kyiv authorities must use force to suppress
other areas of the country. According to Turchynov, the
people of south-eastern Ukraine must end their protests
by the morning of Monday, 14 April, lest armed force
be used. However, the protesters’ interests and opinions
have not been taken into account or even discussed. As
a result, blood has already been shed in the South-East
and the situation is extremely dangerous. Any further
escalation of the situation must be swiftly stopped.
The international community must require the
Maidan henchmen who seized power in Kyiv to cease
their war against their own people and to implement all
the commitments under the 21 February agreement. The
Western sponsors of the Maidan henchmen, in particular
those who stood as witnesses to the agreement and the
United States, which is their backer, are obligated to
end their support, dissociate themselves from neoNazis and other extremists, stop the use of force against
the Ukrainian people, and begin forthwith a genuine
national dialogue with the full participation of all
regions, in the interests of the speedy implementation
of radical constitutional reform.
It is the West that must determine the opportunity
for avoiding civil war in Ukraine. Some people,
including in this Chamber, do not wish to recognize the
real reasons for the events in Ukraine and are forever
seeing the hand of Moscow in the South-East. Enough is
enough. They must stop claiming that we have deployed
our army along the border with that country and are
practically already at the English Channel, and that we
have sent agents to coordinate the protests in Ukraine.
It must be understood that south-eastern Ukraine and
its people are deeply worried about their future and
that they do not want anyone, especially the nationalist
radicals, to impose their will on them.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I wish to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting. I
also wish to thank Assistant Secretary-General Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing.
Lithuania is deeply concerned about the sharp
deterioration of the situation in eastern Ukraine.

14-298483/17

S/PV.7154

Ukraine

External forces and local provocateurs continue to
fuel separatism and hatred, destabilizing the situation
in eastern Ukraine on the eve of the 25 May elections.
The scenario is dangerously familiar. Where there was
no unrest, unrest and chaos are being created by proRussian militias, again anonymous and without insignia,
and again carrying modern models of assault weapons
as seen in Crimea. Again, considerable Russian troops
are massed on Ukraine’s borders. Again, the external
anti-Ukranian and anti-Western propaganda machine is
in full swing, inciting suspicion, mistrust and hatred
waiting to explode. Ukraine’s traitor Yanukovich, who
abandoned his country and fled, opening the floodgates
to Crimea’s annexation, is being pushed again into
the daylight to clear the way for Ukraine’s further
dismemberment.
Groups of provocateurs in the hundreds, supported
by pro-Russian militias, are attacking buildings of
Ukraine’s State institutions and declaring independence
from Ukraine, as well as announcing plans for new
referendums on joining Russia, in spite of the fact that
recent opinion polls clearly show that the predominant
majority of people in the region see their future
inextricably linked to Ukraine. In fact, about 65 per
cent of the region’s residents, according to opinion
polls, have expressed their desire to remain part of
Ukraine, while only 18.2 per cent want to join Russia.
Tragically, bloodshed is happening where there was
no bloodshed before pro-Russian militants started their
creeping secessionist provocations. It is as clear as day
that, in spite of the reassurances we heard from Moscow
a few weeks ago, military aggression against Ukraine
and its sovereignty, independence, and territorial
integrity has not stopped with Crimea. My Government
strongly condemns the actions of the separatist groups
and their sponsors in the Donetsk region, as well as in
the regions of Luhansk and Kharkiv.
Lithuania supports the efforts of the Government
of Ukraine to resolve this complex and unpredictable
situation in a peaceful way. Ukraine’s Government has
reached out repeatedly to the separatists. In the most
difficult of political and economic circumstances,
Ukraine’s acting President Turchinov has decided
to prepare a law on decentralization, granting
more powers to the regions. Acting Prime Minister
Yatseniuk has clearly stated that the Government
must respond to people’s desire to have more regional
authority. That decision is an important step forward,
showing the flexibility and readiness of legitimate

4/17

13/04/2014

Ukrainian authorities to heed its population and engage
constructively.
Prime Minister Yatseniuk also reassured the
Russian-speaking population regarding the use of the
Russian language. Furthermore, amnesty was offered
to all militants who laid down arms and returned to
seeking a peaceful solution to existing issues.
It is obvious that the Ukrainian Government
is doing everything possible, under such dramatic
circumstances, to respond to the legitimate needs
and concerns of the population, to curb corruption
and impunity, which had reigned under Yanukovich,
to re-establish law and order and the authority of the
State and to address the problems the Government
inherited from years of neglect and mismanagement.
We fully support those efforts and once again stress
the extraordinary restraint and patience with which
Ukraine’s Government has continued to respond to the
unending provocations and efforts to dismember the
State by armed pro-Russian militants and separatists.
At the same time, when the existence of a State
is put in danger, we understand and support the right
of Ukraine to defend itself in the face of external
aggression and to tackle militant separatism and
continuous provocations in order to protect the State
and its population from a further escalation of violence.
The international community and members of the
Council should not be fooled by the pronouncements
of the likes of Yanukovich and his corrupt cronies. The
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine are being threatened, and that threat is a threat
to the security and stability of the whole region and
Europe, with serious international repercussions.
We urge the Russian Federation to call back its
troops from the Ukrainian border, to stop supporting
separatist groups and to cease all other actions aimed
at destabilizing Ukraine. The meeting among the
United States, Russia, Ukraine and the European Union
foreseen for 17 April in Geneva wold offer a viable
chance for dialogue and diplomacy. We call on Russia
not to waste that opportunity.
Ms. Power (United States of America): The human
stakes of what is happening in Ukraine are extremely
high. The lives of innocent civilians are at risk, yet
we are being bombarded by Russian disinformation
and propaganda, while the Ukrainians are being
confronted by incitement and violence. Russian media

14-29848

13/04/2014

Ukraine

and Government spokespersons are spreading fiction,
so we must tonight focus on facts.
The Council has heard, these last weeks, Russia
disclaim any intention of occupying or invading.
The Council has heard it publicly, and we have heard
it privately. Unfortunately, the fact is that the armed
seizure of buildings in six eastern Ukrainian towns
yesterday, and several more today, mirrors the tactics
Russian forces used in the early stages of the Crimea
invasion. Then, too, officials from the Russian
Federation spoke early on in the crisis and disclaimed
any intention of occupying or invading. In the earlier
Crimean case, highly organized, well-equipped and
professional forces wearing Russian military uniforms
and military gear without identifying insignia moved
in first to take control of Crimean Government and
security facilities, before being later replaced by regular
Russian military forces. Then, too, Russia said it was
acting to protect minorities’ rights. But the whole world
now knows that they were not. As the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe has reported, the
minorities at risk in Crimea are Tatars and Ukrainians.
The Council has heard that there are no Russian
troops in eastern Ukraine, but the fact is that many
of the armed units that we have seen were outfitted
in bullet-proof vests and camouflage uniforms with
insignia removed. Those armed units, some wearing
black and orange Saint George’s ribbons — associated
with Russian Victory Day celebrations — raised
Russian and separatist flags over seized buildings and
have called for referendums and union with Russia. We
know who is behind that; indeed, the only entity in the
area capable of those coordinated, professional military
actions is Russia.
The synchronized surgical seizure of buildings
yesterday occurred in towns along the main highway,
followed by armed roadblocks, almost as if a coordinated
barrier were being formed between Kyiv and the major
eastern cities of Donetsk and Luhansk. The Council
does not have to take my word for it — or even that of
the Ukrainian Government — it need only witness for
itself the videos of professional military shepherding
thugs into a building in Kramatorsk; the photographs
showing the so-called concerned citizens taking over
Sloviansk, equipped exactly like the elite troops that
took Crimea; or the video of a military operation in
Krasny Liman by armed men with the same equipment.
The Council has heard laments about instability, as
if instability were organic. But the fact is that this is the

S/PV.7154

saddest kind of instability: it is completely man-made.
This instability was written and choreographed in and
by Russia.
We continue efforts to de-escalate the situation in
Ukraine and find a diplomatic path forward, which is
why Secretary Kerry will participate in the Geneva
talks on 17 April, which will include Russian Foreign
Minister Lavrov. But if those are to be successful, Russia
will have to explain why its forces continue to mass on
the Ukrainian border — at least 40,000 forces — and
it will have to come with constructive ideas on how to
de-escalate and resolve the armed attacks on buildings
in eastern Ukraine.
The United States stands with Ukraine and the
fundamental principle that the future of Ukraine must
be decided by the Ukrainian people. We also stand
with international law and norms and the fundamental
principle that borders are not suggestions. On Monday,
we will conclude the $1 billion loan guarantee for
Ukraine. That will benefit all the Ukrainian people,
including minorities. Next week, Vice-President Biden
will visit Ukraine. We strongly support concluding
the agreement between Ukraine and the International
Monetary Fund so that the international community
can bolster Ukraine’s economy. And we will support in
every way we can Ukraine’s elections at the end of May
so that Ukraine can advance its political transition and
look to a peaceful future.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom is gravely concerned by events in
eastern Ukraine, which have escalated over the past
48 hours, with armed men seizing control of Government
buildings and erecting checkpoints and barricades in
six different cities. Street protests have given way to
violent action. That is a dangerous escalation of an
already dangerous situation.
We have all seen the video footage of events over
the weekend: professional, well-armed and wellequipped units wearing identical uniforms conducting
coordinated military operations against Ukrainian State
institutions. That is a pattern that is all too familiar.
Coming just weeks after Russian troops illegally
deployed to Crimea while wearing uniforms without
insignia, these events point clearly to Russia once again
interfering directly in the internal affairs of Ukraine
while using manufactured pretexts and military
force. Such actions are contrary to international law,
have already been condemned by the international

14-298485/17

S/PV.7154

Ukraine

community and have been declared invalid by the
General Assembly.
As a Member of the United Nations, and as a
permanent member of the Security Council, Russia is
obliged to refrain from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity and political independence
of any State. Yet satellite images show that there are
between 35,000 and 40,000 Russian troops in the
vicinity of the border with Ukraine, equipped with
combat aircraft, tanks, artillery and logistical support
units. That is in addition to the 25,000 Russian troops
based illegally in Crimea.
Just as six weeks ago Russia denied deploying its
troops to Crimea, it also now denies that it has amassed
troops on Ukraine’s eastern border. It claims that the
publicly available satellite images illustrating that troop
deployment were taken in August 2013. That is false;
additional images released on 11 April show clearly
that the build-up started in early March of this year.
Russia’s aggressive stance is a clear threat to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Ukraine. The United Kingdom calls on Russia
immediately to redeploy its troops away from the
border, cease all activity designed to heighten tensions
and sow discord, and revoke the mandate given by the
Federation Council on 1 March to use military force on
Ukrainian soil.
The Russian Federation has made little secret of
its efforts to undermine the process of reconciliation
in Ukraine. Rather than assisting its neighbours in
rebuilding their country after the fall of a deeply corrupt
regime that left the nation on the verge of bankruptcy,
Russia has instead sought to destabilize the country
further in pursuit of its narrow interests. Russia must
desist from those steps and address whatever grievances
it has through dialogue, starting with the contact group
talks scheduled for this coming week.
The international community is not fooled by the
Kremlin’s use of propaganda and misinformation to
spread fears among the population of eastern Ukraine.
Contrary to Russian claims, the recent demonstrations
in eastern cities are not organic. They do not enjoy
widespread support, and the numbers of genuine
protestors on the streets pale in comparison to the
crowds of hundreds of thousands who protested against
the former regime. Rather, what we are witnessing is
a well-orchestrated campaign designed to destabilize
the country. If Russia really has genuine concerns

6/17

13/04/2014

about Ukraine’s Russian-speaking population, then its
actions have done nothing to safeguard their interests.
The illegal annexation of Crimea, stoking tensions
and provoking violence in eastern Ukraine, hurt and
endanger all the people of Ukraine.
The special monitoring mission of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United
Nations human rights monitoring mission are in Ukraine
to observe the situation and report on developments.
Their presence is designed to safeguard the rights of
all the citizens of Ukraine. We look forward to their
assessment of the situation and we fully support their
work.
Russia is seeking to impose its will on the people
of Ukraine by using misinformation, intimidation and
aggression — tactics drawn from the darkest days of
the past century. That is completely unacceptable. The
Ukrainian people have the right to determine their own
future free from Russian interference.
On 25 May Ukraine will elect a new president.
The Ukrainian Government has stated clearly that
its programme of constitutional reform will include
discussions on the degree of autonomy devolved to
Ukraine’s regions. That is a clear pathway to resolve
differences through peaceful, constitutional means.
The use of armed force that we are now witnessing
in eastern Ukraine to impose one set of views on
the peaceful majority is therefore entirely without
justification. Moscow must reject these latest unlawful
actions, and do so publicly.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Since
yesterday, we have seen the abrupt and simultaneous
outbreak of violence in eastern Ukraine: nothing about
it was spontaneous. France condemns the violence. We
call on all parties to exercise restraint and dialogue so
that a peaceful solution to the crisis quickly emerges.
Everyone must work towards de-escalation.
The scenario we are seeing reminds one of the
events that took place in Crimea one month ago:
simultaneous action by a small but trained group of
aggressive activists determined to occupy territory,
followed by the presence of disciplined, masked men
wearing uniforms and armed with weapons of war
that are not found in military surplus. Those facts,
which come to us through the waves of images on the
Internet, are the same as the ones that Russia labelled
a month ago as spontaneous demonstrations by local
self-defence groups. No one believed it then, and we

14-29848

13/04/2014

Ukraine

do not believe it today. One gets the impression that, in
denying the facts, Russia is unaware of the existence of
the Internet and that it serves to contradict its denials.
Let us not forget that such protests were a prelude to the
annexation of Crimea.
Moreover, the build-up of Russian troops for
several weeks now — under the guise of military
exercises — casts an ominous shadow over eastern
Ukraine. Further still, the economic pressure is
becoming more biting. Without dialogue with the
Ukrainian side, which it has taken by the throat, Russia
has brutally raised the price of gas. It blocks the entry
of goods at the border between Russia and Ukraine,
no doubt in an effort to stifle a country it calls its
brother. Finally, Russia is systematically bombarding
Ukraine with a message of defiance vis-à-vis Kyiv via
the airwaves and television channels, which, for many
people who do not have access to various sources of
information, is the only message they hear.
It is against that backdrop that France commends
the level-headedness of Ukrainian officials who,
against that destabilizing torrent of events, seek to
resolve the crisis through dialogue. That is the spirit
in which Prime Minister Yatsenyuk visited eastern
Ukraine with specific proposals in response to the real
questions of people overwhelmed by propaganda who
are disoriented and being exploited by radical groups.
France has always been clear on the issue of the status
of languages and
​​
regions. We encourage the authorities
in Kyiv to continue their efforts for cooler heads to
prevail, enter into a constructive dialogue and reassure
people about their place in Ukraine.
The future of Ukraine should not, and cannot, be
up to anyone else but the Ukrainians themselves. We
should support the Ukrainian authorities in organizing
elections, under the best of conditions, that ensure that
everyone is represented. Our message has always been
clear that the presidential election scheduled for 25 May
must be free and transparent and guaranteed by the
presence of international observers.
We reiterate our commitment to the territorial
integrity of Ukraine. We call on Russia commit to
de-escalation and to condemn, along with the rest of
the Council, the attempts at destabilization carried out
by armed groups in eastern Ukraine. We also call on
Russia to fully assume its role as a permanent member
of the Security Council. Russia is a guarantor of peace
and security in the world, both in the larger world
and in its immediate neighbourhood. There cannot be

S/PV.7154

two different standards. Russia must today put its full
weight behind helping Ukraine regain stability. It must
show itself up to the task of playing the role it wishes to
play as a pillar of Euro-Asian stability. We hope that the
proposed meeting on 17 April among Russia, Ukraine,
the United States and the European Union will be held
and that it makes it possible for solutions to emerge.
This is a crucial stage and we call on all parties to
exercise calm and restraint.
In conclusion, I would like to raise a final warning
call. The danger that now faces us is the failure of all
our concerted efforts to build an international order
that is not based on force, for today it is force alone that
is seeking to impose the law.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this emergency meeting on the
situation in Ukraine. I also thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing on
the worrying situation in eastern Ukraine.
We are very alarmed by reports of increased
tensions in eastern Ukraine in the past several days.
We condemn the attack that killed a State security
officer and wounded five others in the eastern city of
Slovyansk. The perpetrators of that criminal act should
be brought to justice. I take this opportunity to echo the
Secretary-General’s call to all sides to work towards
calming the situation.
After numerous calls for the de-escalation of the
crisis, the situation has become more complex for
the diverse Ukrainian community. It is imperative to
protect the rights of the citizens of Ukraine regardless
of ethnic background. We reiterate our call for an
inclusive dialogue, a frank and open discussion that is
mutually beneficial for all the parties concerned.
Although Rwanda agrees in principle that Ukraine,
like any other country, has a right to self-defence
and to promote its territorial integrity, its acts should
be proportional. We discourage any military act that
would put the lives of innocent civilians in danger.
Rwanda remains of the view that military action
will only worsen the already tense situation. We
encourage all the parties involved, particularly in the
current situation, to exercise full restraint. It is vital
to allow the diplomatic efforts that have already been
deployed to work. The international community cannot
watch another crisis slip out of its hands. We must act on
what we stand for — peace and security. We welcome
the discussion among the United States, Ukraine and

14-298487/17

S/PV.7154

Ukraine

Russia due to take place on 17 April. We encourage
United Nations participation in those talks.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that the Security
Council, the only world body in charge of maintaining
international peace and security, must work towards
restoring its own unity in order to be able to defend the
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of a States
Members of the United Nations, while addressing the
interests of the countries of the region. We recognize
that there are political interests involved. However, we
should not forget that ordinary Ukrainians are caught
in the midst of this conflict; all they want and ask for
is a peaceful country. This we should all be mindful of.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan)
(spoke in Arabic): Jordan is deeply concerned about
the recent developments in eastern Ukraine and the
accompanying escalation, which could increase the
threats to the stability of that region. What is happening
there is a mutiny against the State and the Constitution
of Ukraine. If it continues it will lead inevitably to
the dismemberment and dismantling of the Ukrainian
State. Ukraine therefore has a right and a duty to its
citizens to preserve its unity and territorial integrity,
and, even more important, to restore every part of its
territory.
We call on the Ukrainian authorities to attempt to
use every possible means to resolve the crisis and keep
open the channels for dialogue with the rebels and all
the relevant parties in order to put an end to this mutiny.
We also appeal to them to respect the principles of
human rights in dealing with the crisis. We call on the
influential parties to exert every effort to convince the
rebels to bring a peaceful end to the crisis, to end their
armed demonstrations and acts of intimidation, and
to withdraw from Ukrainian public and Government
buildings.
The Security Council should also send a clear
message of support for Ukraine and its authorities
in their efforts to end this movement of armed
insurrection, to promote the rule of law and to preserve
the country’s unity and territorial integrity. There
should be no interference in the internal affairs of
Ukraine, no act of intimidation and no threat of use of
force against it, which would contravene the principles
and positions of the Charter of the United Nations. In
that regard, we reaffirm that it is in the interests of the
international community as a whole to maintain the
integrity of the provisions of international law and to

8/17

13/04/2014

refrain from creating excuses and justifications for
military intervention against States, in contravention
of the Charter. International law is the cornerstone of
equality among States and is designed to protect them
from armed threats to their sovereignty regardless of
their size, importance or military might.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Like all of us, Australia
has watched the events in eastern Ukraine with
mounting concern. What we have seen unfold is a
coordinated operation where well-trained and wellarmed paramilitary units have moved quickly to lay
siege to, occupy and control key institutions in five
or six towns in Donetsk province. The violence in
Sloviansk has led to one death and nine wounded. The
stakes are obviously dangerously high. This has not
been a spontaneous, grassroots, broad-based protest
movement by local inhabitants; rather it is a pattern
of highly orchestrated destabilization by pro-Russian
groups. Those groups have included units of highly
trained armed men with Russian military equipment,
operating without identifying insignia. Those units
have used force to storm and besiege local Government
buildings and institutions.
If all that sounds familiar, it is because we have
seen the playbook used by Russia in Crimea. In that
case, it became clear that the militias were in fact
Russian forces. We condemn any use of proxy forces. A
State cannot seek to avoid responsibility for its actions
by attempting to cloak the identity of those working on
its behalf. The principles of State responsibility make it
very clear that a State bears international responsibility
for acts undertaken by informal actors whom it engages
on its behalf.
We have heard Russia’s statement about the crisis
taking place in eastern Ukraine, but what we are
actually witnessing is violence and destabilization in an
effort to manufacture a sense of crisis and separatism.
Ukraine’s response to those provocations has been one
of restraint under intolerable threats to its stability and
independence. There is no evidence of actions directed
at Russian speakers in eastern Ukraine that could
possibly justify an intervention by Russia. Nor is there
the generalized anarchy claimed. The ongoing work of
the special mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe is all the more important
for providing an objective account of the situation in
eastern Ukraine, and we welcome the information that
the number of monitors will be significantly increased
in coming days.

14-29848

13/04/2014

Ukraine

International condemnation of Russia’s actions
against Ukraine in the past six weeks has been
resounding. General Assembly resolution 68/262
unambiguously condemned the threat and use of force
in this manner as contrary to the Charter of the United
Nations and to Russia’s specific treaty obligations to
Ukraine. Many countries, including my own, have
imposed unilateral sanctions to register the depth of
their concern. Repeated calls for de-escalation have
been ignored.
Russia’s major military build-up along Ukraine’s
eastern border has been a significant and deliberation
provocation that only further escalates tensions and
the likelihood of conflict. It deepens Russia’s own
isolation and also, of course, strengthens the resolve of
the international community to stand with and support
Ukraine as it seeks to maintain its sovereignty and
territorial integrity. The only way forward, as we all
know, is de-escalation, dialogue and the free elections
that are planned for 25 May. And Ukraine must be
allowed to prepare for those elections without the
interference and coercion we are witnessing.
But talks can take place only with genuine
commitment and good faith on all sides. The talks
between Russia, Ukraine, the European Union and
the United States planned for 17 April are an essential
step in that direction, but can take place successfully
only on that basis. Attempts to change the facts
on the ground are completely contrary to dialogue
and peaceful resolution. We call on Russia to work
immediately to reduce tensions, stop its destabilization
and withdraw its forces from the provocative posture
they have assumed on Ukraine’s border. We have heard
assurances in the past that Russia will take such action.
It now really is imperative that it do so.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General FernandezTaranco for his briefing.
China is deeply worried about the recent escalation
of the situation in Ukraine. We hope that the relevant
parties will remain calm, exercise restraint and avoid
any further deterioration of the situation.
Settling the question of Ukraine involves the
interests and concerns of all parties. It should be
considered in a balanced manner. Political and
diplomatic channels should continue to be pursued in
order to narrow differences and settle the issue within
the framework of law and order. China has consistently

S/PV.7154

called on the international community to make
constructive efforts and employ good offices to ease
the situation in Ukraine, and will continue to support
the international community in those endeavours.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I,
too, would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing on the developments in Ukraine and on the
involvement of the United Nations. I also welcome the
presence of the Permanent Representative of Ukraine
at this meeting.
Argentina continues to follow the situation
with concern, in particular in the east of Ukraine.
Undoubtedly, the situation has deteriorated, with
further tensions and violence, and we cannot remain
indifferent to that. We are deeply concerned that the
tension and violence may continue and indeed worsen.
We are also concerned about the consequences for
Ukraine and the region.
The delegation of Argentina reiterates that it
is essential that we adhere to the principles that we
subscribe to as Members of the United Nations. In
particular, we must remember our commitment to
non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
whether militarily, politically or economically. In
that respect, we believe that the action of any State or
international organization must duly respect Ukraine’s
handling of its own affairs. As we have expressed on
several occasions, the situation will not be resolved
through any kind of unilateral action. It is crucial that
the use of force be avoided. We join the SecretaryGeneral today in calling on all parties to endeavour
to bring calm to the situation. Maximal self-restraint
must be shown, and constructive dialogue sought and
established on an urgent basis in order to de-escalate
the situation and address the parties’ differences.
In conclusion, Argentina will continue to promote
dialogue and a peaceful settlement of the crisis. It is
essential to step up efforts to create the conditions
necessary for urgent dialogue to begin so that solutions
can be found to the parties’ differences and the interests
of all minorities are taken into account. The multilateral
meeting among the United States, the Russian
Federation and the European Union that is planned
for Thursday, 17 April will present an opportunity to
do so. We hope that those main actors will be able to
achieve the agreement necessary. We reiterate that the
international community should concentrate its efforts
on establishing dialogue. We stress that Ukrainians

14-298489/17

S/PV.7154

Ukraine

must have a democratic and peaceful outcome to the
situation.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing.
The Republic of Korea is closely watching the
recent developments in the eastern part of Ukraine. We
are deeply concerned over the escalation of tensions
in various cities of eastern Ukraine, including the
worrying seizure of key public buildings in Donetsk
and Slovyansk by force. Those actions will only further
exacerbate the already tense situation, and we condemn
any use of force to change the situation on the ground.
As Ukraine moves towards critical elections in May,
we believe that political differences must be addressed
in a non-violent way through a legitimate process.
United Nations States Members should respect that
process, and there should not be any influence exerted
by outside forces. We reiterate our strong support for
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence
of Ukraine.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Oscar FernandezTaranco for his briefing.
Chad is deeply concerned by the violent acts
committed by armed men and separatist groups in
various cities in the east of Ukraine. The actions of
those insurgents, who are reportedly well-equipped
and well-organized, are aimed at taking possession of
public buildings in several cities, further destabilizing
Ukraine and compromising the search for a lasting
political solution.
Chad condemns every instance of violence that
occurred yesterday and today. As we have stated many
times in previous meetings of the Security Council on
the same matter, the solution to the Ukrainian crisis can
only be political, not military. Therefore, the attacks
by armed and clearly well-organized men in unmarked
uniforms are only making an already explosive situation
worse.
Given the dangerous turn that the situation is
taking, we call upon all the parties concerned to show
restraint and calm. We call on them to give priority
to a peaceful solution that respects the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and unity of Ukraine. In that vein,
a political settlement of the crisis necessarily requires
that the interests and concerns of all parts of Ukrainian
society, in all its diversity, be taken into account.
10/17

13/04/2014

Neither the attempts of the armed insurgents calling for
parts of Ukraine to be integrated into Russia nor the
recourse to force against those insurgents — much less
a possible intervention by foreign forces — will help to
solve the Ukrainian crisis.
The age-old historical, geographic and cultural
links between Ukraine and the Russian Federation
should in principle serve as a basis for new and
healthier relations of good neighbourliness, mutual
respect and cooperation between them. In that context,
we encourage the Secretary-General and the entire
international community to pursue their mediation
efforts in order to align the positions of the parties
involved and find a peaceful solution that respects the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
too would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for
his briefing on the developments in the situation in
Ukraine. I also welcome the Permanent Representative
of Ukraine, His Excellency Mr. Yuriy Sergeyev, to the
Council.
Luxembourg is deeply concerned about the recent
events in eastern and south-eastern Ukraine. Yesterday
in Sloviansk, in the Donetsk region, masked and armed
men took control of a police station, and then the
headquarters of the town’s security services, and put
up barricades, blocking access to the town. There are
also reports coming from the town of Kramatorsk that
armed individuals have taken over a police station and
there has been an exchange of fire with the police. Over
the weekend, other towns in the Donetsk region saw
similiar incidents, which appear to be coordinated and
well orchestrated, recalling the events that took place
in Crimea.
In that regard, we see a continuation of the actions
undertaken by Russia on the territory of Ukraine in
recent weeks. Those actions are a flagrant violation
of international law, in particular the Charter of the
United Nations and the Helsinki Final Act, and run
counter to the commitments that Russia has made to
Ukraine under the Budapest Memorandum of 1994 and
the Treaty between the Russian Federation and Ukraine
on Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership, signed in
1997.
In that context, we welcome the self-control and
restraint shown to date by the Ukrainian authorities
in the face of repeated violations of the sovereignty

14-29848

13/04/2014

Ukraine

and territorial integrity of their country in the past
six weeks. However, we all know that the Ukrainian
Government cannot stand there without doing anything
in the face of this new threat to its territorial integrity.
Like every State Member of the United Nations, Ukraine
has the right to defend itself by virtue of Article 51 of
the Charter of the United Nations.
This evening, Russia reiterated its version of events,
according to which the demands of the eastern and
south-eastern regions of Ukraine are being ignored by
Kyiv. However, that does reflect the facts. We commend
Ukraine’s consistent affirmation that it is ready for an
inclusive political dialogue that takes into account the
interests of all Ukrainians and all regions of Ukraine.
The Prime Minister of Ukraine, Arseniy Yatsenyuk,
recently reaffirmed that during his visit to Donetsk on
11 April. However, political dialogue on the country’s
future and revising the Constitution cannot take place
under the threat of a foreign invasion. That threat must
not jeopardize the opportunity for Ukrainians to express
their sovereign will, in the presence of international
observers, in the free and fair presidential election on
25 May.
We must urgently strive to de-escalate the crisis.
We therefore join colleagues in calling for calm and
restraint and in renewing the appeal to Russia to
withdraw its forces massed near the Ukrainian border.
Russia must stop its actions to destabilize eastern
Ukraine and distance itself from the separatist militia
activity. Continuing the military escalation would have
untold consequences.
For its part, Luxembourg would like to believe
that it is still possible to settle the Ukrainian crisis
peacefully. Multilateral bodies, the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe all have a role to play, in particular through the
observers whom they have deployed on the ground.
However, a peaceful solution first and foremost requires
direct dialogue between Russia and Ukraine. In that
regard, we hope that the four-party talks, bringing
together the diplomatic leaders of Ukraine, Russia, the
United States and the European Union in Geneva on
17 April, will make is possible to begin a dialogue and
to find a way out of the gravest crisis that Europe has
seen since the end of the Cold War. The tension and
violence of recent days must not be used as a pretext to
reject all dialogue.

S/PV.7154

The time is critical. There is not a minute to lose
in ensuring that dialogue prevails over violence, reason
over emotions and peace over war.
Mr. Llanos (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We would like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Oscar FernandezTaranco for his briefing and welcome the convening of
this meeting at this critical time for Ukraine and the
region. We face a sensitive development in the crisis in
Ukraine. Chile regrets the outbreaks of violence seen in
the eastern regions, specifically in Donetsk, Luhansk
and Kharkiv, and expresses its deep concern over the
serious consequences of the escalation of the crisis
owing to the actions of separatist groups.
It is critical that the parties exercise the maximum
restraint in order to contain the crisis. Our country once
again reiterates the need to respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine. We
also reaffirm the obligation incumbent on Members
of the United Nations to refrain from resorting to the
threat of or use of force against the territorial integrity
and political independence of any State. It is urgent that
all parties involved refrain from undertaking actions
that are contrary to the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and the international agreements and
treaties to which Ukraine is a party.
We once again call on the parties to seek a
peaceful solution to the crisis through direct political
dialogue, to refrain from taking unilateral measures
and to support international mediation initiatives, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 68/262.
That process must be inclusive and must ensure the rule
of law, human rights, fundamental freedoms and full
respect for the rights of minorities. In that context, the
role of the Security Council, the Secretary-General, his
Special Envoy and regional organizations continues to
be fundamental.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Nigeria.
I want to join my colleagues in thanking Assistant
Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing on the latest developments in Ukraine. We have
observed very closely the unfolding events in Ukraine
since our last meeting on 28 March, when the Council
was briefed by the Secretary-General. Like others,
we are very deeply concerned about the fact that the
situation remains tense and, indeed, has deteriorated.
The utter lawlessness and state of anarchy witnessed

14-2984811/17

S/PV.7154

Ukraine

in at least six states in eastern Ukraine are provocative
and constitute a grave threat to peace.
Throughout our engagement on this issue, our
message has been unequivocal. The need to uphold
universally agreed principles and the sanctity of
international law is what we have stressed. That begins
with respect for the principles embodied in the Charter
of the United Nations, among which is respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
States. We have also highlighted the need to use the
existing bilateral and multilateral instruments to resolve
the crisis. The Budapest Memorandum of 1994 and the
Treaty between the Russian Federation and Ukraine
on Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership, signed by
both countries in 1990 and 1997, are significant points
of departure for negotiations. Those are the principles
that guide Nigeria’s position and that inform our stance
on the issue. We believe that only a diplomatic solution,
achievable by direct and genuine dialogue between
the parties, can resolve the current crisis between the
Russian Federation and Ukraine.
Over time, the world has graduated from
nineteenth-century adventures. In this splendid
twenty-first century, the world should not encourage or
tolerate the establishment of power blocs or spheres of
influence. which are not only inimical to international
peace and security but especially detrimental to the
conduct of friendly and balanced relations between and
among States. We emphasize the futility and dangers
of a military solution to the crisis. Instead, the option
of dialogue between the concerned parties must be
vigorously pursued without preconditions. We call on
all parties to exercise maximum restraint in order to
avoid any further deterioration of the situation.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I thank you, Madam
President, for this opportunity to speak before the
Security Council. I thank Council members for
understanding the critical situation in Ukraine and for
their support.
Before getting into the substance of my statement
this evening, I would like start by mentioning that today
Christians worldwide celebrate a great holiday, the day
of the entry of our Lord into Jerusalem, Palm Sunday.
Unfortunately, today the celebration is falling under the
shadow of aggression and bloodshed in Ukraine. On the
12/17

13/04/2014

eve of the holiday, terrorists coordinated by agents of
the Russian Federation seized control of State buildings
in several cities of the Donetsk region.
Let me quote a statement made today by Ukraine’s
acting President Oleksandr Turchynov:
“A particularly dangerous situation has arisen
in the city of Slavyansk, where professionally
trained armed troops wearing Russian armed
forces camouflage without insignia shattered the
peace. This morning, a convoy of law enforcement
officers who sought to protect the citizens of
Slavyansk were attacked with assault rifles. The
criminals opened intense fire using local people as
human shields. The blood of Ukrainians has been
shed for one undivided sovereign Ukraine. That
blood has been shed in a war that Russia is waging
against Ukraine. The aggressor has not stopped,
and continues to organize unrest in the eastern
regions of our country. It is not a war between
Ukrainians. The situation of confrontation was
artificially created with the aim of weakening and
destroying Ukraine itself.”
Within a short period of time, approximately one
and half months, the Ukrainian Government has done
everything possible to avoid confrontation through an
inclusive approach to each and every region. Recently,
Mr. Yatsenyuk, the Prime Minister of Ukraine, visited
the southern and eastern regions — Donetsk, Lugansk,
Kharkiv, Dnepropetrovsk, Odessa — addressing such
issues of concern as the language policy and prospects
for decentralization of power and constitutional
reforms. The Government is ready to consider the
significant empowerment of local authorities in
Ukraine. Unfortunately, the efforts of the Government
of Ukraine have been severely challenged by recent
developments in the eastern regions.
According to Ukrainian intelligence data, during
the past month and a half in the eastern regions
of Ukraine, agents of the Russian special services
embarked on large-scale operations to seize power
and destabilize the situation, threatening the lives of
citizens of Ukraine, for the purpose of separating those
regions from our country. During the past month, our
Mission has regularly informed the Security Council
and all States Members of the United Nations on the
latest developments in Russian actions in Crimea and
other regions of Ukraine. Russia has not only been
constantly increasing the number of its troops deployed

14-29848

13/04/2014

Ukraine

along the Ukrainian border but it has also been sending
subversive groups into Ukrainian regions in order to
destabilize the situation. Such specially designated
groups, made up of 10 to 20 members of the special
forces, primarily from the main intelligence directorate
or general staff of the armed forces of the Russian
Federation, infiltrated Ukrainian territory with the
task of forming and organizing military combat units.
Ukraine has strong evidence of the involvement of the
Russian special service forces, as was mentioned in a
statement the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine
made public early today.
The detention of Russian citizen members of
subversive groups coordinated by the Russian federal
security services and military intelligence is carried
out on a daily basis by the security services of Ukraine,
yielding the following facts, which are just a few out of
dozens.
On 8 April, Russian citizen Maria Koleda, who
fulfilled intelligence service tasks to destabilize in
eastern Ukraine, was detained in Herson.
The Russian saboteur who was about to seize such
strategic facilities as the Kakhovka hydroelectric power
plant was detained in the region of Herson.
On 10 March, a representative of the Russian
Federation military intelligence service was detained
in Donetsk.
On 12 March, the intelligence group of the Russian
armed forces that infiltrated the Herson territory from
Crimea was detained at the control point.
On 20 March, a Russian citizen named Markhov,
an officer of the main intelligence directorate of the
general staff of Russian Federation armed forces, was
detained in Chernigiv.
On the same day, a Russian citizen named Oleg
Bakhtiar, one of the leaders of the Eurasian Youth Union
of Russia, was detained in Kyiv as he was preparing a
group of people under the guise of civil activities for
the criminal seizure of the Verkhovna Rada and the
Cabinet of Ministers.
All of the arrestees confirmed being part of a
network of persons conducting Russian subversive
activities in Ukraine.
Intercepted radio communications of the
aforementioned groups, and others, with their Russian

S/PV.7154

coordinators are available and provide other clear
evidence.
It has also been observed that such terrorist groups
are heavily armed with weapons used exclusively by
Russian armed forces, namely, the Kalashnikov assault
rifle AK-100 series. Those weapons have also been
seen in the hands of Russian troops in Crimea.
It is clear that the tactics used by terrorists to
capture admininstrative buildings in the regions of
Donetsk, Lugansk and Kharkiv are identical to those
used to seize the buildings of the Crimean Parliament
and other Governmental building in Crimea, which
video evidence confirms. Terrorist groups are acting
in a very organized and pre-planned manner. One of
the goals is to equip as many locally recruited marginal
people as possible with arms and ammunition. That is
why the primary targets of terrorists have been local
offices of police and security services with weapon
storage facilities. As a result, several hundred guns and
automatic rifles have been seized are now in the hands
of terrorists.
There is substantial video evidence of armed attacks
using gunfire on local Ukrainian police stations, in
Slavyansk and Kramatorsk in particular. Those videos,
which have been widely broadcast on international
television channels and over the Internet, have left
absolutely no doubt that the terrorist groups are not the
peaceful protesters that our Russian colleagues claim
them to be. Rather, they are professional special forces
appropriately equipped and armed by the Russian
Federation.
Terrorists have started using their weapons against
Ukrainian law enforcement and military officers. This
morning in Slavyansk the auto convoy of the Ukrainian
military was attacked by gunmen using automatic
weapons. Terrorists shot and killed Captain Gennady
Belichenko of the Ukrainian security services, while
“Alfa” Commander Kuznietsov and Colonel Kuksa
were seriously wounded, as was a police officer named
Selikhov.
In the light of the aforementioned facts, the
National Security and Defence Council of Ukraine,
pursuant to our anti-terrorism law of 2003, has adopted
a decision to launch a large-scale counter-terrorist
operation involving the special units of the Ukrainian
armed forces. We are not going to let the Crimea
scenario be repeated in eastern Ukraine. We have not
imposed a state of emergency as is required by the

14-2984813/17

S/PV.7154

Ukraine

provisions of the Constitution of Ukraine. Instead, we
have prepared a counterinsurgency plan to strike at the
armed terrorists.
In his statement today, acting President Oleksandr
Turchynov said,
“I would like to emphasize that those not involved
in shooting at Ukrainian law enforcement officers
and who surrender their weapons and leave seized
administrative buildings will not be subject to
prosecution.”
Only a few weeks have passed since part of the
territory of Ukraine was annexed by the Russian
Federation. And now Russia is applying the same
tools — inciting separatists by waging unprecedented
anti-Ukrainian propaganda in the mass media,
distorting the truth about Ukraine, sending in special
troops to seize administrative and law-enforcement
buildings with the aim of destabilizing the situation
in the eastern regions of Ukraine, and encouraging
marginal groups to pursue their separatist ambitions,
threatening my country’s unity and territorial integrity.
Apparently, through these attempts, they hope to
disrupt the presidential elections in Ukraine scheduled
for 25 May.
Russia often positions itself as a prominent fighter
against international terrorism, but by sending its special
agents to Ukraine to effect diversions and sabotage, it
is actually sponsoring terrorism. Russia’s statements
and position are in fact supporting the terrorists in
Ukraine who have seized administrative buildings,
taken over the military arsenals of the Ukrainian secret
services and police in several cities and opened fire on
Ukrainian police. Today, official Russian TV channels
have widely broadcast interviews with the three
individuals — former President Yanukovych, former
Prosecutor General Pshonka and former Minister of
the Interior Zakharchenko — who are suspected mass
murderers in Ukraine. They are wanted internationally.
Ukraine has repeatedly asked its Russian partners to
extradite those suspects and provide the necessary
assistance for their investigation. Unfortunately, the
Russian Federation has refused to do that.
Ukraine is being subjected to a large-scale terrorist
operation orchestrated by the Russian Federation in
subregions of the eastern part of the country. That
constitutes a serious threat not only to the security of
the people of Ukraine but to international peace and
stability as a whole. We consider it to be the Security

14/17

13/04/2014

Council’s duty to find a proper and peaceful solution
to this crisis. We once again call on our Russian
partners to put an immediate halt to the actions aimed
at undermining the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine. We demand that they leave us in peace.
(spoke in French)
As Ambassador Araud said, this is truly a final cry
of warning.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked to make an additional statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Many words have been spoken and many
pronouncements made here today. But the first
impression I would like to share with my colleagues is
that they have not been looking at the clock. It is now
9.30 p.m. our time, which means that in Ukraine it is
about 3.30 a.m. That means that in a couple of hours
it will be Monday morning, 14 April. That is the date
when it has been agreed that Mr. Turchynov’s criminal
decree sending Ukraine’s military forces to suppress
the protests will take effect.
We have heard many unfair pronouncements about
Russia today, but of course the most unfair of all came
from our Ukrainian colleague, who accused Russia of
terrorism. Why did he not accuse those who terrorized
his Government for months on end, up to 21 February,
of terrorism? They were people who really did terrorize
the forces of law and order, who really did attack police
and shoot at them and at those protesting against the
authorities and seemed to be attacking their country.
Why were they not called terrorists? Indeed, they have
been exempted from any responsibility for the criminal
activities they conducted for several months.
I reiterate that, unfortunately, several clumsy
accusations have been made against Russia. It has
been said that Russia somehow wishes to destabilize
Ukraine, if not practically crush it altogether. But
why was there no response to our call at the start of
the crisis for launching a dialogue on how to help
Ukraine emerge from the political and economic crisis
it had found itself in? Why was the crisis encouraged
to continue? Why was it only just a few days ago that
the Foreign Ministers of France, Germany and Poland
said that the European Union and Russia should indeed
talk about the economic prospects for Ukraine, Georgia
and Moldova in connection with their joining the
partnership programme of the European Union. And,

14-29848

13/04/2014

Ukraine

by the way, we have heard nothing about the fact that
those ministerial conversations took place in Brussels.
Let us see what the response will be to the
reproaches to Russia over the fact that we do not want
supply Ukraine with gas for free. Let us see on 14 April
what response the European ministers will give to the
letter that President Putin wrote proposing that we work
together to help Ukraine emerge from its economic
turmoil. It is true that the people in Washington,
D.C., to whom we did not send the letter, have already
poisoned it for the European Union, calling it economic
blackmail. But let us see whether the European Union
has retained some kind of sovereignty and whether it is
capable of making independent, rational decisions that
can help to rescue the situation from crisis.
During the entire course of the crisis in Ukraine,
Russia has never advocated aggravating it or
destabilizing the country. We have absolutely no
interest in doing such a thing, since for us Ukraine is
too important as an economic and political partner and a
country that is very close to us in many ways. We do not
desire its destabilization. We are not to blame for what
has produced the results that we are now witnessing.
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco said that it was on 6 April that
the actions were first observed whereby residents of
south-eastern areas of Ukraine were seizing certain
administrative buildings. And in this, of course, they
learned from the experience of the Maidan in Kyiv,
where for weeks and months administrative buildings
were occupied, and which for some reason our Western
partners saw as demonstrations of democracy.
But when it came to the south-eastern regions of
Ukraine, somehow such tactics were unacceptable. A
month and a half elapsed between 21 February and
6 April; a month and a half had gone by since the
overthrow of President Yanukovych and the conclusion
of the agreement that could have prevented an escalation
of the situation. From the very beginning, all we said
was that it was essential to conclude that agreement;
that perhaps a constitutional assembly should be
convoked; and that some decisive gesture should be
made towards the south-eastern regions of Ukraine.
Was any such gesture made? Finally, Mr. Yatsenyuk
came, said something and left. Then Mr. Turchynov
came the next day and did not seem to agree with him.
It seemed they preferred to use force.
Incidentally, some very worrying tones have
crept into our numerous contacts with our Western

S/PV.7154

colleagues. As the Council knows, our Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Sergei Lavrov, has been talking to
Secretary of State Kerry on the phone almost every day.
Kerry continually claims to understand our concern
that in contacts with the Ukrainian authorities genuine
efforts should be made to ensure that they demonstrate
a better grasp of the concerns of the south-eastern
regions of Ukraine regarding a definition of their
autonomy, independence and language rights. And then
suddenly one of the United States Deputy Secretaries of
State gets up in Congress and says, we know that these
talks will not lead anywhere, but we have to occupy the
time somehow. “Occupy the time.” So, really, maybe
somebody in Washington, D.C., is thinking about
Turchynov’s military offensive scenario. In which
case, there is no need to accuse Russia of attempting
destabilization.
The representative of the United States noted that
Vice-President Biden will be going to Ukraine, it seems,
on 21 April. But maybe he should not wait for 21 April.
Maybe he should go right now. Pick up the phone, call
Mr. Turchynov — as he called President Yanukovych
more than once before 21 February — and say to him
what he said to Mr. Yanukovych. As we were informed
by the Vice-President’s Chief of Staff, he said, “For
God’s sake, just do not use force. Call off your forces
from the centre of Kyiv”. That was what Mr. Biden
said. And now, is the United States going to encourage
the fulfilment of this criminal decree authorizing the
use of military force? Why, in one case, when it was
a question of preparations to storm the residence of
the President of Ukraine, the call was that under no
circumstances should force be used, while in the current
situation, it is to encourage the insane military actions
that Turchynov’s decree talks about? I would therefore
request Ms. Power to ask Vice-President Biden to call
Mr. Turchynov right now, because in a few hours’ time
things might take an irreversible turn.
Many colleagues mentioned the meeting that was
announced for 17 April. Indeed, for some months now,
in particular during the period after 21 February, we
have constantly encouraged such formats for dialogue
as a possible way to achieve a solution to the crisis. We
agreed in principle that the meeting would take place
among the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation, Secretary of State Kerry, Ms. Ashton
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine. We
very much hope that such a high-level meeting will
encourage a broad political dialogue in Ukraine and
show the way towards a political solution to the crisis.

14-2984815/17

S/PV.7154

Ukraine

But what does the Council think? If armed force is used
and hostilities take place tomorrow, are we really going
to sign off on that meeting? Of course, that initiative
is going to be fundamentally undermined if military
operations are commenced in south-eastern Ukraine.
Please, let us refrain from any accusations or
speculation as to why Russia is trying to do what it
is doing. Let us focus our attention on what we can
actually do in this case. Here I am speaking to my
Western colleagues. Let us ensure that we do not permit
the Ukrainian authorities to commit the reckless actions
that are currently enshrined in the criminal decree by
Mr. Turchynov, and let us stop that decree from being
implemented. That would have extremely significant
consequences, first and foremost for the people of
Ukraine, of course. That needs to be avoided.
The President: The representative of the United
States has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I will be
brief, but in response to my colleague from the Russian
Federation, I would like to say just a few things.
First, the United States has constantly called for
de-escalation and urged restraint. That has been our
consistent policy. Our consistent statements have made
clear that military force is not the answer, and we have
commended the Ukrainians, frankly, for enduring more
than probably any country in the United Nations could
or would endure without using force. Therefore, there
have been no shortage of efforts at diplomacy.
Secondly, it is not the United States that has
escalated the situation, it is the Russian Federation.
Thirdly, while we would like to place our faith in
talks with the Russian Federation, the European Union
and Ukraine, it is hard to reconcile the behaviour of
the Russian Federation, the propaganda of the Russian
Federation and the military actions of the Russian
Federation — which range from the massing of 40,000
troops on the border to the subversive activities inside
Ukraine — with their appeal for diplomacy and
de-escalation. It is an appeal that we wish were in fact
sincere.
Fourthly, a few times, the representative of the
Russian Federation has described what is happening in
the eastern cities as protests and demonstrations. I would
refer back to my French colleague’s comment that those
claims are rooted in some idea that the Internet does not

16/17

13/04/2014

exist and that people cannot see for themselves that they
are not protests and they are not demonstrations. They
are professional forces carrying weapons — Russianmade weapons, as it happens — and carrying out
sophisticated, coordinated military operations across
a substantial number of eastern Ukrainian cities. They
are not demonstrations. They are not protests. They are
military operations.
Finally, the credibility of the Russian Federation
has been gravely undermined. That said, we remain
eager and willing to talk about how to de-escalate the
situation. That will require that the Russian Federation
pull back its forces, which are ominously stationed
and massed at the eastern Ukrainian border. It will
require that the Russian Federation work to de-escalate
the situation in the light of the armed takeover of
those buildings. If, in fact, the Russian Federation
is interested in peace and in upholding its role as an
enforcer of international peace and security, then it will
engage quickly and with a wholly different degree of
conviction, urgency and truthfulness than it has up to
this point.
The President: The representative of Ukraine has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Several issues were
raised by our Russian colleague. I would like to answer
just one.
(spoke in Russian)
First, Mr. Churkin compared the situation in
December and January with the current situation. We
must recall that, at that time, the people were speaking
out against the banditry of the authorities, and now it is
bandits who are against the people. There is a difference
there.
We cannot remain calm about the fact that several
hundred separatists are holding thousands of people
hostage to fear in towns. We see the standoffs on
television in Kharkiv, Luhansk and Dnipropetrovsk.
We cannot look on while small groups of armed people,
headed up, inter alia, by agents from the Russian
Federation, seize State buildings and take weapons
to hand out. Indeed, those are terrorist operations
that have been specially organized and orchestrated.
Mr. Churkin is absolutely right, there is not much time
left at all, there is just about an hour and a half. It is
just as easy for him to call his President and say a few
simple things to him as it is for me to do so, so I will
14-29848

13/04/2014

Ukraine

repeat them here. The statement that Mr. Churkin has
referred very negatively to several times today was
made by the acting President, Mr. Turchynov, and was
addressed to those people who are now creating tension
in those towns, the terrorist groups of separatists. He
stated:
(spoke in English)
“Those not involved in shooting at Ukrainian law
enforcement officers and who will surrender their
weapons and leave State administrative buildings
will be released from prosecution.”
(spoke in Russian)
Why do they not call their people and tell them to
come back, sit down around the negotiating table and
decide together how we can establish good neighbourly
relations? That would be the right thing to do. The
Government mentioned the referendum, changes to
the Constitution, the retention of the language law
and the fact that the problems that have cropped up
over the decades and remained unsolved by previous
Governments needed to be addressed at last. That is
something that we need to do, but we are being prevented
from doing so. I would like Mr. Churkin to listen to that
and convey what he can to his Government.
(spoke in English)
I am sincerely thankful to the members of the
Security Council who spoke in favour of a peaceful
resolution of the problems in Ukraine. I am sincerely
thankful for that. I also thank the members of the
Security Council for understanding the critical situation
in Ukraine and for any kind of support they can provide.

S/PV.7154

The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I shall not take up much of the Council’s time.
I should just like to say two things.
First, the representative of Ukraine is far too easy
in characterizing his own people as bandits. The Right
Sector and those who say the demonstrators should be
killed are not bandits; they are simply the political elite
of Kyiv. Are not those who are protesting in eastern
Ukraine able to do so without Russia’s say-so? Do they
need Russia to say that events in Kyiv are unacceptable
before they are able to grasp that? When radicals come
to tell the miners of that region that they will establish
their own order — surely the miners can understand
that without a hint from Russia? Are the protesters able
to understand how bad things have become only when
Russian agents come to explain the situation to them?
Do their own life experience and understanding of the
situation in their own country count for nothing? How
will those things influence them?
Secondly, with regard to the statement made by my
American colleague Ms. Power, she did not mention
her view on the decree to use armed force in eastern
Ukraine. I hope that, as the Ukrainian representative
has called for, following today’s discussion some
Western colleagues and partners will pick up the
telephone and call their leaders and those in Kyiv with
whom they enjoy influence, who may not act unless
they get the green light from Western capitals. I would
ask my colleagues to give them the red light and tell
them that problems can be resolved through dialogue
and not military confrontation.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 9.45 p.m.

14-2984817/17
