S/PV.7800

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7800th meeting

Wednesday, 2 November 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Seck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Senegal)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region (S/2016/840)
Letter dated 4 October 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2016/891)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-35692 (E)
*1635692*

S/PV.7800

The situation in the Great Lakes region

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

of the Congo and the Region, despite outstanding
challenges, including the continued presence and
activities of negative forces in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region
(S/2016/840)
Letter dated 4 October 2016 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/891)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General to the Great Lakes Region, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/840, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, and
to document S/2016/891, which contains a letter dated
4 October 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Djinnit.
Mr. Djinnit (spoke in French): I have the honour
to introduce the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region (S/2016/840), covering the period from
9 March to 20 September. I am overjoyed to deliver this
briefing on the Great Lakes region under the Senegalese
presidency of the Security Council, which attests to
the importance that Senegal continues to attach to the
consolidation of peace and stability in that region.
(spoke in English)
During the period under review, the signatory
countries continued overall to make efforts to implement
their commitments under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
2/5

02/11/2016

Yet, there have been renewed efforts to tackle
this persistent problem. The cooperation between the
Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
was enhanced in carrying out joint operations against
negative forces in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including against the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda and the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF). In addition, the representatives of the guarantor
institutions of the Framework Agreement — the United
Nations, the African Union (AU), the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR)
and the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) — conducted a series of initiatives, including
regional consultations and field visits, to support efforts
to neutralize the negative forces.
These led, first, to the convening in Kinshasa of
two evaluation meetings of the implementation of
the Nairobi Declarations in May and June between
representatives of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and a delegation of the former
Mouvement du 23 mars; and secondly, the holding of
a meeting, convened by my Office, of the Ministers of
Defence of some States members of ICGLR and SADC,
in Nairobi on 20 July, to discuss ways and means of
strengthening ongoing efforts aimed at neutralizing
negative forces. Furthermore, in implementation of
a recent decision of the ICGLR summit in Luanda,
concerned countries of the region have also been
working on the establishment and operationalization
of a joint follow-up mechanism to address the growing
threat posed by ADF in eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo and across the region.
Progress was also achieved in strengthening
judicial cooperation in the region and in investigating
and prosecuting cases of violations of human rights,
including sexual and gender-based violence. I am
pleased to note in this regard that, as a result of the
joint efforts of my Office, ICGLR, the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the Great Lakes Regional judicial
cooperation network will be launched in Nairobi on
10 November. The network, comprising representatives
of States members of the ICGLR, with the support
16-35692

02/11/2016

The situation in the Great Lakes region

of regional and international organizations, will
contribute to combating impunity in the Great Lakes
region by building trust and confidence among member
States and promoting the effective implementation of
the regional commitments on judicial cooperation.
Supporting women, youth and civil society has
continued to be an important objective to my Office, as
demonstrated by the convening of an important meeting
of the Women’s Platform for the Framework Agreement
in Goma on 12 July.
During the period under review, considerable
efforts were deployed to promote inclusive dialogue
processes in the region, including in Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In liaison with my
colleague Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Sidikou, and in accordance with resolution
2277 (2016), we have taken a number of initiatives and
deployed sustained efforts, including through regular
engagements with national stakeholders, as well as
regional and international actors, and the establishment
of the international support group to promote inclusive
dialogue in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as facilitated by Mr. Edem Kodjo on behalf of the
African Union.
I have also been following closely the situation
in Burundi. On 17 October, I visited former President
Benjamin Mkapa in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, to seek
his candid assessment of the status and the challenges
faced in the inter-Burundian dialogue. I encouraged
him to pursue his efforts aimed at creating conditions
for inclusive dialogue under the auspices of the East
African Community. I am pleased to note that the
facilitator intends to intensify his formal and informal
contacts with Burundian stakeholders and the leaders
of the region. I further encouraged the efforts of the
East African Community on the occasion of a meeting I
had with President Museveni in Entebbe on 19 October.
Less than a week ago, I was in Luanda for the
seventh high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism on 26 October, chaired by President
José Eduardo dos Santos. This seventh meeting had
a symbolic value, as it was the first to be hosted by
a signatory country. The meeting of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism in Luanda was held as a result
of the reform process of the governing structures of the
Framework Agreement, initiated last year and endorsed
by the sixth meeting of the Mechanism in New York in

S/PV.7800

September 2015 and by the sixth Ordinary Summit of
ICGLR in June 2016.
I am pleased to report that there was a good highlevel participation in the Regional Oversight Mechanism
in Luanda, which demonstrates the continued interest in
and commitment to the Framework Agreement. I wish
to express here my sincere gratitude to President Dos
Santos for hosting this important event and for setting
in motion the process to strengthen the ownership
of signatory countries in the implementation of the
Agreement. I wish also to thank President Denis Sassou
Nguesso of the Republic of Congo for the offer to host
the next high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism in 2017. Other signatory countries have
also expressed interest in hosting future meetings of
the Mechanism and its Technical Support Committee.
The Regional Oversight Mechanism meeting
reviewed and endorsed the progress report on the
implementation of the commitments under the
Framework Agreement, which was extensively
discussed by the Technical Support Committee and
the meeting of Ministers of Foreign Affairs. It also
discussed challenges in dialogue and elections processes
in the region, notably in Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Regional Oversight
Mechanism welcomed the signing on 18 October of the
comprehensive political agreement on the organization
of peaceful, credible and transparent elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; called on all parties
to seek peaceful solutions to the political crisis, in line
with the constitution of the country and resolution
2277 (2016); and, in this respect, encouraged the
Government and other stakeholders to take additional
confidence-building measures.
I seize this opportunity to reiterate the call of the
Secretary-General on the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to continue to engage with all
political stakeholders, including those who reject the
recent round of talks and the resultant agreement, and
to take additional confidence-building measures with a
view to seeking an inclusive process. I equally urge all
stakeholders to pursue their political objectives through
peaceful means and dialogue.
Concerning the situation in Burundi, the Regional
Oversight Mechanism called on all Burundians to
seek peaceful solutions to addressing grievances and
to commit to inclusive dialogue, and extended full

16-356923/5

S/PV.7800

The situation in the Great Lakes region

cooperation to the East African Community facilitator
with a view to expediting the dialogue process.
The conflict situations in South Sudan and
the Central African Republic also featured in the
discussions at the Regional Oversight Mechanism. In
particular, the Mechanism recognized the potential
of the presence of elements of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movemen/Army in Opposition (SPLM-I0)
to further exacerbate existing tensions and the security
situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The leaders urged the region, the States member of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the AU
and the United Nations to assist the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in finding a durable
solution for the removal of the SPLM-I0 elements
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo as soon
as possible.
On the Central African Republic, the Regional
Oversight Mechanism welcomed the efforts of the
Government to promote reconciliation and called on
all armed groups to engage in dialogue with national
authorities so as to ensure peace and stability. In a
statement made on that occasion, the Prime Minister
of the Central African Republic expressed support
and appreciation for the work of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, in a context of renewed
tension in some parts of the country.
With regard to the negative forces, the Regional
Oversight Mechanism endorsed the recommendations
adopted at the 20 July meeting of Ministers of Defence
and welcomed the establishment of the joint follow-up
mechanism on the ADF. Furthermore, the leaders of
the region encouraged efforts aimed at promoting the
role of women in peace and development processes;
welcomed the declaration of the Framework Women’s
Platform, issued in Goma on 12 July; and directed
their respective national institutions to follow up on its
effective implementation.
Finally, the Mechanism welcomed efforts aimed
at promoting regional economic integration, including
the successful holding of the first Great Lakes Private
Sector Investment Conference, held in Kinshasa in
February 2016, and encouraged follow-up actions to
promote the role of the private sector in support of
peace and stability in the region.
It is my hope that the decisions taken by the
Regional Oversight Mechanism Summit last week will
4/5

02/11/2016

be followed by vigorous and decisive action on the
part of all stakeholders. This is particularly crucial as
developments in the region, including challenges related
to elections and the threat posed by negative forces,
continue to highlight its fragility. Concerted efforts
are needed to avert any reversal of the commendable
gains achieved thus far. For my part, I will continue to
work with the countries of the region, the guarantors
and other stakeholders to ensure appropriate followup action of the decisions of the Summit, enhance
the implementation of the Framework agreement and
encourage cooperation in the region.
(spoke in French)
I should like to conclude by thanking Council
members for their unstinting support for the Great
Lakes region and for my efforts as Special Envoy.
As the Council is aware, my Office was the subject
of a strategic review carried out by the Department
of Political Affairs pursuant to resolution 2277
(2016). I hope that the Council will welcome the
recommendations emanating from the review, which
are aimed at strengthening the smooth functioning
and effectiveness of the Office so as to enable it
better to assist this dynamic and complex region in
the implementation of the Framework agreement and
the achievement of its goals of bringing about lasting
peace, security and stability.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Djinnit for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the member of the
Council who wishes to make a statement.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I wish once again to convey to you and
your team my delegation’s wish that you will enjoy a
very successful presidency of the Security Council
during the month of November.
I should like first to thank the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes region,
Mr. Said Djinnit, for his presence here today and for
the information that he has provided us.
Almost four years after the adoption of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
Uruguay would like to acknowledge the efforts and
the commitment of the signatories and the guarantors
to implement the provisions of the agreement. The
convening of several high-level meetings in the past
16-35692

02/11/2016

The situation in the Great Lakes region

few months, including, inter alia, the sixth Ordinary
Summit of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, held in Luanda in June, as well as last
week’s meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
testify to the validity and the relevance of the provisions
of the Framework agreement, which is both a political
and a diplomatic platform established to tackle the
challenges that loom large over the Great Lakes region.
Despite the aforementioned progress in the
implementation of the agreement, I should like to stress
that the process of achieving lasting peace and security
in the Great Lakes region continues to face major
political, security and humanitarian challenges. As the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/840) rightly
indicates, the key here is the effective neutralization
of the armed groups that are threatening stability. In
this context, I would stress the fragile security situation
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which is threatened principally by the actions of
the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda and
the Allied Democratic Forces.
The humanitarian situation in the Great Lakes
region is also a source of deep concern. Several
countries of the region, including the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi, South Sudan and the
Central African Republic, are confronted with grave
humanitarian issues, with millions of displaced persons
whose most basic humanitarian needs remain unmet.
On the political front, the dialogues launched in
certain countries of the region have not yet yielded any
significant results. Nonetheless, we would reiterate
how important it is that in all cases the political
dialogue be open, inclusive and peaceful; bring
together all stakeholders; and guarantee protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms. We must not

S/PV.7800

tire of reiterating that dialogue is the only option for
resolving differences.
Against that backdrop, Uruguay calls on the
Governments of the region and the international
community as a whole to pool their efforts to foster
political and social stability in the Great Lakes region,
with strict adherence to the principle of non-interference
in the internal affairs of neighbouring countries and
a renewed commitment not to tolerate, or provide
assistance and support of any kind, to the armed groups
that are active in the region. They must also ensure the
protection of civilians and respect for the human rights
of all inhabitants without distinction.
Uruguay takes note of the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General’s letter dated
4 October 2016 (S/2016/891) on the strengthening of the
role of the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes region. On
this point, we would like to indicate that my delegation
deems several of the recommendations therein to be
extremely relevant and deserving of due consideration
by the Security Council.
Finally, given that today is 2 November, the
International Day to End Impunity for Crimes against
Journalists, we would like to convey a message of
solidarity and express our appreciation for the work
done by journalists, especially that which provides us
with information on conflicts and political processes.
A great deal of that information, given the transparency
and passionate sincerity with which journalists carry
out their work, is in most cases very useful to the work
of the Security Council.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.25 a.m.

16-356925/5
