S/PV.8332

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8332nd meeting

Tuesday, 28 August 2018, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Pierce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Adom
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Eckels-Currie

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017) and 2401 (2018) (S/2018/777)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-26882 (E)
*1826882*

S/PV.8332

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 9.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014),
2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017) and
2401 (2018) (S/2018/777)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. John Ging,
Director of Operations and Advocacy of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/777, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014),
2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017) and
2401 (2018).
I now give the floor to Mr. Ging.
Mr. Ging: Last month, the Emergency Relief
Coordinator informed the Security Council (see
S/PV.8320) of the dramatic increase in the number of
people in need of humanitarian assistance in Aleppo
and Idlib governorates since the beginning of the year.
Recent weeks have seen a further serious deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in the north-west, with
intense aerial bombardment and shelling reported in
parts of Idlib, Aleppo, Hama and Latakia governorates,
resulting in the death and injury of civilians and damage
to, and the destruction of, civilian infrastructure,
including schools and hospitals, thereby placing even
more strain on humanitarian responders and vulnerable
host communities.
On 10 August, there were air strikes on the town
of Oram Al-Kubra, in western Aleppo, which were
reported to have killed 41 civilians and wounded more
2/19

28/08/2018

than 70. On the same day, bombs were dropped on
Alteh and Khan Shaykhun, in southern Idlib, killing
12 civilians and wounding dozens of others. On
12 August, 67 people were reportedly killed and 37 were
injured, including many women and children, when a
weapons depot in a residential building exploded near
Sarmada, in rural Idlib.
Over the same period, the United Nations Children’s
Fund reported that three health facilities it had been
supporting were attacked, rendering two of those
facilities out of service. Separately, an unconfirmed
report was received of a projectile striking the grounds
of a hospital in Al-Ma’arra which had been deconflicted
according to agreed procedures. In that instance, no
casualties or damage to the hospital were reported.
School activities were also suspended in several areas
owing to hostilities.
Humanitarian organizations are responding to
needs across the north-west while drawing on crossborder assistance deliveries, which continue to provide
a critical lifeline for hundreds of thousands of civilians
who cannot be reached through other means. Some
680,000 people received food delivered from Turkey
during the month of July alone, while 254,000 people
received health assistance during the same period.
Alongside the ongoing response and prepositioning
of aid, humanitarian partners are finalizing a
comprehensive readiness plan for people in areas of the
north-west being reached by cross-border humanitarian
organizations. The plan is intended to guide a flexible
response over a six-month period, complementing
assistance mobilized from inside Syria. With an
estimated 2.1 million people already in need in areas
under non-State armed group control covered by the
readiness plan, with humanitarian workers likely to
be among the displaced and with many organizations
facing increasing funding shortfalls, the efforts of the
Council to avoid a further escalation of violence and an
ensuing humanitarian catastrophe are critical.
Turning to the situation in the south-west, the
Government of Syria has now regained control over
the vast majority of Dara’a, Quneitra and Al-Suwayda
governorates. Large-scale return of internally displaced
people has already taken place, and fewer than 60,000
people are now estimated to remain displaced across
the three governorates.
However, massive levels of humanitarian need
persist, and the United Nations continues to provide
18-26882

28/08/2018

The situation in the Middle East

aid in partnership with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
and other local organizations. Food assistance has now
been provided to more than 390,000 people, as have
water and sanitation, education, shelter assistance
and protection services. Two ad hoc inter-agency
convoys delivered hygiene kits, nutrition supplies and
sanitary and household items for a total of 40,000
people in Dara’a’s Al-Balad and Busra Al-Sham on
9 and 16 August, respectively. As efforts to scale up
protection and basic services continue and more detailed
needs assessments are also under way, sustained and
expanded humanitarian access across the south-west
will, be critical.
The humanitarian situation remains complex and
challenging in other parts of the country. At Rukban,
on the Syrian-Jordanian border, the movement of
several hundred families out of the camp due to
deteriorating living conditions means that the current
population is estimated to be approximately 45,000, of
whom the vast majority are women and children. The
provision of humanitarian assistance in the camp is
increasingly urgent, with minimal aid delivered since
January. Discussions on a humanitarian convoy to the
area continue.
Close to 150,000 people are now estimated to
have returned to Raqqa city. Unexploded ordnance
and improvised explosive devices continue to pose a
life-threatening threat to returnees and humanitarian
personnel. Alongside the insecurity and resource
shortfalls, this is hindering the scaling-up of assistance.
In Deir ez-Zor, ongoing fighting in the east of
the governorate has continued to impact civilians,
with reports of more than 20,000 people having
been displaced to makeshift camps between July
and the beginning of this month. Many sites hosting
new arrivals are not accessible to humanitarian
organizations present in the area, and most displaced
people are reported to be prevented from leaving the
sites, although some have been able to move to other
areas to receive medical treatment.
The number of people who remain displaced from
eastern Ghouta in sites in rural Damascus is reported to
have fallen to just below 7,500. The United Nations did
not receive authorization to access these sites between
mid-June and August. However, the goods news is
that visits to some of those locations were possible
last week. Returns to eastern Ghouta are reported to
have continued, although access to the area remains

S/PV. 8332

limited, delaying our efforts to scale up assistance and
provide much-needed services in the area, including
for returnees.
World Humanitarian Day was held on 19 August to
pay tribute to aid workers and rally support for people
affected by crises around the world. Syria remains
among the most dangerous countries in the world for
humanitarian workers and health-care providers. Many
have been directly targeted in the course of their work
or forced to flee their homes. Hundreds have lost their
lives. We continue to remind all parties to the fighting
in Syria of their obligations under international
humanitarian law to protect and respect humanitarian
relief personnel.
The Emergency Relief Coordinator is in Damascus
today to engage with the Government of Syria on how
best to further scale up the collective humanitarian
response across Syria and how to ensure that those
in greatest need are assisted and protected. His visit
coincides with a visit of the High Commissioner
for Refugees.
The Council’s engagement is also critical to
ensuring de-escalation in Idlib and surrounding areas;
to ensure safe, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian
access; and to ensure the protection of civilians and
civilian infrastructure. Hundreds of thousands of
people are already experiencing dire humanitarian
conditions in overcrowded sites in which basic services
have been stretched to the breaking point for months.
Humanitarian organizations are doing what they
can with the resources available to them to sustain
the current response and prepare for a possible
further deterioration, thanks in large part to crossborder assistance and the generosity of our financial
donors. But a worst-case scenario in Idlib would
overwhelm capacities and have the potential to create a
humanitarian emergency at a scale not yet seen in this
crisis. We therefore call on the members of the Council
to do all they can to ensure that we avoid that. In the
words of Kofi Annan, “We have the means and the
capacity to deal with our problems, if only we can find
the political will.”
The President: I thank Mr. Ging for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Speaking on behalf
of the humanitarian penholders, I thank Mr. Ging for

18-268823/19

S/PV.8332

The situation in the Middle East

his briefing and I pay tribute to the tireless efforts of
humanitarian workers saving lives on the ground in
Syria every day. Too many brave humanitarians have
been killed on duty.
We meet today as there are alarming signs of a
pending military offensive in north-western Syria.
Over the past two weeks, we have already witnessed
attacks on educational and health-care facilities,
including three schools supported by UNICEF. In the
first half of 2018, there were 38 reported attacks against
health facilities in Idlib. These are clear violations of
international humanitarian law.
All parties, including Syrian allies, need to be
reminded of their obligations under international
humanitarian law to protect civilians and civilian
objects and comply with the principles of distinction,
proportionality and the avoidance of unnecessary
suffering. Civilian areas, buildings dedicated to
education, including schools, and hospitals and medical
facilities must not be subject to direct attack or used
for military purposes, and humanitarian and medical
personnel must be respected and protected.
We note with deep regret the continued lack of
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018), presented by
Sweden and Kuwait and adopted unanimously by the
Council some six months ago (see S/PV.8188). We stress
that Security Council resolutions must be respected.
Idlib is a de-escalation area, established by
the Astana guarantors. One after the other of the
de-escalation areas has turned into escalation areas.
Of the estimated 2.9 million people living in Idlib and
surrounding areas, more than half of the population
are internally displaced persons (IDPs), many of whom
have already fled not only once, but several times,
including from other de-escalation areas. A staggering
2.1 million people in Idlib and surrounding areas are
in need of humanitarian assistance. Increased military
escalation would have catastrophic consequences and
could lead to a humanitarian disaster. We therefore
urge all parties to abide by the de-escalation agreement
in Idlib and call upon the Astana guarantors to uphold
their commitments regarding de-escalation and
humanitarian access. We must ensure that Idlib will not
become the next Aleppo or eastern Ghouta.
We remain deeply concerned by the continued lack
of humanitarian access. In the last reporting period,
only four inter-agency convoys were dispatched. The
Syrian authorities must be compelled to do more. We
4/19

28/08/2018

encourage those with influence and those who engage
in dialogue with Damascus to step up advocacy for
the signing of facilitation letters for convoys, United
Nations regular programming to all areas, including
areas that have recently changed control, and approval
of visas for United Nations staff, including those of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
We also note that the cross-border modality remains an
absolute lifeline for the many people in need in Idlib,
and commend the efforts of the United Nations and
partner organizations in that regard.
In Syria, horrible war crimes continue to be
perpetrated on a daily basis. Civilians, women and
men alike, as well as children, continue to be targeted
in blatant disregard for human life and dignity and in
violation of international law. In the military operations
to retake control of the south-west, indiscriminate
aerial bombardment and artillery shelling, including
against schools and hospitals, have frequently been
used. We are also shocked by the attacks perpetrated by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Suwayda on
25 July, such as the abduction of women and children.
This highlights yet again the need for accountability,
and we reiterate our full support for the Commission
of Inquiry, as well as the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.
All displaced Syrians have the right to return, but
the assessment of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is that
conditions for the voluntary repatriation of Syrian
refugees are not yet in place. It is the responsibility of the
Syrian authorities to create an environment propitious
for a safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees
and IDPs, in accordance with international law and
the principle of non-refoulement. UNHCR has a clear
mandate to protect refugees. The return of refugees and
IDPs must be managed by the United Nations with all
relevant parties, in line with international humanitarian
law. We fully support the work of the United Nations,
including UNCHR, and agree with its assessment. In
this regard, we also express our continued concern
regarding the Syrian Law No. 10.
Finally, we reiterate our support for a United
Nations-facilitated political solution, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015). That is the only way to ensure
a sustainable solution to the crisis in Syria, to end the
18-26882

28/08/2018

The situation in the Middle East

suffering and to address the legitimate concerns of all
Syrians. Furthermore, only once a credible political
transition is firmly under way and when conditions
for the safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees
and IDPs are in place will the international donor
community be ready to assist in the reconstruction
of Syria.
To conclude, let me emphasize that Sweden and
Kuwait have been significant donors to the Syria
humanitarian response over the years and we will
continue to contribute. As co-penholders, we will also
continue to do our utmost to help alleviate the suffering
of the Syrian people, remind the Syrian parties of
their obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
and ensure that the Council upholds its responsibility
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the holding of this meeting and thank
Mr. John Ging for his valuable and informative briefing
this morning.
Peru is following the situation in Syria with great
concern. The conflict continues to claim lives and
destroy civilian infrastructure. The sorely needed
humanitarian assistance is still delivered only in a
limited way. More than 13 million people — two out
of three Syrians — need it. Our main focus at the
moment is Idlib, a highly volatile scenario. The extreme
vulnerability of nearly 4 million civilians should compel
us to direct our attention to the need and responsibility
to protect them. Under no circumstances can the fight
against terrorism be used as an excuse to violate human
rights and international humanitarian law, especially
when, as in Idlib, the lives of approximately 2 million
children are at stake.
It is essential to prevent a further escalation of
violence. Its humanitarian impact is incalculable. It
could lead to massive new refugee flows and further
complicate regional stability. We are also concerned
about the situation of nearly 5 million internally
displaced persons and the 6 million Syrian citizens,
who constitute the largest population of refugees and
displaced persons in the world today. These people,
who are in many cases exposed to the most precarious
living conditions, have the right to return voluntarily
to their homes and businesses, in a safe and dignified
manner, under internationally accepted parameters.

S/PV. 8332

The right of ownership of these persons must not be
undermined in any way.
More than ever, the tragic situation demands that
the United Nations and other humanitarian actors have
immediate, safe and unrestricted access to those most
in need. We wish to reiterate our admiration of, and
support for, the work of humanitarian workers. We also
stress the importance of cross-border assistance for
the survival of millions of people. The international
community, and in particular the countries with the
greatest resources and those committed to peace and
stability, must ensure stable and predictable funding for
the humanitarian response plan in Syria.
Finally, we must bear in mind the urgency of a
political solution to this protracted conflict, based on
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). All parties, especially the
Government, must engage constructively in those
efforts. Our ability to ease the suffering of the
population and to ensure the necessary and urgent
rebuilding of the country ultimately depend upon it.
In that regard, we hope that the upcoming meeting in
Geneva between the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral and the Astana guarantors will enable progress
in establishing a constitutional committee that is
inclusive and representative, especially with regard to
Syrian women. We believe it is essential that the Astana
guarantors, other countries with influence over the
Syrian Government, and the opposition contribute to an
atmosphere of moderation, détente, dialogue in order to
ensure peace, the well-being of the people of Syria and
the territorial integrity of the country.
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America): I
thank Mr. John Ging for his briefing.
All eyes are now on north-western Syria, and we
are gravely concerned about the threats to civilian
lives should the regime and its allies undertake a wider
offensive in Idlib province. Tensions are rising there,
and so is the violence. In recent weeks alone, hundreds
of civilians have already lost their lives, many of them
women and children. Education authorities reportedly
have suspended all school activities for several days
in cities near Idlib due to hostilities. Syrian regime
military operations in Idlib, particularly with Russian
military support, would escalate the conflict and
further undercut the Security Council’s efforts to work
towards a political solution to the conflict.

18-268825/19

S/PV.8332

The situation in the Middle East

We are also profoundly troubled by reports that the
regime is continuing its practice of targeting medical
facilities, an egregious and ruthless tactic flagrantly
in defiance of international humanitarian law and
specifically in violation of resolution 2286 (2016). There
is no excuse to claim ignorance about the locations of
those facilities under the deconfliction mechanisms
that are in place. Doing so only adds to the lies, crimes
and countless accounts of human tragedy that have
defined this conflict over the past seven years.
The United States takes seriously the warnings
from Special Envoy of the Secretary-General De
Mistura and the Regional Humanitarian Coordinator
that a military operation in Idlib and surrounding areas
would not only endanger the lives of many of the more
than 3 million civilians sheltering there, but would also
severely interfere with humanitarian partners’ ability
to deliver lifesaving assistance. Unless the Astana
guarantors — Russia, Iran and Turkey — uphold their
own established de-escalation zone in Idlib province to
stop the regime’s imminent assault, those civilians will
have nowhere left to turn to seek safe refuge or aid.
The United States is also deeply concerned that
the regime may again use chemical weapons against
civilian populations as part of its assault on Idlib, with
devastating consequences for humanitarian conditions
on the ground and further eroding the international
regime prohibiting the use of chemical weapons. As we
made clear in our joint statement to commemorate the
anniversary of the regime’s deadly sarin gas attack in
Ghouta, the United States and our allies, France and
the United Kingdom, will respond appropriately to any
new chemical-weapon attacks by the Al-Assad regime.
The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees assesses that conditions
in Syria are not yet conducive for large-scale refugee
returns. Despite the assessment of the United Nations,
however, the Al-Assad regime has called on Syrians
around the world to return home, but has done little to
create the conditions necessary to make that a reality.
In fact, the regime continues to make the country a
threatening and dangerous place for its own people
by routinely blocking United Nations cross-border
humanitarian access, stalling the United Nations-led
political process in Geneva and proceeding with air
strikes and ground offensives — placing millions of
civilians in peril.
6/19

28/08/2018

As the leading donor of humanitarian assistance
for Syria, the United States supports aid that reaches
4 million Syrians across all 14 governorates every
month, and we will continue to provide that support to
the Syrian people. If our Russian partners are serious
about their concern for refugees and other displaced
Syrians, we recommend that they stop enabling the
Syrian regime’s ongoing and indiscriminate violence,
maintain the de-escalation areas and allow unhindered
humanitarian access to those in need, in full accordance
with resolution 2165 (2014).
The best and only durable solution to the
humanitarian crisis in Syria is through a credible
political process in Geneva that leads unalterably
to constitutional reform, United Nations-supervised
presidential and parliamentary elections and a political
transition that genuinely reflects the will of the Syrian
people, as well as accountability for human rights
abuses committed during the conflict. Those goals
often seem out of reach, but we owe it to the Syrian
people to support every effort to make them a reality.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): We very much appreciate and take
note of the briefing by the Director of Operations
and Advocacy of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Ging.
We once again express our dismay that the people
of Syria continues to live under siege and in violence,
primarily the most vulnerable population, children, who
in some cases have known only that reality their whole
lives. We regret that, at the time of the presentation of
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/777), as a
result of the conflict approximately 1.48 million people
were still living in hard-to-reach areas, and that among
the more than 6 million internally displaced persons
2.6 million are children. We also regret that in July
alone, in the south-west of Syria, up to 325,000 were
displaced, thereby increasing the number of displaced
persons of this already vulnerable population.
In that regard, we renew our appeal to the relevant
parties and call for the cessation of hostilities in the
context of resolution 2401 (2018). Any increase in
tensions must be prevented so as not to cause greater
instability in the region. We therefore reiterate our
concern and alarm about what may happen not only
in Aleppo province, but particularly in Idlib, since
any use of force in that region can lead to, apart from
mass population displacement, a greater humanitarian
18-26882

28/08/2018

The situation in the Middle East

catastrophe. We therefore draw attention to the fact
that, in the month of July alone, the population in Idlib
increased to 4.2 million people.
It is essential to avoid any kind of tension or
escalation of violence in order to prevent a greater
tragedy. To that end, the full implementation of
resolution 2401 (2018) is crucial. In that regard, we
highlight the various initiatives that made it possible
to reach local agreements that facilitated not only
the delivery of humanitarian assistance but also the
evacuation of people in need, such as the populations of
Fo’ah and Kafraya on 16 July.
Likewise, we highlight the delivery of supplies
by France, which were transported to Syria with the
support of the Russian Federation. That example should
be repeated if we hope to reach the 13.1 million people
who need assistance throughout Syrian territory. We
are convinced that dialogue and cooperation are more
effective than the use of violence.
We once again condemn any kind of indiscriminate
attack on civilian installations. We call on the parties
to respect their obligations under international law
and international humanitarian law in order to ensure
the protection of civilians, hospitals and educational
facilities and not make such civilian infrastructure the
target of their attacks, but particularly to have regard
for and to protect medical and humanitarian personnel.
We believe that only respect for international law and
international humanitarian law will make it possible
achieve a gradual sustainable peace in Syria.
We pay heartfelt tribute to humanitarian and medical
personnel, whose tireless work, including risking their
own lives, has enabled the much-needed humanitarian
access. We urge the various humanitarian agencies not
to stop such assistance, since, thanks to them, it has
been possible to reach more than 3.3 million people
with food and 1 million people with water, sanitation
and hygiene services and supplies. In that regard,
we emphasize that, in the month of July alone, more
than 188,000 children and mothers received primary
health-care and immunization services, while more
than 193,000 children and nursing mothers received
nutritional supplements and services. However, we
particularly emphasize that it has been possible to
provide protection and psychosocial support services to
more than 209,000 children.
That is why we reiterate the need for cooperation
on the part of the Syrian Government so that, working

S/PV. 8332

in a more coordinated and active way with the various
United Nations agencies and their representatives,
such assistance can be increased. That also urgently
requires visa approvals, as well as authorization for the
entry of convoys. We therefore highlight the dispatch
of at least four cross-border convoys during the month
of July. We urge that the delivery of humanitarian
assistance through such inter-agency humanitarian
convoys continue.
We insist on the need to ensure the clearing of
explosive remnants of war throughout the territory and
populated areas, in particular in Raqqa city. We believe
that to be an urgent and essential task, not only since
they threaten humanitarian activities but also because
the necessary measures must be taken to prevent
fatalities among medical staff, humanitarian workers
and, in particular, civilians returning to their cities of
origin. In that regard, we recall the fact that any return
must be voluntary, unhindered, in full dignity and in
safe conditions.
Finally, we reiterate that the only way to resolve the
conflict is through an inclusive, negotiated and agreed
political process, led by and for the Syrian people and
which facilitates a peaceful solution.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, allow
me to thank our briefer, Mr. John Ging, for his
comprehensive analysis.
First, let me very briefly underline once again our
strong support for the relaunching of a United Nationsfacilitated political process for Syria. We strongly
support a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned inclusive
political process under the auspices of the United
Nations in Geneva.
Switching now to our main topic, namely, the
humanitarian dimension of the Syrian conflict, we
have to acknowledge that the military logic continues
to drive developments in Syria. We still face unceasing
and widespread violence and violations of international
law, including gross and systematic human rights
violations and abuses. The most striking examples of
that are still visible in the south-western part of Syria.
We are extremely worried by reports stating that by the
end of this month, almost 200,000 people may be newly
displaced in affected areas.
Taking into consideration the recent events, we
strongly condemn the intensification of military
operations and call for an immediate end to the violence

18-268827/19

S/PV.8332

The situation in the Middle East

in south-western Syria. Military operations resulting
in deaths among the civilian population, as well as the
destruction of and damage to civilian infrastructure,
such as schools and hospitals, are unacceptable and must
stop. Safe and sustainable humanitarian access must be
secured. Unfortunately, since the Syrian Government
retook control of many areas of the country, there is
still no unhindered access for humanitarian actors to
the areas in need.
We are concerned about not only south-western Syria
but also the north-western part. Military operations led
by Government forces, with the support of its allies,
have already displaced thousands of civilians. The total
number of people in need of humanitarian assistance in
Aleppo and Idlib governorates has increased by more
than half a million this year.
As we heard in the briefing, Idlib governorate
is still struggling with the new, significant influx
of internally displaced persons. It is an extremely
worrying pattern, which leaves Idlib with the highest
total number of displaced persons in Syria. More than
half a million people have been displaced to and within
Idlib governorate in the past six months, mostly from
eastern Ghouta, Homs, Yarmouk and other parts of Idlib
governorate. Possible consequences of further military
escalation in that area are of great concern to us.
The humanitarian imperative should be our
priority. We would like to reiterate our strong call to
all parties with some influence on the ground to take
all the necessary actions to achieve a full cessation of
hostilities in the whole territory of Syria, in particular
in Idlib, in order to prevent scenarios already witnessed
in eastern Ghouta and Aleppo. In that context, it should
be emphasized that the protection of civilians and
civilian infrastructure by all sides to the conflict should
be respected.
Let me also stress the need for the protection for
refugees. We would support only the safe, voluntary
and dignified return of the Syrian people under a
United Nations-led framework once conditions allow it.
Respect for the imperative of non-refoulement should
be our guiding principle in that matter.
There is no need to repeat the importance of the
protection of groups in situations of vulnerability,
especially children, women and members of religious
minorities, who are far too often disproportionally
affected by the conflict in Syria.
8/19

28/08/2018

In conclusion, allow me to stress the necessity of
maintaining the unity of the Security Council on the
question of the full implementation of a humanitarian
resolution across Syria. Unfortunately, we see a new
military offensive persisting. That worries us, as we
may again witness increased violence. We call on all
parties that can affect events on the ground to take the
steps necessary to ensure the cessation of hostilities, the
adequate protection of the Syrian people and, finally,
the provision of urgent humanitarian access.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, we would like to thank the Director of Operations
and Advocacy of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Ging,
for his briefing, which once again highlighted the grave
humanitarian situation in Syria and the risk of further
deterioration if the regime launches a large-scale
offensive in Idlib. It should be recalled that violence
begets violence and that deadly cycle must cease. In
that regard, I would like to make four points.
First, France is very concerned about the signs of
a large-scale military offensive in Idlib. Such military
action continues to undermine hopes for an end to the
crisis and could spark another humanitarian tragedy
in northern Syria, coupled with a migrant crisis in
Turkey. The protection of civilians and infrastructure
must be guaranteed, as the lives of 2.2 million people
are at stake. Such violence would also exacerbate
threats to regional security as it would cause jihadist
combatants, including those in the Idlib region, to
disperse. The increased bombings of recent weeks
must cease immediately. Together, we must dissuade
the Syrian regime from carrying out its strategy of
crushing opposition and, in particular, using chemical
weapons. That is the message France, along with its
American and British partners, conveyed last week.
In that regard, maintaining dialogue is essential and
President Emmanuel Macron is in close contact with
President Erdoğan and President Putin on that issue.
We call on the guarantors of the Idlib de-escalation
area to maintain the ceasefire and to fully respect and
ensure respect for humanitarian law.
Secondly, more broadly, full, immediate and
unhindered access must be guaranteed throughout
Syria. Humanitarian workers must have safe access
to all those in need, including in eastern Ghouta and
Quneitra. France deplores the fact that no genuine
progress has been achieved in that area, including in
priority zones where control has changed hands. Only
18-26882

28/08/2018

The situation in the Middle East

11 per cent of convoy needs identified by the United
Nations have been covered in July and August, which is
insufficient and unacceptable. We recall that assistance
provided by the cross-border convoys authorized
by resolution 2393 (2017) is crucial. The assistance
provided via Turkey is vital and no alternative exists
for providing daily assistance to approximately
2 million people in north-western Syria. We also call
for increased aid through Al-Yarubiyeh, between Iraq
and Syria.
Thirdly, with regard to the return of refugees, at
present conditions for their safe, dignified and voluntary
return regrettably do not exist. If they should decide
to return to Syria, their safety cannot be guaranteed.
Since January, there have been nearly 1 million
additional internally displaced persons. Those who
return are vulnerable to expropriation, abuses, forced
recruitment and even persecution by the regime. Law
No. 10 makes the displacement of people irreversible
and is part of a demographic engineering strategy. It is a
major hindrance to the return of refugees and displaced
people. Like our European Union partners collectively,
we request a repeal of the law, reparations and in-depth
work on the restitution of property and conscription.
Fourthly and lastly, I recall that the humanitarian
situation will enjoy no long-term improvement without
credible and irreversible progress in a United Nationsled political process. To date, the Syrian regime has
demonstrated no willingness to negotiate a political
transition. Without a political transition, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015), national reconciliation will not
take place and the majority of refugees will not return.
We also recall very explicitly that without a genuine
political transition, the States members and institutions
of the European Union will not fund reconstruction.
In conclusion, we are at a crossroads on the path to
a serious process that will lead to an inclusive political
solution. France is working to bring together the parties
to the conflict. The announcement by Mr. Staffan de
Mistura on the formation of a constitutional committee
is an opportunity we must take to ensure progress
towards a political solution. France will continue its
efforts to protect Syrian civilians and to ensure that the
political process leads to genuine constitutional change
and free, transparent and inclusive elections.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First,
let me express appreciation to Mr. Ging for his
sobering briefing.

S/PV. 8332

I will focus on three points today: the need to uphold
international humanitarian law, in particular in Idlib;
the conditions for the voluntary, safe and dignified
return of refugees; and the need for a political process.
First, with regard to international humanitarian
law and Idlib, we have continued to witness the
consequences of intensified military action in Syria,
especially last month in the south-west. Cross-border
aid is needed to fulfil humanitarian needs in that area;
sporadic deliveries from Damascus are not sufficient.
We underline the need to uphold international
humanitarian law and protect civilians, including aid
workers and medical personnel. Even when hospitals
provide their coordinates to receive protection,
they are targeted from the air. Such practices reflect
shocking disrespect for international law and human
dignity and decency. The parties to the conflict should
provide protection to all civilians, especially to those
fleeing violence.
We share the concerns expressed in the Secretary
General’s report (S/2018/777) with regard to further
military escalation in the north-west. Nearly 3 million
civilians, including 1 million children, live in Idlib.
Sixty per cent of them are internally displaced persons
who have fled violence elsewhere in Syria and sought
protection in the north-west. The Astana guarantors
of the de-escalation area should provide such
protection; that is their obligation under international
humanitarian law. We urge the Syrian regime and the
Astana guarantors to prevent an escalation of violence
in Idlib. The Astana guarantors and the Syrian regime
have to work towards a non-violent negotiated solution.
Upcoming meetings, such as the Istanbul conference,
should be used to find the solution. Parties need to
refrain from military action.
Secondly, with regard to conditions for the safe
return of refugees, Syrians — totalling approximately
5.6 million people — remain the largest group of
refugees worldwide. We remain grateful to neighbouring
countries for their hospitality and stress the importance
of international support and solidarity. We appreciate
the recent agreement on the humanitarian response
plan, although it is long overdue. Like our Peruvian
colleague, I would also highlight the dire plight of so
many internally displaced persons. Once again, we
stress the importance of a needs-based humanitarian
approach in Syria, not just now but also in the
coming year.

18-268829/19

S/PV.8332

The situation in the Middle East

We are shocked by the recent publication of the
death records of hundreds of Syrians who died in the
regime’s detention centres. We cannot talk about the
safe return of refugees so long as the regime is not even
prepared to protect its own citizens throughout Syria.
It remains unsafe to return to Syria. The 21 protection
thresholds, as defined by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
and which we strongly support, are not in place. For any
voluntary return, a safe political, social and economic
environment needs to be ensured to enable refugees
to return to their towns and villages and re-establish
themselves in safety and dignity. In line with the
principle of non-refoulement, guaranteeing voluntary
returns is at the core of such a process. It is crucial
that UNHCR and other protection actors have access to
monitor compliance with the 21 protection thresholds.
Related to that issue, we still have serious concerns
about Syrian Law No. 10. That law seems to attempt
to construct new demographic realities on the ground
and challenges the future of refugees and internally
displaced persons alike.
Thirdly, a political solution is needed. The pursuit
of a strategy based on military violence and the violation
of civil rights will never bring long-term stability and
peace. Syrians need to see that they can trust their
own Government to bring peace. Ultimately, stability
and peace can be created only through an inclusive
political solution. The position of the Kingdom of
the Netherlands is clear and consistent. We support a
United Nations-facilitated political solution in line with
resolution 2254 (2015). There will be no reconstruction
support for Syria as long as a political transition has not
taken place.
In conclusion, let me echo the call from the
Secretary-General’s report:
“[T]he perpetrators of serious violations of
international humanitarian law must be held
accountable. Such a step is central to achieving
sustainable peace in the Syrian Arab Republic.”
(S/2018/777, para. 45)
In line with the Secretary-General, we call for the
situation in the country to be referred to the International
Criminal Court.
Let me end with a word of respect and appreciation
for aid workers and medical personnel who risk their
own lives for the victims of the violence in Syria.
10/19

28/08/2018

Mr.
Adom
(Côte
d’Ivoire)
(spoke
in
French): Мy delegation welcomes this briefing
on
the
humanitarian
situation
in
Syria.
I thank Mr. John Ging, Director of Operations and
Advocacy of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, whose briefing
informed us about the continuing humanitarian
challenges, linked in particular to the ongoing hostilities
between the parties to the conflict in Syria. In that
regard, the warning of an imminent Syrian offensive
against Idlib only increases our concern.
Despite the unanimous adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 2401 (2018), the long-awaited
stable humanitarian pause, indispensable for the
delivery of humanitarian aid, including medical
evacuations, is unfortunately struggling to materialize.
I recall that the resolution called on all parties to cease
hostilities in order to create the conditions necessary for
unrestricted and sustainable access by United Nations
humanitarian convoys to the besieged areas in order to
put an end to the plight of millions of Syrians.
Unfortunately, despite the Council’s urgent
appeals, military clashes are still ongoing, as indicated
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/777), and
the escalation of violence spares neither schools
nor hospitals. They are contributing thereby to the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Syria. In
the north-west of the country, the report states that the
total number of people in need of humanitarian assistance
in the governorates of Aleppo and Idlib has increased by
more than 570,000 since early 2018, reaching a total of
4.2 million. Thousands of evacuees from the south-west
have been transported to Idlib — a town that recorded
the arrival of nearly 130,000 displaced people between
March and August. The worrisome deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Syria is further exacerbated
by the difficulties encountered by humanitarian actors
in assisting populations in distress.
In that particularly difficult environment, where
humanitarian actors are risking their lives to restore
hope to millions of Syrians, Côte d’Ivoire would like to
commend the courageous actions taken for the return
of some 147,000 civilians to Raqqa city since the end
of hostilities in October 2017, despite the spread of
explosive remnants of war in that city. My country
also welcomes the continued cross-border delivery of
humanitarian assistance by the United Nations and
its specialized agencies, which has helped more than
3.3 million people in need.
18-26882

28/08/2018

The situation in the Middle East

In view of the deteriorating humanitarian situation,
Côte d’Ivoire recalls that it is incumbent on the warring
parties in the Syrian crisis to respect their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. It urges them in particular to refrain
from impeding the delivery of humanitarian aid. It
endorses the Secretary-General’s appeal to all parties
to the conflict, Syrian civil society and all other actors
to cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic, with a view to conducting the
necessary investigations and bringing to justice before
international courts those who have committed serious
crimes under international law since March 2011.
The lack of consensus in the Council on the Syrian
issue further exacerbates the impasse in the political
process and jeopardizes the chances of a negotiated
way out of the Syrian conflict. In that context, the
joint humanitarian operation conducted by Russia
and France appears to us to be a model of cooperation
that should be welcomed and repeated. That project
enabled the supply of essential medical equipment to
500 seriously wounded and 15,000 lightly wounded
persons in eastern Ghouta. My delegation therefore
urges the members of the Council to consider all forms
of cooperation in support of the fundamental right of
the Syrian people to health, education and well-being.
Côte d’Ivoire encourages Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the political
process in Syria, to spare no effort to maintain the
momentum of consultations with a view to achieving
further progress in the implementation of the Sochi
final statement and the establishment of a Syrian-led
constitutional committee, in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015).
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the informal consultations
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General with
high-level representatives of the Islamic Republic of
Iran, the Russian Federation and Turkey at the Astana
process meeting in Sochi on 30 and 31 July. My country
remains convinced that the just and lasting peace
that our Council wishes to see in Syria must be the
outcome of a political process based on inclusive and
constructive dialogue.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to express my

S/PV. 8332

delegation’s appreciation to Mr. John Ging, Director of
Operations and Advocacy of the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
for his informative briefing. We once again commend
the OCHA teams for their tireless efforts to alleviate
the suffering of millions of Syrian civilians.
Equatorial Guinea joins previous delegations in
expressing its deep concern over the ongoing hostilities
in several provinces in the south-west and north-west of
Syria. We condemn the terrible attacks of recent weeks
in various parts of the country on civilians and civilian
and humanitarian infrastructure in north-western Syria,
which have claimed the lives of hundreds of civilians,
many of them women and children, in the provinces of
Idlib and Aleppo.
The civilian population should not and must
not continue to be the victim and target of military
operations. In that regard, we call on all parties
and those with influence over them to ensure safe,
unhindered and sustained humanitarian assistance to
civilians and the protection of civilian infrastructure,
in accordance with their obligations under international
humanitarian law.
Syria is one of the most challenging and dangerous
environments for humanitarian workers. Since the onset
of the crisis in March 2011, hundreds of humanitarian
workers and service providers, including health workers,
are estimated to have been killed in the line of duty. It
is therefore urgent that all necessary measures be taken
to increase their protection and ensure the continuity
of services in support of an effective humanitarian
response to people in need.
In Idlib and surrounding areas, the threat of an
escalation of violence, similar to that seen in other
parts of Syria, will not only endanger many of the
more than 3 million civilians surviving in that densely
populated area, but will also seriously affect the
ability of humanitarian partners to deliver life-saving
assistance, and will ultimately become a genuine source
of destabilization for the region.
As we have reiterated, the humanitarian situation
cannot be addressed in isolation from the political
process. In that regard, it is essential that all parties to
the conflict and those with influence over them reach
a genuine and inclusive agreement so as to resolve
this protracted war peacefully and to avoid further
suffering of the Syrian people. We also reiterate our
firm commitment to the inclusive political process

18-2688211/19

S/PV.8332

The situation in the Middle East

28/08/2018

under the auspices of the United Nations, pursuant to
resolution 2254 (2015).

solution through dialogue that could protect civilians
in that area.

Lastly, we hope that the talks scheduled for early
September in Geneva with the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General will create the conditions necessary
to achieve a lasting solution to the conflict, which will
lead inevitably to the country’s needed reconstruction
and breathe new life into its economy thanks to the
financial contributions of its strategic partners.

The Council — particularly those members that
have influence over local actors — should also play
a constructive role in avoiding military measures
that could have a huge impact on civilians. As the
Secretary-General reminds us in his latest report, we
all should have only one agenda — to end the continued
and enormous suffering of the people of Syria. It is
only a Syrian-owned, comprehensive and political
solution facilitated by the United Nations that could
sustainably end the humanitarian tragedy. Therefore,
all efforts should be made to accelerate progress on the
political track.

Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Director John
Ging for his briefing. We reiterate our appreciation to
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners for
continuing to provide life-saving assistance to millions
of Syrians in challenging circumstances.
We note from the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/777) that the United Nations no
longer categorizes any area in Syria as besieged. In
addition, the number of displaced people has decreased
significantly, particularly in south-west Syria. While
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons
in some parts of Syria could be taken as a positive
trend, we understand that humanitarian needs remain
at a high level. Therefore, the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners should be supported by all parties
so that they can reach all Syrians in need of assistance.
In that regard, we stress that safe, timely, sustained
and unimpeded humanitarian access to people in
need throughout the country remains indispensable.
The protection of civilians and civilian facilities is
also critical. In addition to supporting an effective
humanitarian response, the protection of aid workers
should be afforded special attention. In order to
continue need-based humanitarian programmes, the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners also
require sufficient and predictable funding for the Syria
humanitarian assistance response plan.
We are concerned that further military escalation
in Idlib and surrounding areas, where nearly 3 million
Syrians reside, could aggravate the humanitarian crisis.
The report of the Secretary-General clearly cautions that
increased military escalation in that area would not only
trigger further massive population movements, but also
have catastrophic consequences for civilians in terms
of protection and access to humanitarian assistance
and basic services. As Idlib is one of the de-escalation
zones, we encourage the Astana guarantors — who, we
acknowledge, had a meeting late last month — to abide
by the de-escalation agreement and find a sustainable
12/19

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thank Mr. John Ging for his valuable briefing
and we commend the efforts made by all humanitarian
workers in Syria and elsewhere in the world. On behalf
of the State of Kuwait, I would also like to endorse
statement delivered by the representative of Sweden.
However, I have additional points that I would like to
briefly address.
The province of Idlib, which is inhabited by nearly
3 million people, is in the spotlight as a result of various
reports pointing to a potential military escalation there.
Any escalation would undoubtedly exacerbate the
ongoing humanitarian crisis, and we urge everybody
to abide by the de-escalation agreement. The military
option in Idlib would have disastrous humanitarian
consequences, especially in light of the fact that half
of its population is made up of internally displaced
persons. In addition, millions of people in Idlib and
the neighbouring areas are in need of humanitarian
assistance. Diplomatic efforts must therefore be
stepped up by all actors at the highest level to avoid
bloody battle and further bloodshed, so as to prevent
the recurrence of the disasters that occurred in Aleppo
and eastern Ghouta.
We are convinced that the cross-border assistance
mechanism constitutes a vital part of the humanitarian
assistance in Syria, where millions rely on that
machinery, which was able to deliver humanitarian
assistance to more than 600,000 people in July. That
bears witness to its effectiveness and importance and to
the need to renew its mandate in due time.
Millions of Syrians have been displaced during the
past few years as a result of the war and the deliberate
destruction of residential areas and vital infrastructure
18-26882

28/08/2018

The situation in the Middle East

such as roads, hospitals and schools, as well as violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law. All
Syrian refugees have the right to go back to their homes,
and we reiterate what we have said previously and what
the Secretary-General of the United Nations has said in
his monthly report about the need for safe, voluntary
and dignified return of refugees to their homes.
The Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark
Lowcock, is currently visiting Syria, and we hope to
see more cooperation from the Syrian authorities with
the United Nations and its specialized humanitarian
agencies by allowing unhindered and effective
humanitarian access to help all people in need in
Syria. In that context, we recall that six months ago the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2401 (2018),
calling for an immediate ceasefire, the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and the evacuation of injured
persons. Unfortunately, however, that resolution has
not been effectively implemented on the ground. It is
frustrating that resolutions that are not implemented
are useless and cannot help innocent civilians. History
will not forget the Security Council’s inability to
shoulder its responsibilities for putting an end to
flagrant violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law throughout the Syrian crisis and to
ensure accountability.
In conclusion, we all need to step up our efforts to
make further tangible progress on the issue of Syria.
We hope that the high-level diplomacy which we have
seen recently will lead to a comprehensive settlement,
in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). The settlement must
be approved by all components of the Syrian people and
meet their legitimate aspirations, while preserving the
unity, independence and sovereignty of Syria.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Director John Ging for his briefing.
We have taken note of the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/777) on the cross-border
humanitarian assistance.
Currently, the Syrian humanitarian situation
continues to face challenges. Parties in Syria must
proceed while considering the future of the country
and its people’s welfare, abide by the Council’s
resolutions and resolve differences through dialogue
and consultations so as to immediately alleviate the
humanitarian situation. The United Nations and the

S/PV. 8332

international community must step up communication
and cooperation with the Government and support all
regions in need of assistance within Syrian territory. At
the same time, humanitarian assistance in Syria must
be fully consistent with the principles of neutrality,
impartiality and non-politicization, while based on
respecting the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria.
We have also taken note of the reported ongoing
returns of some Syrian refugees and displaced persons.
People can be hopeful and long-term peace and stability
in Syria can be fully guaranteed only when steady
progress has been made in rebuilding the country. The
international community must actively support Syrian
reconstruction, including stepping up efforts to clear
landmines, improvised explosive devices and other
explosive remnants of war, in order to pave the way for
the return of refugees and displaced persons.
Terrorist organizations continue to threaten the
security of Syrian people. We must bolster the progress
made in counter-terrorism and prevent the resurgence
of terrorist organizations. The international community
must consistently enhance its cooperation and resolutey
combat all terrorist organizations on the Security
Council’s list so as to maintain regional stability
and security.
We must step up efforts to promote a political
settlement of the Syrian issue in order to fundamentally
address the humanitarian situation in Syria. The
international community must come together to support
both the United Nations as the primary mediator and
the efforts of Special Envoy De Mistura to advance the
political process based on the principle of a Syrianled and Syrian-owned process and resolution 2254
(2015). The Security Council must remain united on the
Syrian humanitarian issue and provide conditions for a
political settlement.
Ambassador Xie Xiaoyan, Special Envoy of the
Chinese Government on the Syrian issue, visited Syria
and countries of the region in late July. He held a
further exchange of views with the parties concerned
and played a constructive and active role in the political
settlement of the Syrian issue.
China takes the humanitarian situation in Syria
seriously and has been contributing to alleviating the
suffering of the Syrian people. In May, China hosted a
workshop on the development and rebuilding of Syria.
In July, at the opening session of the eighth Ministerial

18-2688213/19

S/PV.8332

The situation in the Middle East

Meeting of the China-Arab States Cooperation Forum,
President Xi Jinping announced that China would
provide another ¥600 million to Syria, Jordan, Lebanon
and other countries for humanitarian assistance and
reconstruction on the ground. China will continue to
do its utmost to assist Syria and its neighbours that have
been affected by the refugee issue.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Director
of Operations and Advocacy of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Ging,
for his briefing on the very critical humanitarian
situation in Syria.
We have carefully studied the most recent report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions (S/2018/777). We
are closely following developments on the ground and
are aware of the dire humanitarian situation. Only by
ensuring the safe, sustained and unimpeded access for
the United Nations to people in need throughout the
country, across conflict lines and in areas that have
recently changed control will we be able to prevent
further deterioration of the humanitarian crisis. We pay
tribute to the United Nations system and its humanitarian
partners for their work in the dangerous humanitarian
operations in Syria, which are unprecedented in their
magnitude and scale.
The political negotiation process is difficult but, as
is said, diplomacy is the art of the possible. We must not
lose hope that a political agreement between the parties
to the conflict, as well as between the main players,
will soon be achieved.
We welcome the outcomes of the international
meeting in Sochi, held in the framework of the Astana
talks, where all parties to the negotiations agreed to
the basic postulates of peace, in particular creating
the conditions to set up a constitutional committee
in Geneva.
We consider the return of internally displaced
persons to their homes and the return of Syrian
refugees in neighbouring and European countries to
their homeland as very pressing issues. We hope that
the new constitutional committee for Syria, which is
being established under United Nations auspices, will
play an important role in that regard.
Supporting and maintaining the new momentum
and creating new conditions for peace should be our
priority, instead of saber rattling or undertaking
14/19

28/08/2018

military interventions, which could derail everything
that has been achieved so far. Peace, not war, should be
our dictum.
Lastly, Kazakhstan believes that Syria’s State
institutions should be preserved and helped to grow
along democratic lines, with proper rule of law.
The destruction of statehood or attempts to forcible
change it will only add to the chaos, as we see with the
consequences of nearly eight years of fighting. We also
endorse the Secretary-General’s call on all parties to
ensure that all the necessary security guarantees are in
place for the continued delivery of services to the south,
which must be carried out in an impartial manner and
without distinction.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Ging for his briefing.
The situation has stabilized in many areas in
Syria. The authorities are creating the conditions for
a dignified and safe return of refugees and internally
displaced persons. The Syrian Government has
called on its citizens to come home and participate in
rebuilding the country after the devastating conflict.
It has provided security and safety guarantees. Law
Number 10, as Damascus has continued to explain, is
not aimed at undermining property rights. A series of
measures was developed to streamline passport and
customs control, social and medical care, training and
employment assistance, and preferential lending.
At the same time, with the support of Russian
experts, there are efforts under way to demine, clear
rubble and repair infrastructure. A total of 93 medical
and 226 educational institutions have been restored; 318
kilometres of roads have been repaired; 242 kilometres
of electrical transmission lines have been laid; 88
electricity substations have been made operational;
and 72 water supply facilities, two oil wells and two
fuel and energy complexes were commissioned. In
118 towns in the provinces of Aleppo, Damascus, Deir
ez-Zor, Latakia, Hama and Homs, work is under way
to restore 82 schools, 56 preschools, 58 bakeries, 59
pumping stations, 54 electricity substations, 50 medical
facilities and more than 500 houses.
Russia has established a centre in Syria for
receiving, processing and housing refugees in the
country, which provides information about towns that
are ready to receive people. The process of the return of
Syrians to their homes is gaining momentum. In total,
since September 2015, more than 238,000 refugees
18-26882

28/08/2018

The situation in the Middle East

have returned to Syria from abroad, as well as more
than 1.2 million internally displaced persons. Starting
in July this year, more than 9,000 refugees, first and
foremost from Lebanon and Jordan, have returned.
Reception centres have been established in 412 towns
in order to place almost 1.5 million individuals.
It is clear that efforts to support Syrians in restoring
damaged infrastructure must be stepped up. Making
artificial demands that will only complicate that process
is unacceptable. It is high time to heed United Nations
assessments about the detrimental impact of unilateral
sanctions on the lives of ordinary Syrians and to refrain
from such inhumane measures.
The United Nations, especially the Office of the
High Commissioner for Refugees, should play an
important role in the process of the return of Syrians
to their homes. So far that Office has adopted a fairly
passive position, possibly because of an internal United
Nations directive that was developed at the end of last
year by the Department of Political Affairs without
consulting with Member States. That directive does
indeed exist, despite clumsy attempts to refute that fact.
It impedes the involvement of United Nations agencies
in efforts to rebuild Syria until political changes are
in effect in that country. What does that remind us
of? It is, word for word, the well-known politicized
position of the key Western countries, which the
Secretariat has, for some reason, adopted as the final
word. This irresponsible approach, which runs counter
to the neutral posture of the United Nations, must be
immediately reviewed.
At the same time, we were surprised by the
extent to which the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees expeditiously provided
assistance to the White Helmet activists in Jordan
who had been evacuated from Syrian territory by
their sponsors. It would seem that ordinary Syrians
who want to return home do not deserve assistance,
whereas those who abet extremists by pretending to
be humanitarian actors are welcomed with open arms.
Such double standards undermine the credibility of our
international Organization.
We agree that the situation in Idlib deserves close
attention. The priority task continues to be separating
the moderate opposition from the terrorists. In Idlib,
we see concentrated forces of Jabhat al-Nusra that are
attempting to lead and direct other groups, including
those that are interested in national reconciliation. The

S/PV. 8332

terrorists have detained more than 2,000 “unreliable”
individuals, who are suspected of wishing to reach an
agreement with Syrian authorities.
We are seeing constant provocations against the
Syrian Army and innocent civilians in areas abutting
de-escalation zones. In August alone, the positions
of the Government forces were shelled 383 times by
mortars, anti-aircraft batteries and heavy-calibre
machine guns. Twenty-one soldiers and 10 civilians
were killed. The residential neighbourhoods of Aleppo
have also been shelled. We have shot down 45 drones
launched at the Khmeimim air base. Such drones are
not limited to reconnaissance; they sometimes carry an
explosive payload. Those practices will be countered.
We call on the commanders of illegal armed groups
to refrain from provocations and to embark on the path
of peaceful settlement. That option is still available.
However, the current status quo is unacceptable. In
violation of Syrian sovereignty, the United States has
illegally set up the Al-Tanf military air base in the south
of the country in the security zone where the Rukban
refugee camp is located. There, hundreds of terrorists
from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
Jabhat al-Nusra feel quite safe and they carry out raids
against liberated areas. Delivery of humanitarian aid
to that camp has not yet been set up. We hope that this
situation will be resolved.
Unfortunately, in the report of Secretary General
(S/2018/777), the situation in the area around Rukban
is not given adequate consideration. Furthermore, the
essentially neocolonial policy to divide the country
has continued, while in north-eastern Syria, with the
support of the coalition, quasi-State structures that
have pledged allegiance to the coalition have been
established. We are seeing increasing numbers of
military sites of the occupying Powers that are part of
the coalition. There is clear evidence of a consolidated
terrorist presence in the country that is attempting to
secure control over the country’s resources. That runs
counter to statements that the only goal of the military
presence is to combat ISIL.
The July meeting on the humanitarian situation
in Syria (see S/PV.8320 ) focused on the protection
of children. Some delegations said all the right words
about the priority tasks, including the psychological
rehabilitation of children and ensuring normal conditions
for their return to school. That was encouraging and
we began to ask colleagues what steps they intended to

18-2688215/19

S/PV.8332

The situation in the Middle East

take in order to help Syrian children. To our surprise, it
seemed that they had no such plans. In other words, the
goal was simply to draw attention to the issue. Making
noise and making a show of appearing humane to the
audience is not necessary. The Syrians understand their
problems better than anyone else. What is necessary is
concrete assistance.
Before the start of the meeting, you made the
following statement to the press, Madam President. I
will quote it in part.
“We all remember the risk of possible chemical
attacks. All of these issues will be discussed during
the Security Council meeting. The Russian Ministry
of Defence has made a statement on this subject. I
believe that this is an incredibly fake story, even
by the standards of Russian propaganda. Those
statements by the Ministry of Defence are absurd
and comical. We are not preparing any chemical
attacks. We think it would be best if the Russian
Ministry of Defence and the Russian Government
were to use their influence to convince Al-Assad
not to use chemical weapons and not to attack his
own population.”
The Russian Ministry of Defence is not in the habit
of issuing fake, absurd and comical statements. Maybe
other countries’ Ministries of Defence are wont to do
that, but certainly not the Russian one. If our Ministry
of Defence makes a statement, it does so based on
concrete facts. Let me tell the Council a bit about that
statement and leave it to members to decide whether or
not it is comical.
In Syria, another provocation is being prepared
with the use of chemical weapons. Terrorists associated
with Jabhat al-Nusra who have occupied Idlib province
are interested in stopping the Government army and
are counting on further actions of intimidation by the
United States and its allies against Damascus. It is
hard to consider it a mere coincidence that the most
loathsome leaders of the terrorists — Al-Baghdadi and
Al-Julani — have recently made appearances in the news.
According to reliable information, two large-capacity
trucks arrived in the area of Saraqib from the village
of Afs, accompanied by eight employees of the White
Helmets. At the point of arrival, they were met by two
high-ranking Ahrar al-Sham commanders. The White
Helmets delivered a large volume of toxic substances to
a warehouse for weapons and combustible lubricating
materials located in Saraqib. Later, some of the
16/19

28/08/2018

chemicals, contained in unmarked plastic barrels, were
transferred to small vehicles and transported to another
militant base in the southern part of Idlib province.
Eight containers of chlorine were delivered to the Idlib
town of Jisr al-Shughur. After the cargo was transferred
to fighters affiliated with Hizb al-Islami al-Turkistani,
they were transported to the village of Halluz, where
they were met by a special group that was supposed
to stage a delivery of first aid to victims of chemical
weapons. The Syrian side has informed the members
of the Security Council and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) about this issue. The
group underwent training in the handling of chemical
weapons, under the leadership of the specialists of
the British private security company Olive. With the
active participation of Western intelligence agencies,
the provocation is meant to serve as a pretext for the
Western troika to conduct missile and air strikes against
the military infrastructure of Syria, as it has done in the
past.
We have all heard statements at the highest political
level in Washington, D.C., London and Paris about the
readiness to respond forcefully to chemical weapons.
They are also threatening even broader actions, probably
forgetting that following the April aggression, they
stated that the alleged chemical potential of the regime
at the time had been completely destroyed. It is not by
chance that the destroyer USS The Sullivans arrived in
the Persian Gulf, armed with 56 cruise missiles, or that
a United States Air Force bomber, armed with 24 airto-surface cruise missiles, arrived at the Al-Udeid air
base in Qatar. In other words, we are being warned.
At the same time, Arab news networks have
aired reports that cases of terrorist child abduction
from villages in Idlib province have increased. These
children will probably be used for the staged episodes
directed by the White Helmets and funded by their
Western sponsors.
The Syrian armed forces have no chemical weapon
and have no plans to use such weapons. There is no
military need to do so. We have stated that repeatedly.
People in their right minds would not use means that
are useless from a military point of view, as that would
trigger reprisals from three major Powers. However,
publicizing those plans and awaiting the provocation
of militants could unleash such strikes. I am grateful
for the warning about these developments. We in turn
wish to warn that we are fully aware of those unsavoury
plans and we strongly suggest that they be scrapped.
18-26882

28/08/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Carrying out such plans will deliver a further blow
against a peaceful resolution in Syria, but the guerrillas
who are being protected will not help.
We see how certain Western countries are more
openly supporting Jabhat Al-Nusra and shielding the
terrorists. The issue of chemicals is being crudely
manipulated to pressure Damascus and its allies, and the
sabre-rattling is intended to resolve internal domestic
measures instead of reserving that energy to achieve a
political settlement, fight terrorists and promote postwar reconstruction.
The President: Protocol requires me to thank the
Russian representative for his statement. I will turn to
some of his allegations in a moment. In my capacity
as President, may I remind members of the Security
Council and other speakers of presidential note
S/2017/507 and that they should keep their remarks to a
maximum of five minutes.
I will now speak in my national capacity — and I
will certainly do that.
I would like to join other speakers in thanking
John Ging and paying tribute to humanitarian workers:
they work in extraordinarily difficult circumstances. I
also want to reject the allegations we have just heard
against the Department for Political Affairs. To the best
of my knowledge, everybody in the United Nations is
trying to do their best for the people of Syria and for
the political process.
I think it is clear from everything we have heard
today that the situation, especially in Idlib, is dire. All
of the purported achievements on the list read out by
the Russian representative are chimera. They will not
help the people of Idlib. There are 3 million civilians
at risk in Idlib, and yet the Syrian regime is escalating
its military action against them. I would be grateful to
know which forces have been relocated to Idlib, and
I would like to say that we will hold the commanders
responsible for attacks on civilians.
I would also like to echo the words of the
representatives of the United States and France. The
United Kingdom, too, will respond appropriately if
the Al-Assad regime repeats its illegal use of chemical
weapons, which has already had such devastating
humanitarian consequences for the Syrian population.
I have three questions relating to the humanitarian
situation. They centre around the fact that United
Nations convoys have not had access to 6,000 internally

S/PV. 8332

displaced persons in Damascus and eastern Ghouta for
two months, that 1 million people remain in hard-toreach areas, where only 11 per cent of inter-agency
convoys are able to conduct needs assessments and
deliver aid, and that the United Nations continues not
to be given the necessary security assurances so that
humanitarian convoys can go through the Al-Ramtha
border crossing from Jordan, which is in violation, as we
have heard, of resolution 2393 (2017). I hope the Syrian
representative will be able to give us an explanation in
his remarks.
The Russian representative referred to refugees
going home. I think the ongoing military operations, the
lack of humanitarian access, the bombing of schools,
the arbitrary arrests and the bombing of hospitals show
exactly why the situation is not right for refugees to go
home en masse.
Mr. Ging stated that Idlib represented a scale
that we have not yet seen. We are used to superlatives
when it comes to Syria, and we are used to them being
surpassed. He also mentioned Kofi Annan, and, like
others, I think the best tribute we can offer Mr. Annan
is to continue our efforts to accelerate the political
process and bring peace to Syria.
I do want to make a point reconstruction. As
our Syrian colleague set out, and as echoed by every
European Union member State and by the United
States, there will be no reconstruction assistance until
there is a credible and ongoing political process. There
will not be a Marshall Plan for Syria; there will not be a
Brussels plan for Syria. If there is any plan, it will need
to be in Moscow and a Putin plan.
I would now like to turn to some of the other
statements made by the Russian Ambassador. The
Russian Ministry of Defense today gave a briefing in
which it said — and this has been echoed by members
of his own Mission — that the United Kingdom
and the White Helmets were involved in preparing
chemical-weapons attacks against the Syrian people. I
did not use the word “comical” in my press briefing.
What I said was that, even by the egregious standards
of Russian propaganda, this is an extraordinary
allegation. It is wholly untrue. And it has been denied
by the commander of the British forces in Kuwait, who
is supporting the coalition. I am happy to repeat that
denial now. And I am happy to rebut any allegation that
the British Government or British forces engage with
terrorists on the ground in Syria.

18-2688217/19

S/PV.8332

The situation in the Middle East

The only plausible explanation we have a for why
these stories are being floated at the time, other than
to increase the amount of fake news in the system, is
as a smoke screen for a possible impending attack by
the Syrian regime once again against its own people in
Idlib. I repeat the statement that I, the French and the
Americans made earlier about responding appropriately:
we have no information about chlorine being delivered
and, therefore, if the Russian Ministry does have that,
the most probable explanation is that it as a pre-emptive
attempt to set the agenda and the narrative for an
appalling attack to come. I would appeal to Russia to
use all its persuasive powers to convince the Syrian
authorities not to attack their own population and never
again to use prohibited chemical weapons.
I would draw the Council’s attention to the fact that
we have had a letter from the Syrian authorities about
warning of an impending attack. I would recall for the
Council that, on 10 March, the Syrian authorities wrote
to the Security Council to warn of a chemical attack
in eastern Ghouta, and one month later, on 10 April,
such an attack took place and is attributed to the
Syrian authorities.
I repeat again our abhorrence of chemical weapons.
And I repeat gain that the British Government will
always uphold its commitment to prohibit the use of
such weapons and work with our international partners
to ensure that that prohibition is upheld.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for mentioning the two letters we sent to the President
and members of the Security Council on the chemical
issue and the very serious risk concerning the possible
use of chemical weapons again in Idlib.
You asked me some questions, Madam President,
and I hope that the presidency will be patient enough
and listen to my responses for several minutes, given
that I have listened to all the members of the Council
for over an hour and a half. There are several important
points requiring explanation that I shall mention before
reading out my statement.
First, during the period in which the report of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
18/19

28/08/2018

(OCHA) was written, the Foreign Ministry approved
2,700 requests from the World Food Programme
to provide assistance to liberated areas and others.
The Foreign Ministry confirmed that it approved
2,700 requests.
Secondly, this month we have provided a detailed
explanation to the members of the Council and
Member States about the meaning and purposes of Law
Number 10, which clearly refutes all the prejudiced
and fallacious claims and information made by some
about that Law. Hence, this topic should be withdrawn
from circulation.
Thirdly, the Syrian Red Crescent continues to work,
repeatedly and daily, with its local and international
humanitarian partners to provide assistance. Dozens of
convoys have arrived in areas where the inhabitants are
in need of such assistance. Our problem with OCHA is
as follows. Mr. Ging said earlier that only four convoys
had been given approval by the Government. That is
not true. Our problem with OCHA is that it counts only
its own convoys. For example, it does not count convoys
from the World Food Programme or the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. It
does not count Red Cross convoys either. Therefore,
thousands of convoys and tons of assistance are being
delivered to areas where it is needed without being
counted by OCHA. Again, according to OCHA only
four convoys were given access this month. That is not
true. This erroneous information misleads the members
of the Security Council.
We have warned numerous times about the presence
of a huge, unruly elephant in the Chamber that imperils
our joint work and steps with its huge feet over many
facts in order to cover the violations perpetrated against
the Charter of the United Nations and international law
by certain permanent members.
Apparently, the policies and practices of Western
Governments against my country still contiue. Instead
of shouldering the political and legal responsibility for
waging a terrorist war against Syria and its people, and
instead of correcting the disastrous policies against
our region in general, and against my country, Syria,
in particular, those Governments are insisting on their
policy of aggression while using their black banners,
White Helmets and red lines. They are currently
preparing another staged bloody chemical-weapons
incident in the north-west of Syria. The goal is to hinder
the current political process and justify aggression by
18-26882

28/08/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Western countries in the Council against my country so
as to occupy parts of our territory and strengthen the
remnants of terrorist groups operating in certain areas.
My Government condemns the statement made a
few days ago by the United States, France and the United
Kingdom. It rejects both the content and format of that
statement. Syria has repeatedly underscored that it
considers the use of chemical weapons as immoral, and
condemns their use anywhere, under any circumstances
and against whomsoever. Syria once again reiterates
that it does not possess any chemical weapons, and has
lived up to all its obligations with the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, which has
informed international bodies and the Council that
Syria has lived up to its obligations in that regard. It is
futile to have to repeat at every meeting that the Syrian
chemical stockpiles were destroyed on the United
States vessel MV Cape Ray in the Mediterranean Sea.
Meanwhile, we await the approval of the Council for
the destruction of Israeli stockpiles of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons.
I would like to make available to the Security
Council documented information about preparations
by terrorists from the Al-Nusra Front and affiliated
groups to use chemical weapons against civilians in
Idlib in order to then accuse Syrian forces and thereby
justify military aggression by the Governments that
support those terrorist groups — as was the case during
the American aggression against Al-Shouayrat airport
on 7 April 2017, and the tripartite American-BritishFrench aggression on 14 April 2018.
As to the preparations for committing this crime,
we strongly call on those countries with influence over

S/PV. 8332

the terrorist groups to forbid them from committing it.
I would recall that eight containers of chlorine were
transferred to the village of Hallouz in Idlib as part of
preparations for this new staged incident of chemical
aggression. Terrorists related to the Islamic Party of
Turkistan and the Al-Nusra Front, whom the drafters
of the Secretariat’s reports refer to as “non-State
military opposition”, are planning to use toxic chemical
substances against Syrian civilians, including dozens of
children who were kidnapped few days ago in Aleppo
and Idlib countryside in order to then accuse the Syrian
Government and justify an aggression against it.
Any act of aggression against my country, if it
happens, is an act of aggression against a founding
Member of the United Nations, as well as aggression
against international peace and security. It would
constitute support for terrorism and target the efforts
we have made with our allies to combat it. Of course,
what goes around comes around.
I shall limit my statement to that, given your request,
Madam President, although this is a very important
meeting that concerns my country. Yet everyone else
took the floor for quite a long time.
The President: I again remind everyone of the
existence of presidential note S/2017/507. We return to
the issue of Syria every month. That is plenty of time
for people to make their points.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers. I now invite colleagues to come to the
Consultations Room for informal consultations on
two subjects.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

18-2688219/19
