S/2018/479

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 May 2018
Original: English

Letter dated 17 May 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to paragraph 7 of Security Council resolution 2367
(2017), in which the Council called upon the Secretary-General to conduct, by
15 October 2017, an independent, external assessment of the structure and staffing of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), related resources, priorities
and areas in which it had comparative advantages and synergies with other United
Nations entities, in order to ensure that the Mission and United Nations country team
were configured to most appropriately and efficiently fulfil mandated tasks.
I also have the honour to refer to my letter dated 15 November 2017 addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/2017/966), in which I brought to the
attention of the members of the Council the executive summary, the observations and
the full set of recommendations of the report of the independent, external assessment,
as submitted by the team of experts. In follow-up to that letter, I am hereby providing
an update on the implementation status of the recommendations made in the report.
Following the report of the independent and external assessment team, I
established an interdepartmental and inter-agency group, led by the Department of
Political Affairs. The group developed an implementation plan for the
recommendations, including timelines, in close consultation with UNAMI and the
United Nations country team. The plan was adopted on 9 Januar y 2018 by the Iraq
Integrated Task Force.
The Secretariat briefed the members of the Security Council on the status of
implementation in an informal interactive dialogue on 7 February 2018. A further
update was provided in my report pursuant to Security Council resolution 2367
(2017), issued on 17 April 2018 (S/2018/359).
Further to those updates, the implementation of the recommendations related to
United Nations system coordination and to performance measurement is on track. A
senior policy forum has been established in Iraq and meetings are convened regularly,
providing guidance to the United Nations presence in Iraq on strategic priorities and
issues affecting operations.
In addition, existing procedures and mechanisms that promote coordination and
cross-system collaboration between UNAMI and the United Nations country team on
thematic issues, including gender, monitoring and evaluation, reconciliation and
strategic communication, have been strengthened through the development of
workplans. A United Nations Development Assistance Framework working group
will be established. The anticipated review of the UNAMI mandate in July 2018 will
inform preparations for the 2018/19 integrated strategic framework, the formulation

18-08133 (E)

240518

*1808133*

S/2018/479

of the common country assessment, the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework and other integrated strategic planning documents.
The Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and the Chief of Staff
have expanded their portfolios to encompass the enhanced managerial responsibilities
recommended in the report. UNAMI and the United Nations country team are
coordinating closely on common services and cost-sharing processes to develop more
effective, transparent service-level agreements.
The revised 2018 budget proposal for UNAMI (A/72/371/Add.10), currently
being considered by the General Assembly, includes measures to augment the
Mission’s presence beyond Baghdad by strengthening political, research and human
rights capabilities in Mosul, Basrah and Kirkuk. UNAMI is finalizing the terms of
reference for the review of its Integrated Coordination Office for Development and
Humanitarian Affairs, and will incorporate the findings into the 2019 budget proposal.
The Department of Safety and Security has completed the first part of its
assessment of the security architecture. A subsequent assessment will be conducted
following the parliamentary elections, with the intention to inform the budget
submission for 2019. In addition, a full hardship review is being undertaken as
preparation for the International Civil Service Commission to review the rest and
recuperation cycle in all duty stations in Iraq.
I intend to provide further updates on the implementation of the
recommendations in future reports to the Security Council.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/2

18-08133
