S/PV.9332

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9332nd meeting

Tuesday, 30 May 2023, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Baeriswyl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Switzerland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mr. Biang
Mr. Korbieh
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Letter dated 26 April 2023 from the Panel of Experts on South Sudan established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2206 (2015) addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2023/294)
Report of the Secretary-General on the assessment of progress achieved
on the key benchmarks established in paragraph 2 of resolution 2577 (2021)
(S/2023/300)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-15032 (E)
*2315032*

S/PV.9332

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

Against:
None

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Letter dated 26 April 2023 from the Panel
of Experts on South Sudan established
pursuant to Security Council resolution
2206 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2023/294)

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2023/379, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/294, which contains the text of a
letter dated 26 April 2023 from the Panel of Experts
on South Sudan established pursuant to resolution
2206 (2015) addressed to the President of the Security
Council; and document S/2023/300, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the assessment of the
progress achieved on the key benchmarks established
in paragraph 2 of resolution 2577 (2021).
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, Ecuador, France, Japan, Malta,
Switzerland, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
2/6

Abstaining:
China, Gabon, Ghana, Mozambique, Russian
Federation
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 10 votes in favour, none against and
5 abstentions. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 2683 (2023).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.

Report of the Secretary-General on the
assessment of progress achieved on the key
benchmarks established in paragraph 2 of
resolution 2577 (2021) (S/2023/300)

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

30/05/2023

Mr. Korbieh (Ghana): At the outset, I would like to
thank the penholder, the United States, for its committed
efforts during the negotiation of resolution 2683 (2023),
which was just adopted, and commend all members
of the Council for their constructive engagement on
the resolution.
While Ghana acknowledges the need for further
efforts to be made by South Sudan in its security sector
reforms, including in its arms and weapons management
practices, we abstained in the voting on the resolution
because we think that what South Sudan needs from the
international community at this time are not sanctions,
but a carefully managed support system of capacity
development in the young nation’s transitional journey
of statehood.
We also regret that the efforts of the three African
members of the Security Council and other delegations
to introduce language from the African Union
resolution adopted during the thirty-sixth ordinary
session of the Assembly of the Union, held from 18 to
19 February, were not incorporated in the text. That
resolution expressed concern about the socioeconomic
impact of sanctions as one of the main obstacles
impeding the implementation of the African Union
Agenda 2063 and the United Nations 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
We, however, welcome the Council’s decision that
the notification requirements set out in paragraph 2
of resolution 2633 (2022) shall no longer apply to the
supply, sale or transfer of non-lethal military equipment,
solely in support of the implementation of the terms of
the peace agreement, or related technical assistance or
training on non-lethal military equipment.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): At the outset,
we would like to thank the delegation of the United
23-15032

30/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

States for its involvement and commitment throughout
the negotiating process.
Gabon abstained in the voting on the renewal of
a sanctions regime with regard to South Sudan. That
position is in line with our firm conviction that the
sanctions remain counterproductive given the efforts
undertaken by the Government of South Sudan in
recent years. Similarly, we believe that the international
community should recalibrate and redouble its efforts
and direct them at capacity-building and peacebuilding.
Above all, the South Sudanese forces must be given
the necessary tools to enable them to carry out their
constitutional mandate to defend the territorial integrity
of their country more effectively.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): Mozambique
would like to thank the penholder for its efforts in
facilitating the negotiation process and trying to build
consensus on the text of resolution 2683 (2023), which
was just adopted.
Mozambique abstained in the voting because
we consider that the current text does not reflect
the important progress achieved by the people and
the Government of South Sudan on the political,
economic and security tracks since the country became
independent on 9 July 2011. We think that there were
still opportunities for us to continue engaging to build
consensus for consolidating a text that would better
reflect the views of all and best support the Government
of South Sudan in overcoming its challenges.
Sanctions regimes can have negative effects on
people’s lives, particularly by exacerbating pre-existing
socioeconomic vulnerabilities, which is why we should
thoroughly consider listing criteria to avoid ambiguity in
the implementation of the sanctions. It is also important
to take into consideration the challenges that young
countries such as South Sudan face in the process of
consolidating their State and ensure that the decisions
taken by the Council do not have unintended negative
consequences. We encourage a continued commitment
on the part of the people, the Government and other
relevant stakeholders in South Sudan to paving the
way to further accelerating national reconciliation
and the peace process at large. We advocate for the
international community’s continued support to South
Sudan to enable it to deal with pending issues such the
creation of the army’s command-and-control structure
and the preparation of the country’s first elections.

S/PV.9332

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China abstained in the voting on resolution 2683 (2023)
on South Sudan, which was just adopted. I would like
to make the following explanation.
For some time the sanctions imposed by the
Security Council have seriously hampered South
Sudan’s implementation of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan and its efforts to enhance its security
capabilities, develop economic and trade ties and
conduct humanitarian operations, and have been
the subject of much controversy. As a result, China’s
attitude to maintaining the Council’s sanctions against
South Sudan has been one of caution, and we have
repeatedly abstained in the voting on the resolutions
extending them. The sanctions have a bearing on South
Sudan’s long-term peace and stability and its peoples’
welfare, and the desire to see them lifted is shared by
the countries of the region. Both the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, at its meeting in November
of last year, and the African Union Peace and Security
Council, at its meeting in February, issued communiqués
calling for lifting the unreasonable arms embargo and
other sanctions on South Sudan.
Regrettably, the penholder of resolution 2683 (2023)
ignored the many positive developments that South
Sudan has registered on the sanctions benchmarks and
disregarded the just calls of the countries concerned and
the international community. Instead of lifting any of
the sanctions, the penholder included more items on the
embargo list in the early draft of the resolution, added
criteria for listing, made accusations and put pressure
on the South Sudanese authorities. That is unacceptable.
During the consultations, the three African members
of the Security Council (A3) proposed coming up with
a list of exemptions from the arms embargo, which
could have been a compromise solution to bridge the
divide. However, the penholder stubbornly insisted on
its own national position and put the draft resolution
to a vote directly without fully discussing the A3’s
proposal. China rejects that approach, which is not at
all constructive and undermines the Council’s unity.
China has always believed that the Security Council
should handle the issue of sanctions prudently and
responsibly. It should carefully calibrate their intensity
and scope and stay committed to creating conditions that
are conducive to a political settlement. The organization
of elections, financial management and the exploitation
of natural resources are issues that should be decided

23-150323/6

S/PV.9332

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

by the Government and the people of South Sudan.
However, the resolution we just voted on includes
the so-called obstruction of free and fair elections
in the listing criteria and interferes in South Sudan’s
affairs on issues such as finance, anti-corruption and
resource management. The international community
should take an objective view of the difficulties and
challenges that South Sudan is facing in improving its
national governance and show it the necessary patience
and encouragement. No country should use Security
Council sanctions as a political tool for exerting
diplomatic pressure or coercion or to undermine the
sovereignty and security of other countries.
China has repeatedly stressed that the penholders
should maintain objectivity and impartiality, listen to
the legitimate concerns and appeals of the countries
concerned and maintain the unity and cooperation of
the Council as much as possible. Some penholders have
recently disregarded the views of the countries under
consideration and have placed their national positions
above the collective opinion and engaged in double
standards and political manipulation. The frequency
of such events deserves the Council’s attention
and vigilance.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I too
would like to start by thanking the penholder, the United
States, for facilitating the consultations on resolution
2683 (2023). The United Arab Emirates affirms its
commitment, alongside all the other members of the
Security Council, to supporting all efforts towards
peace and stability in South Sudan. We engaged
constructively in the negotiations on the resolution and
felt it was crucial that regional perspectives, including,
and most importantly, those of South Sudan, were taken
into account when considering Council resolutions,
particularly those related to sanctions regimes. During
the negotiations on the text, we consistently sought to
amplify those regional perspectives, as put forward by
the three African members of the Security Council.
While we had hoped that the Council would be able
to find a path to consensus, the United Arab Emirates
nonetheless voted in favour of the draft text. We did so
because it signals that the sanctions regime is responsive
to progress on the ground and reflects the further
achievements that have been made on the benchmarks
established by the Council, and that trajectory needs to
be continued. We look forward to further progress in
adjusting the sanctions regime to reflect the ongoing
situation in South Sudan.
4/6

30/05/2023

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation abstained in the
voting on resolution 2683 (2023), prepared by the
United States, on the extension of the sanctions regime
against South Sudan. We believe that the easing of the
sanctions that it provides for is insufficient. We regret
that the United States penholders were so fixated
on the ill-suited sanctions paradigm that they were
unwilling not only to meet this young State halfway
regarding reviewing the arms embargo but even to hold
a constructive discussion during the negotiations on the
key provisions of the draft and the specific proposals
made for their revision. They once again ignored the
agreed positions of the countries of the continent as
well as the approaches of a number of other members of
the Security Council, including Russia.
It cannot be ignored that at this point South Sudan
is particularly in need of strengthening its developing
armed forces, which can become an effective tool for
tackling the problem of intercommunal violence and
can ensure the success of the elections scheduled for
December 2024. South Sudan has made significant
progress in the past year in implementing the
benchmarks of resolution 2577 (2021), as the SecretaryGeneral recognized in his report on the findings of the
United Nations assessment team (S/2023/300). In our
view, using the alarming situation in its neighbour the
Sudan as a pretext for not making meaningful progress
on South Sudan’s sanctions file is unfair.
We believe that rather than keeping African
countries under sanctions for decades, what they need
is help in overcoming their continuing security issues,
which is impossible without effective, well-trained
and -equipped national security entities. And their
benchmarks were not intended to become an iron curtain
against the lifting of sanctions. In general, it is our view
that the Council’s frequently archaic sanctions regimes
on the African continent are in need of extensive review
and restructuring. We are particularly concerned about
the fact that in many African States, including in South
Sudan, sanctions regimes are used by Western countries
to pressure them and even interfere in their internal
affairs. Moreover, they are compounded by unlawful
and unilateral restrictive measures that run counter to
all the principles of international law, further aggravate
the socioeconomic situations of the countries involved
and undermine efforts — including those of the
Council — to build peace. That is why our delegation
took the initiative of including a passage in the draft
23-15032

30/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

resolution recognizing the negative impact of such
unilateral measures on post-conflict reconstruction
work and calling for countries to refrain from applying
them to countries that are subject to Security Council
sanctions. We regret that our constructive language,
despite receiving strong support from China and the
three African members of the Security Council, was
rejected by the United States as the penholder. We
nonetheless intend to promote that provision in other
Security Council sanctions regimes.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I join other colleagues
in commending the efforts of the United States as
penholder. Japan decided to vote in favour of the
sanctions resolution (resolution 2683 (2023)).
With regard to the benchmarks set out in existing
Security Council resolutions, the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2023/300) and the final report of
the Panel of Experts on South Sudan (see S/2023/294)
indicate that some progress has been made but that
sufficient progress has not been achieved.
Security Council sanctions are not an end in
themselves. They are a means to maintain international
peace and security. The introduction of sanctions
against South Sudan is meant to contribute to that
purpose, and, on that basis, Japan believes that
sanctions against South Sudan should be lifted as soon
as possible through appropriate procedures, once it is
judged that the objectives have been achieved.
Japan notes that the Government of South Sudan
is moving forward with various peace processes based
on the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and hopes that
the peace agreement will continue to be implemented,
including through the holding of elections and the
establishment of a Constitution. Japan is willing to
consider how it can cooperate with the Government of
South Sudan to help it achieve those benchmarks and
expected goals.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): At the outset, allow me
to reiterate the objection of my country to the resolution
just adopted (resolution 2683 (2023)). It is done in bad
faith and with ill intent, given the reasons being stated
as to why that unilateral coercive measure is necessary.
It is not, in fact, necessary — it is counterproductive and
has an adverse humanitarian effect on the very citizens

S/PV.9332

whom the proponents claim to support and protect
from harm’s way, rather than on the Government.
The resolution is an example of brazen interference in
domestic affairs.
South Sudan wholeheartedly appreciates the three
African members of the Council — namely, Gabon,
Ghana and Mozambique — as well as China and
Russia for their efforts throughout the consultations
phase in seeking to have a balanced text that takes into
consideration the achievements in the implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and the parties’
respect for the cessation of hostilities agreement. Any
minor hiccups should not be taken out of context and
considered a violation.
Much has been achieved, including the
implementation of chapter V, with the final public
consultation held in Juba from 15 to 17 May under the
theme “Building a sustainable South Sudanese model
for the transitional justice system”. After the conclusion
of that forum, the parties will then prepare for the
formation of the Commission for Truth, Reconciliation
and Healing and its related components, including the
Compensation and Reparation Authority and the Hybrid
Court. In his statement, His Excellency President Salva
Kiir Mayardit stated the importance of the truth as a
basis for reconciliation and healing, with an emphasis
on the fact that South Sudan will not shy away from
establishing the Hybrid Court.
With the adoption of today’s resolution, the
Security Council lost the opportunity to appraise the
events in my country from an objective point of view
and according to the facts. If some of the views and
proposals offered and shared by certain members of the
Security Council had been considered, we would have
had a balanced text and an encouraging resolution. It is
our hope that, in future reviews, different views will be
accommodated to give the Security Council objective
ownership of the resolution.
Allow me to address the issue of the inclusivity
of women, youth and civil society in the affairs of
the State. We have talked about it time and again in
the Security Council. However, it keeps recurring for
reasons best known to those who continue to advocate
for it. Nevertheless, South Sudan’s position on the
inclusion of women is ingrained in our Constitution,
with 35 per cent of all public positions allocated to
women as a matter of law. That was a decision of the

23-150325/6

S/PV.9332

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

people of South Sudan, and it is being implemented
on a daily basis. For example, we have ministries the
sole duties of which are catering to the needs of women
and youth. Therefore, we should talk from a position
of what has been achieved and how to do better,
rather than engaging in repeated and tried discussions
and accusations.
Any peace agreement is, by nature, complicated,
but what matters is the political will of the stakeholders
to fulfil their promises through the implementation of
what they have agreed. In South Sudan, the stakeholders
have that commitment, which has been demonstrated in
the agreement on the road map and the collegiality of
the leaders.

6/6

30/05/2023

In conclusion, an incorrect understanding of
conflicts leads to wrong diagnoses and potentially
harmful responses, as has been witnessed in the case of
South Sudan. Therefore, we call on the Security Council
to be objective, accommodating of others’ views and
proposals and devoid of national political interests,
which increase rather than discourage conflict.
South Sudanese leaders are seized with the objective
of finalizing the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement and embarking on the next phase of the
transition. Join us in a genuine partnership to realize
the objective of a lasting peace in South Sudan. Let us
stop being referees.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

23-15032
