UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/40
16 January 1998
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: FRENCH

LETTER DATED 15 JANUARY 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to transmit to you herewith a letter dated
13 January 1998 from the High Representative for Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

98-00913 (E)

190198

190198

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1998/40
English
Page 2

Annex
[Original:

English]

Letter dated 13 January 1998 from the High Representative
for Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina addressed to the Secretary-General

I have the honour to transmit to you the eighth report on the activities of
the High Representative for Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The final document of the Peace Implementation Conference, held at
Bonn on 9 and 10 December, has been issued in document A/52/728-S/1997/979. I
would appreciate your making this report available to the Security Council.

(Signed)

Carlos WESTENDORP

/...

S/1998/40
English
Page 3

Appendix
Report of the High Representative for Implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina to
the Secretary-General

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
By its resolution 1031 (1995) of 15 December 1995, the Security Council
endorsed the appointment of a High Representative and reaffirmed the importance
of his role in monitoring the implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina and giving guidance to and coordinating the activities of the
civilian organizations and agencies involved in assisting the parties to
implement the Peace Agreement.
2.
By the same resolution, the Security Council requested the SecretaryGeneral to submit reports from the High Representative in accordance with
Annex 10 of the Peace Agreement and the conclusions of the London Peace
Implementation Conference of 8 and 9 December 1995. Accordingly, I present
herewith the eighth report to the Council.
3.
The report covers the activities of the Office of the High Representative
and developments in the areas listed below during the period from the beginning
of October 1997 to the end of December 1997.

II.

INSTITUTIONAL ASPECTS

Office of the High Representative
4.
My headquarters in Sarajevo and the secretariat in Brussels have in the
period under review continued to maintain operational coordination of civilian
implementation activities inside Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as contacts
with the respective implementation organizations and agencies, closely
following, as far as possible, the various international forums dealing with the
Bosnian peace implementation. Special attention was given to the high-level
meetings leading up to the Peace Implementation Conference held at Bonn on 9 and
10 December 1997 and outlining the parameters of involvement of the
international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina for the rest of the
consolidation period.
5.
During the period described, considerable progress has been made in
implementing peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in enhancing the
climate of reconciliation, tolerance and democracy. The achievements also
include the establishment and functioning of the common institutions, the
holding of free elections and the commencement of economic reconstruction, which
are prerequisites for the three constituent peoples to live peacefully together.
The overall picture in Bosnia and Herzegovina is changing for the better, and
life is returning to normal. Yet, notwithstanding these accomplishments, huge
and complex tasks are still ahead of us. Therefore, it would be premature to
say that the peace process is yet irreversible or lasting. However, it is clear
/...

S/1998/40
English
Page 4

that there is no alternative to the Peace Agreement that will continue to
provide the important mechanism for moving the peace process forward. The main
responsibility in this process, and in particular in turning the Peace Agreement
into living reality, lies with those who signed it. I am convinced that there
still exists enormous potential in the dialogue and cooperation between the
Bosnian parties themselves, and my Office will spare no effort in exploiting
this potential to the maximum.
6.
In view of the arbitration decision to be made by 15 March 1998, my Deputy
for the Office of the High Representative-North, the Brcko Supervisor, and his
staff entered a critically important stage of implementation of the arbitration
award. At the end of 1997, acceptable progress towards multi-ethnic governance
in the areas of administration, police and the judiciary has been achieved.
Efforts are proceeding to revitalize the Brcko economy to provide adequate
conditions in support of the return of displaced persons and refugees to their
homes of origin. In accordance with the arbitral award of 14 February 1997, the
Brcko Supervisor, following local elections, issued appropriate orders to
enhance multi-ethnic administration, including multi-ethnic police and
judiciary. The Brcko Municipal Assembly was certified on 30 December 1997, and
a multi-ethnic Executive Board was elected and is now at work. The programme to
restructure the Brcko police has been successful and this new police
organization has started to function. A multi-ethnic judiciary was established
in Brcko on 31 December with good cooperation with the Republika Srpska
authorities.
7.
Regional coordination and monitoring of the situation on the ground has
been a priority, and my offices in Mostar, Tuzla and Banja Luka have continued
to facilitate contacts at the local level, promoting inter-entity cooperation in
a variety of fields. I proceed from the assumption that the regional reach
provided by these offices will continue to be of importance.
8.
The capacity of my Office to conduct preventative, proactive and follow-up
action could be both preserved and developed if countries that contribute
personnel will maintain their current level of commitment. I hope that steady
contribution in this field will be maintained.
Peace Implementation Council
9.
On a monthly basis, I have convened Steering Board meetings at the level of
political directors of the respective Foreign Ministries and weekly meetings at
the ambassadorial level in Sarajevo, each devoted to specific issues of the
peace process. At the meeting in Brussels on 1 October, I concentrated on the
Bosnia and Herzegovina municipal elections, the media and deadlines relating to
the Sintra Declaration, while the meeting in Sarajevo on 6 November focused on
preparations for the Republika Srpska Assembly elections and economic issues. A
further meeting in Paris on 2 and 3 December dealt with the preparations for the
Bonn Conference.
10. The Bonn Conference noted the considerable progress made, especially in the
following areas: the holding of Bosnia and Herzegovina municipal elections and
elections for the Republika Srpska Assembly; arms control and confidence- and
security-building measures; restructuring and reform of the police; the
/...

S/1998/40
English
Page 5

beginning of minority returns in the Federation, and to lesser degree in the
Republika Srpska; economic revival in the Federation; development of
non-partisan professional media; and more than doubling the number of persons
indicted for war crimes in the custody of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. It stressed that much more could have been achieved had the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina contributed their full share to the
construction of a civil and democratic society in the country. The Conference
made it clear to the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina that assistance by
the international community remains conditional upon compliance with the Peace
Agreement and subsequent obligations, and reaffirmed that it will tolerate
neither any tendencies to dominate the political institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, nor any attempts to undermine its sovereignty and territorial
integrity. It outlined the objectives for the remainder of the consolidation
period and established clear time-frames in this regard. The Conference
welcomed my intention to use my final authority in theatre regarding
interpretation of the Peace Agreement in order to facilitate the resolution of
difficulties by making binding decisions on certain specific issues. I believe
that the positive dynamics achieved can be maintained and further developed
through the consistent implementation by all sides of the requirements defined
by the Conference. The final document of the Conference is attached as an annex
to the present report.*

III.

COORDINATION OF CIVILIAN IMPLEMENTATION

Overall coordination
11. I have continued extensive consultations with representatives of
Governments and organizations at different levels. On 11 November, I met with
the Secretary-General in New York and on the same day reported to the members of
the Security Council on the progress in the peace implementation. I also had
several meetings with the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) and the Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
12. Regular discussions have been maintained with the principals in Sarajevo in
which the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the Commissioner of
the International Police Task Force (IPTF), the Special Envoy of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the Commander of the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) and the OSCE Head of Mission participated. I shall
continue these consultations.
13. The Economic Task Force, which meets under my chairmanship in Saravejo,
continues to be the key instrument for coordinating economic reform policies and
priorities of international reconstruction assistance. A working group of the
Economic Task Force has prepared an anti-corruption strategy, which was endorsed
by the Bonn Conference. The Economic Task Force is being strengthened by the

* For the text of the final document of the Conference, see A/52/728S/1997/979, annex.
/...

S/1998/40
English
Page 6

setting up of a secretariat, which will allow improved coordination of donor
activities.
14. At the end of the reporting period the Reconstruction and Return Task Force
was restructured to achieve greater strategic clarity and effectiveness. In the
recommendations of the Reconstruction and Return Task Force to the Bonn
Conference emphasis is placed on minority returns, both from aboard and within
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and on achieving the repatriation targets set by host
countries for 1998. The Governments of the United States of America and Germany
joined the Reconstruction and Return Task Force as full institutional members.
15. The Bonn Conference supported the establishment of a Reconstruction and
Return Task Force secretariat, encouraged its members and donors to provide
reserves in their 1998 programmes, and urged all concerned Governments to second
appropriate staff to the regional offices of the High Representative as well as
other Reconstruction and Return Task Force members, thereby reinforcing its
capacity in the field. I appointed an expert with extensive experience as my
Deputy for Reconstruction and Return Task Force matters.
16. The Human Rights Task Force met in December and established a concrete set
of priorities and objectives for 1998 based on the recommendations of the Human
Rights Coordination Centre Steering Board and the findings of the Human Rights
Strategy Workshop held on 24 November 1997. The Human Rights Coordination
Centre and its Steering Board continue to work to address these priorities and
to provide effective coordination of human rights programmes and policies. My
office is committed to the process currently under way to reform the legal
framework applicable to non-governmental organizations to establish a proper
legal and security environment which supports the development of civil society
organizations.
17. The Freedom of Movement Task Force has continued to be a valuable forum for
exploring various ways to promote freedom of movement for people, goods and
services.
Common institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
18. The Presidency, the Council of Ministers and the Parliamentary Assembly met
regularly; however, the efficiency of their work continued to be hampered by the
lack of administrative structures and permanent locations.
19. The Presidency held only two working sessions, but met frequently with
high-ranking international visitors and delegations during the reporting period.
After having agreed on the distribution of ambassadorial posts in August, only
28 out of 33 ambassadors have been nominated and none of them have taken up
their positions.
20. The Council of Ministers on several occasions referred issues to the
Presidency on which it could not agree. This practice weakened the political
position of the Council, which should serve as the major policy- and decisionmaking organ. The Council nonetheless stood out as the most active of the
common institutions, meeting on average once weekly. During the period under
review, the Council finalized and forwarded to the Parliament of Bosnia and
/...

S/1998/40
English
Page 7

Herzegovina the draft laws on travel documents and the Council of Ministers. it
failed to reach consensus on the draft law on citizenship. Because of this
failure I have taken action to bring this law into force as of 1 January 1998.
The priority is now on implementing these three laws. Progress on other issues
has been slow.
21. My office will continue to work intensively with Council members and staff
to maintain what positive momentum exists for the Council to move forward on
meeting its constitutional obligations. This is particularly necessary when one
notes the failure of the Council to meet important Sintra deadlines.
Commitments undertaken in Bonn must be fully respected by the Council in order
to avoid negative consequences for the implementation process.
22. During the reporting period, both houses of the Parliamentary Assembly
showed a marked increase in activity by holding their fourth, fifth and sixth
sessions. For the first time, these sessions featured political debates of a
controversial, yet constructive, nature. After numerous interventions by my
office, the law on the Council of Ministers and the law on travel documents were
adopted on 16 December.
23. A notable achievement during the reporting period is the efficient work of
the Constitutional Court. At its fifth session, in December 1997, the Court
decided on a number of cases. I am, however, concerned that no resources have
been put at the Court's disposal; nor does the 1997 budget of Bosnia and
Herzegovina provide for the necessary amount. Consequently, the administrative
structure cannot be established. The authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina must
provide full funding for the Constitutional Court.
24. There have been monthly meetings of the Standing Committee for Military
Matters, with its functioning secretariat chaired, for the time being, by my
Military Adviser. Decisions are now beginning to be taken, and regular reports
by the Ministers of Defence and their respective Chiefs of the Armies can be
considered first steps on the road to more confidence-building between the
defence establishments in Bosnia and Herzegovina. At its December session, the
Committee instructed the Ministries of Defence to formulate a plan for the
implementation of the 1997 Ottawa Treaty. This concerns the banning of
anti-personnel mines for which they are responsible. It has also debated
matters such as appointment of military attachés, though a final decision still
eludes the members.
Essential legislation
25. I am most concerned that the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have not
made better progress in implementing key aspects of the Constitution of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and in passing important legislation. Since the Council of
Ministers failed to submit to the Parliament the customs tariffs schedule before
24 December, I have decided to enact this schedule as annex 1 to the law on the
customs policy effective on 10 January.
26. To establish new multi-ethnic parties and to strengthen the existing ones,
the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina must rapidly adopt an election law
under which the forthcoming elections will be conducted. As an integral part of
/...

S/1998/40
English
Page 8

the law, a Permanent Election Commission must be established. My office,
together with OSCE and the Council of Europe, is elaborating a draft of such a
law.
27. Consistency and cooperation between the entities in the area of legal
reform is essential. I have called for the establishment of a Commission for
Inter-Entity Judicial Cooperation, to be operational no later than 31 January.
There is a need to harmonize Federation and cantonal laws. I have taken steps
to coordinate the various judicial and legal reform programmes within a coherent
and focused programme, including the harmonization of the criminal codes and
procedures of both entities with the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
have requested the United Nations to set up a task force to focus on the
assessment and monitoring of the court systems in the entities, and on the
restructuring of appropriate institutions within the judicial system.
Special parallel relationships and succession issues
28. Existing agreements between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
Republika Srpska and between the Republic of Croatia and the Republic of the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina establishing special parallel relationships
between the Entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the neighbouring States,
suffered from constitutional shortcomings.
29. Croatia and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina have engaged
positively in a process to align the Agreement on the Establishment of the Joint
Cooperation Council with the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina. However,
Croatia has presented a proposal for a special parallel relationship with the
Federation which is inconsistent with the Peace Agreement. The Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia has not yet aligned the Agreement on Special Parallel Relationship
with the Republika Srpska with the Peace Agreement.
30. The working groups composed of representatives of the interested parties
and my office, which are intended to bring the texts of the agreements concerned
into line with the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, need to accomplish
their tasks as soon as possible.
31. A revised version of the draft Framework Memorandum on Succession Issues
was prepared by the Special Negotiator on succession issues. The new text, the
draft Framework Agreement on Succession Issues, was discussed with all five
States of the former Yugoslavia at the meeting in Brussels from 9 to
11 December. Negotiations will continue on the basis of that revised text and
in the light of the Bonn conclusions.
Joint commissions
32. Activities of the Provisional Election Commission (annex 3), chaired by
OSCE, are referred to in the elections sections of the present report.
33. The Human Rights Chamber, the Ombudsperson and the Commission for Real
Property Claims have not yet secured stable and adequate funding for 1998. The
commitment by the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina to contribute DM 200,000
to each institution from its 1997 budget has not been met. This failure is all
/...

S/1998/40
English
Page 9

the more troubling given the need for the contribution of the Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to increase incrementally, with a view to assuming full
responsibility by the end of the five-year transition period, as underscored at
the Bonn Conference.
34. Despite financial pressures, the work of all three institutions has
expanded considerably. As of 30 November, the Human Rights Ombudsperson (both
Sarajevo and Banja Luka offices) had opened 2,726 provisional files, registered
1,338 cases and issued 53 final reports in individual cases, as well as 11
special reports. Thirty-three cases were referred by the Ombudsperson to the
Human Rights Chamber. By the end of November, the Human Rights Chamber had
registered 75 cases and made 12 decisions on admissibility of applications.
Seven public hearings have been held and final decisions on the merits have been
rendered in five cases. During the same period, the Commission for Real
Property Claims received over 50,000 claims for property. The Federation
Ombudsmen have established six regional offices in addition to their Sarajevo
office. They currently have more than 1,200 open cases.
35. There is still a serious lack of cooperation on the part of the authorities
in ensuring that the decisions and recommendations of those institutions are
effectively implemented. Mechanisms to ensure respect for the final and binding
decisions of the Human Rights Chamber and the Commission for Real Property
Claims, as well as implementation of recommendations by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Ombudsperson and the Federation Ombudsmen should be strengthened.
My office is actively involved in monitoring the responses of authorities and
coordinating intervention in cases in which the authorities have failed to meet
their obligations. The drafting of implementing legislation for the
institutions is also under way. Coordination among the institutions has
improved and measurable progress has been made in terms of the institutions'
effectiveness in specific cases.
36. At its sixth regular session, on 17 December, the Commission to Preserve
National Monuments (annex 8), extended the selection of monuments and sites of
cultural heritage. It also addressed the question of legislation regarding the
protection of heritage, and requested the assistance of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in gathering
legislation from other countries and giving technical advice on the appropriate
draft law.
37. The Bonn Conference noted that, despite the efforts of the Commission on
Public Corporations (annex 9), the establishment of the Transportation
Corporation in Bosnia and Herzegovina had remained a dead paper. It called upon
the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to implement the recommendation on
railway traffic by 31 March, and urged the entities to establish their joint
corporations. I believe that a framework agreement on the organization of the
electric sector in the railway will be reached soon. My office has
substantially increased its involvement in this field and is supporting the
Commission so that concrete results may finally be achieved.

/...

S/1998/40
English
Page 10

Elections
38. Since my last report, the voters in the Republika Srpska cast ballots in a
calm and secure environment in the extraordinary elections for the Republika
Srpska National Assembly on 22 and 23 November, which were conducted in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Provisional Election Commission
and with full OSCE supervision. The Provisional Election Commission certified
the election results on 12 December 1997 and reported a voter turnout of
79 per cent.
39. The elections did not produce a clear majority for any party or party
coalition. We interpret this as a sign of increasing political pluralism and
democratization of the political landscape in the Republika Srpska and Bosnia
and Herzegovina as a whole. I believe that the election results demonstrate
that the people of the Republika Srpska desire change in their political
leadership. The first meeting of the National Assembly took place on
27 December 1997. Although it failed to elect a speaker, consultations are
ongoing. I expect the formation of a new Republika Srpska Government in
January 1998.
40. I am, however, concerned with the pace of implementation of the municipal
election results. By 10 October, the Permanent Election Commission had
technically certified all 136 municipalities, and nearly all municipalities had
held their first session. Yet by 31 December, only 10 municipalities had
achieved final certification by the Permanent Election Commission. The Bonn
Conference agreed that municipalities in which the requirements had not been
fulfilled would be submitted to the OSCE Head of Mission and my office for final
and binding arbitration before 28 February 1998.
41. The establishment of a Permanent Election Commission is a priority task for
my office. The Bonn Conference endorsed my view that until a Permanent Election
Commission has been established by an act of Parliament and an election law has
been adopted and has entered into effect, elections should be conducted under
OSCE supervision, and the authority of the Provisional Election Commission and
its rules and regulations.
Federation issues
42. My office continued to focus its attention on Federation issues. Two highlevel meetings, on 14 October and 2 December, on the Central Bosnia Canton and
two Federation forum meetings, on 30 October and 12 November, achieved
considerable results in the areas of police restructuring and refugee return.
The political and security situation in the Federation continued to improve
overall, despite some security incidents with possible terrorist background.
The successful establishment of a joint police force and recent progress in
reforming the judicial systems in the two cantons with a special regime have
contributed to this improved atmosphere.
43. Upon the failure of the competent Federation authorities to find a solution
to the long-standing dispute on the boundaries of the Usora municipality, my
office, with the full support of the Federation leadership, submitted its final
and binding arbitration on 19 December. Now that this outstanding issue has
/...

S/1998/40
English
Page 11

been resolved, I anticipate that the law on split and new municipalities will be
adopted by the Federation Assembly in January 1998.
44. However, it is clear that the implementation process in the Federation
needs further international attention and assistance, in particular regarding
reconstruction and return of refugees and displaced persons. There are still
signs of old structures being kept alive despite the fact that they should have
been disbanded as the structures of the Federation and the new common
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina are established and functioning. This
should not be tolerated any longer.
Republika Srpska issues
45. The political crisis in the Republika Srpska continues. The National
Assembly, which was dissolved by the President of Republika Srpska in July 1997,
has continued to meet and pass laws that cannot be recognized as legally valid.
Furthermore, the caretaker Government continues to take decisions inconsistent
with its competency. For example, on 10 November it began to implement the law
on privatization, despite my insistence that any decision should wait until
after the 22-23 November Assembly elections. This crisis can only be resolved
by the agreement of Republika Srpska leaders to overcome their internal
differences and turn their attention instead to addressing numerous problems
facing the entity.
46. Owing to persistent pressure by my office, the first session of the
National Assembly met on 27 December within the time-frame set out in the
Constitution of the Republika Srpska. Deputies representing Federation-based
parties have been installed in office with full voting rights and without taking
a sectarian oath of office. At that session, the President of the Republika
Srpska proposed a non-party candidate for Prime Minister, a vote on which is
expected in the near future. My office handed over to the deputies a list of
priority tasks for the Republika Srpska National Assembly and new Government.
As noted earlier, the Serb Democratic Party (SDS) no longer holds a majority in
the Assembly. However, it remains the party with the greatest number of seats,
and it has entered into a coalition with the Serb Radical Party (SRS). The SDS
and the SRS maintain that their party members should hold the top positions in
the Assembly and that the Prime Minister should come from the SDS.
47. My office continues to provide strong support for free and pluralistic
media throughout the Republika Srpska with the aim of ensuring that Serb Radio
and Television (SRT) is reformed through the reunification of the network in the
Republika Srpska, improved coordination between the Pale and Banja Luka studios
and a monitoring mechanism that meets internationally recognized standards of
journalism.
48. The process of restructuring the Republika Srpska police has moved forward,
in particular in Banja Luka and Brcko, where IPTF has begun certification of
prospective police officers. However, the overall security environment in
Republika Srpska remains tense at times. On 13 November, a terrorist attack
took place against the Serb National Union regional office in Bijeljina.

/...

S/1998/40
English
Page 12

49. Arrest warrants by the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia for
persons under Republika Srpska jurisdiction have not been complied with. Until
these persons are brought to The Hague, the prerequisites for reconciliation and
the rule of law in the Republika Srpska remain seriously impaired. In this
regard, the continuing influence of Radovan Karadzic on the political life of
Republika Srpska is unacceptable. My office remains committed to applying
economic leverage and other measures to ensure full cooperation of the Republika
Srpska authorities with the Tribunal.
50. The economic situation in the Republika Srpska remains grim, with high
levels of unemployment and low wages and pensions. There was no sizable foreign
investment in the Republika Srpska in 1997. International aid is limited and
linked to cooperation with the peace process. On 18 November, the Banja Luka
airport was reopened for commercial flights.
Media
51. During the reporting period, the media situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
continued to be a high priority for my office.
52. My office has now nominated an international supervisor of SRT who will
oversee the restructuring of the SRT network in line with international
principles. Accepting the restructuring of SRT in principle, the Pale
leadership has to date failed to ensure the return of the Veliki Zep transmitter
equipment or adopt restructuring requirements. Failure to address these issues
positively will prohibit the return of Pale studio programming to the SRT
network.
53. My office has developed a strategy to deal with the monolithic control of
the media throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina and to create the necessary
conditions for the electorate to make informed judgements free from political
bias before the elections in September. This plan was presented to the Bonn
Conference, which reiterated its firm commitment to establish free and
pluralistic media throughout the country and supported our media strategy.
54. The strategy of the Office of the High Representative envisages three main
pillars of approach. The first is editorial intervention, media restructuring
and regulation. This we have already embarked upon with SRT, with the aim of
restructuring the whole media landscape in Bosnia and Herzegovina in accordance
with internationally recognized democratic standards. We intend to establish an
intermediate media standards licensing commission, which will regulate the media
in the interim period before the enactment of the laws on the media and
telecommunications. The second foresees the encouragement of independent media
and the provision of alternative sources of information. The Open Broadcast
Network (OBN) still remains the main project in this arena, and our commitment
to the process is now beginning to bear fruit; OBN has now firmly established
itself as a serious contender in the Bosnian media scene. Another key issue is
in encouraging the expansion of independent print, in particular, the
distribution of independent newspapers to those areas of the country that they
do not currently reach. The third pillar of the strategy provides for an
internationally sponsored public information campaign, which is scheduled to
/...

S/1998/40
English
Page 13

last six months and will combine targeted short (30-60 second) commercial public
information slots together with four 10-15 minute programming slots per week.
Return of refugees and displaced persons
55. My office has continued its interventions in support of return to the
Central Bosnian Canton. The third and fourth Federation meetings, on 16 October
and 2 December, attended by the highest officials from the Federation and the
Canton Government, have advanced the establishment of the joint police in the
Canton, as well as the identification of priority return villages. The Central
Bosnia Return Programme was presented by the Canton to the Governments and donor
organizations on 5 December at a meeting chaired by the Office of the High
Representative. My staff has worked with UNHCR as well to extend the Central
Bosnia return initiative to the Neretva-Herzegovina Canton.
56. Under the auspices of my Deputy, the Brcko Supervisor, returns of original
inhabitants to Brcko continued throughout the period under review. The
establishment of a multi-ethnic administration, police and judiciary at the end
of the year would facilitate further returns.
57. In the north-western region of Bosnia and Herzegovina, my Deputy was
intensely engaged in spearheading minority returns and cross-inter-entity
boundary line contacts between displaced persons and their home communities. A
concerted effort by key members of the Reconstruction and Return Task Force
resulted in the successful return of several hundred Serb displaced persons to
Drvar. My office also helped to arrange the first official visits of Serb
refugees in Bosnia and Herzegovina to their homes in the Pakrac area in Croatia.
Freedom of movement
58. Numerous visits across the IEBL, both organized and spontaneous, are ample
evidence of increased freedom of movement. At a trade fair in Banja Luka in
November, approximately 60 Federation companies participated and more than 100
vehicles with Sarajevo licence plates moved freely through the city. My office,
in cooperation with other agencies, developed a plan for a uniform licence plate
system in Bosnia and Herzegovina, to be implemented after 31 January.
59. On 2 December, the first commercial bus line started to run between
Sarajevo and Banja Luka through cooperation between one Federation- and one
Republika Srpska-based bus company. On 17 December, the Republika Srpska
Minister of Traffic and Communication decided to stop the line and had one bus
confiscated. I am following this matter closely and have decided to take action
in order to ensure the unhindered running of buses.
60. On 16 October, the Joint Border Commission established between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia met for the first time in Sarajevo under the
chairmanship of my office, followed by a meeting in Zagreb on 17 December.
Considerable progress has been achieved at those meetings to allow the free
movement of people and goods across the northern border between Croatia and the
Republika Srpska territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

/...

S/1998/40
English
Page 14

61. Regarding police, additional Federation cantons have finished their
restructuring programmes, in particular the Herzegovina Neretva and the Central
Bosnia cantons. After long negotiations and planning, the Federal Police
Academy started to function on 15 December. Police restructuring in the
Republika Srpska started in Banja Luka, followed at the end of the year by
Brcko.
Missing persons, mass graves
62. The international community has continued to work with the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to determine the fate of the missing. The total number
is still uncertain but the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has
received tracing requests for more than 19,500 persons. The Working Group on
Missing Persons, chaired by ICRC, has made it possible for representatives of
family associations to have direct contact with the responsible authorities and
relevant members of the international community.
63. Cross-IEBL exhumations were blocked during most of 1997 owing to
disagreement between the parties and the political situation in the Republika
Srpska. In October, my office introduced a new strategy asking the parties to
name one site each that they wanted to exhume without opening up negotiations
regarding number of bodies, number of working days or size of the sites. This
resulted in three weeks of exhumations in two locations. The Bosniak team
collected surface remains in the Kravice area in the Republika Srpska, and the
Republika Srpska team exhumed two graves and collected surface remains in Ozren
in the Federation. The total number of collected bodies during the reporting
period is 97. The Croat side did not participate.
64. I consider that unresolved issues relating to the missing are a serious
impediment to reconciliation. Therefore, my office has already started the
planning for 1998, together with the parties, in order to speed up the process.
Human rights
65. Despite gradual improvement in freedom of movement, fewer arbitrary arrests
and a more responsible attitude on the part of authorities, systemic human
rights violations continue to occur in both entities. Few steps have been taken
by Federation or Republika Srpska authorities to ensure that the rights and
freedoms set forth in the European Convention on Human Rights are effectively
protected. Harassment, violence and destruction of property on the basis of
ethnicity remain substantial problems, and discrimination on ethnic or political
grounds is endemic, particularly in the Republika Srpska areas. The role of
police in addressing these violations itself continues to present significant
concerns, particularly as police response is influenced by political and ethnic
criteria, and reports of abuse in police custody remain frequent. In these
respects, the situation during the reporting period remained fundamentally
unchanged.
66. Property and housing laws which block the return of hundreds of thousands
are still in force, making full implementation of annex 7 of the Peace Agreement
impossible. Both entities must take urgent steps to amend these laws. As
reiterated at the Bonn Conference, the Federation will be held to its
/...

S/1998/40
English
Page 15

commitment, made at the Federation Forum on 12 November 1997, to adopt the three
draft laws submitted by my office. The Republika Srpska has been urgently asked
to amend its property and housing legislation within 60 days of the new
Government taking office. Should they fail to do so, I will recommend
additional measures as sanctions. Establishing the conditions for safe return,
including functioning human rights protection mechanisms, is also an essential
component of the implementation of annex 7, as are efforts to address current
discrimination and difficulties associated with both civil registration and
acquiring access to personal documents throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina.
67. At the same time, the process of rebuilding a multi-ethnic Bosnia and
Herzegovina is encumbered by several basic problems. The Constitutions of the
entities themselves embody insupportable distinctions between ethnic groups in
their designation of "constituent peoples". These provisions should be amended
to accord equal status to Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs, along with members of
other groups, in order to foster multi-ethnicity and ensure that the fundamental
principle of equal rights for all people is fully respected. In addition, the
current education policy and programmes of both entities do not promote
understanding and reconciliation. It is essential that the responsible
authorities move expeditiously to develop an education programme consistent with
those principles and with the right of parents to choose the nature of the
education their children receive.
Cooperation with the ICTY and strengthening of the rule of law
68. The Human Rights Task Force has emphasized the urgent need for criminal
justice reform in both entities. In particular, criminal law and procedure
codes must be harmonized with the European Convention on Human Rights. As noted
in Bonn, the Federation should implement the recommendations of the expert team
regarding the criminal procedure code by 31 January. While the Republika Srpska
has requested that the Council of Europe assist in the harmonization of its
criminal code and criminal procedure code with European standards, the expert
team set up in the Republika Srpska should also include representatives of my
office, the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and other
relevant institutions. These steps are essential to address ongoing human
rights abuses, including violations of fair trial standards in such highly
publicized cases as the prosecution of I. Djedovic in Sarajevo and the
conviction of three Bosniak men in Zvornik on murder charges.
69. The independence and effectiveness of the judiciary remains compromised by
flaws in the judicial appointment process and the absence of a mechanism for
inter-entity cooperation in this field. The appointment process must be
reformed so that selection is based on merit rather than political or ethnic
criteria, and training programmes for legal professionals, including the
initiative to establish a judicial training institute for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, should be supported.
70. Rule of law and reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina will remain
seriously impaired until competent authorities fulfil their legal obligation to
hand over indicted war criminals to the ICTY. Two additional arrests of persons
indicted for war crimes occurred in December. Following those arrests, two
persons subject to publicly disclosed indictments (both Croats) remain at large
/...

S/1998/40
English
Page 16

in the Federation, while only three of 54 Serbs publicly indicted by the
Tribunal are in custody.
71. No arrests in violation of the Rome Agreement (rules of the road) occurred
during the past three months, but activities which are incompatible with the
rules continue. In both entities, reliance by authorities on local "war crimes
lists", including publication and broadcasting of these lists, poses serious
obstacles to the return of refugees and displaced persons, the ability of
elected councillors to assume office and freedom of movement.
Economic reform and reconstruction
72. Despite the shortcomings of the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
addressing economic management, the international reconstruction aid has
continued to fuel economy recovery. An estimated total of US$ 1.5 billion has
been implemented so far in the country, approximately 95 per cent being in the
Federation, including Sarajevo. The proportion of financial help for the
Republika Srpska is now increasing. In the fourth quarter of 1997, eight grant
agreements were signed with the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
World Bank approved credits in the total amount of $27 million for the financing
of two projects with a total cost of $123 million. This includes the
reconstruction assistance project ($82 million), which is dedicated to the
Republika Srpska. During the reporting period, some 150 new contracts were
signed. In the same period, the European Commission has contracted grants for a
total amount of $125 million.
73. The Bonn Conference confirmed my priorities regarding economic management
and transition. To speed up the process, the Conference issued a schedule for
key steps regarding the common currency, the State budget and its financing from
the entity budgets, and entity-level legislation on pension reform and basic
commercial legislation. I am confident that the various deadlines in the first
quarter of 1998 will be met. The crucial economic policy framework for a
growing and unified economy will then be in place. Under such conditions, the
much-needed support through an International Monetary Fund (IMF) standby
agreement and two proposed World Bank adjustment credits can go ahead. In
addition, the Paris Club debt resolution can follow the successful London Club
debt agreement, which was consummated in December.
74. The Bonn Conference expressed deep concern about corruption and diversion
of funds and endorsed my anti-fraud strategy based on the following elements:
(a) improvement of prosecution capacities by creating an anti-fraud unit to
assist the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to identify illegal activities,
(b) better control of international assistance, (c) increased transparency in
public finance through an extended mandate of the European Commission Customs
and Fiscal Assistance Office and establishment of external auditing institutions
and (d) dissolution on non-constitutional bodies.
75. Together with the Commission on Public Corporations, my office has held
negotiations to establish a Railway Corporation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. A
framework agreement is to be signed in January by which the parties would resume
traffic immediately, and final negotiations on the organization of the sector is
/...

S/1998/40
English
Page 17

to be completed by March.
services.

Preliminary discussions have also started on postal

76. Over 600 households have returned in the Brcko area. Return applications
of an additional 2,270 households (representing more than 9,000 persons) have
been approved. Though the arbitral award stated the significance of economic
revitalization of the Brcko area, only slow progress has been made by
international donors and development agencies in this regard. Following a
donors' conference held in Brcko on 4 and 5 November, several donors
demonstrated interest in funding specific projects.
Civil aviation
77. A lack of response from the international community in funding of the
Department of Civil Aviation as a joint institution has slowed further progress.
This will hinder economic recovery in the aviation sector. International
efforts centred on the physical development of Sarajevo airfield, minor
passenger terminal improvements in Mostar and limited Sarajevo terminal air
traffic systems, but have largely ignored safety and support activities that are
central to operating the aviation system to International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) standards. In addition, the Department's field staff
requirement of approximately 160 persons has yet to be implemented.
78. Significant inroads have been made in airfield planning, and in securing a
bilateral charging agreement for overflight fees throughout Eurocontrol. The
organizational framework for the Department of Civil Aviation has been
developed, and nominations from the three parties to the integrated staff have
started work on air procedures, air navigation, infrastructure and policy
development. An international secretariat of the Department has been
established and funded to give the technical expertise to continue system
development and provide mediation.
Mine clearance
79. The Bonn Conference expected the new civilian demining structure to be
established by 1 January 1998 at the Bosnia and Herzegovina level and by
31 March 1998 at the entity level. The first deadline has been met owing to the
efforts of the Board of Donors, co-chaired by the United Nations/Office of the
High Representative working in consultation with the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Commission for Demining.
80. A memorandum of understanding and agreed principles on the new structure
were signed by the Council of Minsters of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 20 October.
This structure aims to ensure efficiency and transparency so that the donor
confidence is maintained. It is also designed to welcome donors who wish to
follow their own projects outside of the structure, while leaving them with the
option to join at a later date. The Board of Donors will remain an advisory
body to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Demining Commission, which oversees the whole
structure on behalf of the Council of Ministers.
81. The agreed principles have been applied to various decisions, agreements
and decrees which formally establish the organizations within the new structure.
/...

S/1998/40
English
Page 18

A consensus on several important documents was reached in December, and the
United Nations, the Office of the High Representative and the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Commission for Demining were able to co-present them to the Council
of Ministers and respective Governments. The documents are as follows: (a) a
decision on the establishment of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Commission for
Demining, (b) a decision on the establishment of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Mine
Action Centre, (c) an agreement between the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the Republika Srpska on cooperation in the field of mine action.
82. The next agreements to be finalized are those establishing the entity mine
action centres. These are the decree on the establishment of the Republika
Srpska mine action centre and the decree on the establishment of the Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina mine action centre. I am reasonably confident that
the Bonn deadline of 31 March for these bodies to be established can be met.

IV.

COOPERATION WITH THE STABILIZATION FORCE

83. Cooperation with SFOR remains excellent, and is the most important factor
for the implementation of the Peace Agreement. It is my firm belief that for
the time being there could be no civil implementation without the strong
international military force available immediately to ensure the secure
environment, which is also mandatory for the work of the civilian organizations.
But beyond the mere presence and deterrent effect of SFOR, its direct and dayto-day support is essential for maintaining peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Bonn Conference supported the emerging consensus on the need
for a military presence to continue beyond June, and I proceed from the
assumption that the international force will stay in Bosnia and Herzegovina as
long as necessary.

-----
