180

General Assemhly --Thirty-fifth Session

these groups of people from discrimination based on
race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin:
7. Ca/Is upon the United Nations bodies concerned
to ensure that the Committee is supplied with all relevant information on all the Territories to which General
Assembly resolution 1514 (X V) applies and urges the
administering Powers to co-operate with these bodies by
providing all necessary information in order to enable
the Committee to discharge fully its responsibilities under article 15 of the Convention;
8. Notes with appreciation the adoption by the Committee of the revised general guidelines concerning the
form and contents of reports by Sta tes parties under article 9, paragraph 1, of the Convention 11 and invites
States parties to supply the Committee, in accordance
with these guidelines, with information on the implementation of the provisions of the Convention, including information on the demographic composition of
their population and on their relations with the racist
régime of South Africa:
9. Urges all States parties to the Convention to extend full co-operation to the Committee and notes with
regret that on one occasion such co-operation was
withheld by one State party:
10. Expresses its grave concern that sorne States parties to the Convention, owing to reasons beyond their
control, are being prevented from fulfilling their obligations under the Convention in parts of their respective
territories;
11. Urges all States which are not parties to the Convention to ratify orto accede to it and. pending such ratification or accession, to be guided by the basic provisions of the Convention in their interna] and foreign
policies;
12. Urges Member States to attend sessions of the
Committee and to encourage their national mass media
to give wider publicity to the Committee. as well as to
the Convention;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to make appropriate arrangements for the Committee to hold. as
part of activities within the Programme for the Decade.
one session in one of the developing countries. preferably in Africa, befare the end of the Decade and to
report in this regard to the General Assembly at ib
thirty-sixth session.

73rd plenary meeting
25 Novemher 1980

35/41.

Report of the lJnited '.\iations High Commissioner for Refugees
A

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of hi~
Office, 35 as well as the report of the Executive Commit. tee of the Programme of the High Commissioner on its
thirty-first session, 16 and having heard the High Commissioner's statement,"
14
Official Recvrds vf the Cienera/ As.1emhlr. Thirty-fijih Ses.1w1:
Supplement No. IR (A/35/18), annex IV
"/bid., Supp/ement :Vo. 12 (A 115 121.
''!bid .. Supplement No. UA (A,3'.·12,Add.1).
"/bid.. Thirty-fijih Sessiun. /hin./ Commi//e,• '1 ,1 rnccl ""'.
paras. 1-8.

Recal/ing its resolutions 34/60. 34/61 and 34/62 of
:'9 N ovember 1979.
Expressing concern at the persistence and gravity of
the problems of refugees and displaced persons in all
parts of thc: world, particularly in different parts of
Africa and Asia.
Noting with deep appreciation the positive resp?nses of
Governments to the problems of refugees and displaced
persons of concern to the Office of the High Comm_i~sioner through offers of asylum, resettlement, rehab1htation and financia! contributions, as well as the
generous support given to the Office of the High Comm issioner in its humanitarian task,
Reajf1rming the humanitarian character of the activities of the Office of the High Commissioner.
Considering further the continuing and urgent need
for a substantial international humanitarian effort to
promote durable solutions to the problems of refugees
and displaced persons, drawing particular attention to
women and children the world over, and welcoming the
recommendations on this subject in the Programme of
Action for the Second Half of the United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace
adopted at the World Conference ofthe United Nations
Decade for Women,"
Noting with concern that refugees encounter serious
difficulties in many parts of the world in obtaining
asylum and that they are exposed to the threat of refi¡u/ement. arhitrary detention and physical violence.
Deploring, in particular, the instances ·of physical attacks on asylum seekers at sea and ofmilitary attacks on
refugee camps in southern Africa.
Drawing attention to the problem of refugees rescued
at sea and the difficulties encountered for their disemharkation.
Taking note nf resolution CM/Res.814 (XXXV) concerning the situation of refugees in Africa. adopted by
1he Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity at its thirty-fifth ordinary session, held at
heetown from 18 to 28 June 1980, '" and of Economic
and Social Council resolution 1980/55 of 24 July 1980
concerning thc organization of an international confcrence on assistance to refugees in A frica,
1. Commends the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and his staff for the dedication they
have continued to demonstrate in discharging their responsibilities for protecting and assisting refugees and
displaced persl1ns throughout the world;
2. l'akes note of the efforts already made by thc
High Commissioner to adapt the managcment of his serv1ces to their vastly increased tasks and encourages
him to continue thesc efforts within the framework of
comprchensive action and 111 close contact with thc
Exe<.:utivc Commíttcc of thc Programme of the High
c·ommissioncr and Lln the hasis of thc principies and
guidelines of the Cicneral Assembly:
3. Cal/supon thc international community to share
the burden nf assisting refugees and displaced persons of
concern to thc High Commissioner the world over. in
partirnlar in the devcloping countries;
4. Reajfirms the esse1111al importance of the High
\ , ,m missioner", ac! iun tP prnvidc international protec" RPporr o{ the World ( ·on/erence o/ the l 1nited Nations Decade fvr
1, ,,men t.qualitr. f>ndopmem and l'eace. Copenhagen. 14-30 Julv
/1.)8/J (linited Na!Hrn:, puhlicat1on. Sale~ No. E.XO.IV .1 and corrigendumj, chap l. secl \.
' :~e" ', J'i '411.' .111.l C,,rr. i. annex 1

VI.

tion to refugees and to promote durable and speedy
solutions through voluntary repatriation or return, and
subsequent assistance in rehabilitation, in consultation
with the countries concerned, integration in countries of
asylum or resettlement in other countries of refugees
and displaced persons of concern to the Office of the
High Commissioner;
5. Urges Governments to intensify their support for
activities which the High Commissioner is carrying out
in accordance with relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, especially by:
(a) Facilitating his efforts in the field of international protection by observing the principie of asylum
and non-refoulement relating to rt:fugees:
(b) Supporting his efforts to promote, in cooperation with Governments, United Nations bodies
and non-governmental organizations, durable solutions
to the problems of refugees and displaced persons, including those in urgent need, whenever emergencies occur;
6. Welcomes the steps already taken in implementing the recommendations of the Conference on the
Situation of Refugees in Africa, held at Arusha, United
Republic of Tanzania, from 7 to 17 May 1979, urges ali
States to provide the utmost support for the envisaged
International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in
Africa 40 and recommends that the High Commissioner
should substantially increase, subject to the availability
of funds, the assistance programmes allocated to A frica
in order to respond effectively to the manifested needs:
7. Expresses its appreciation for the role of the High
Commissioner in the repatriation of Zimbahwean
refugees and in the co-ordination of the United Nations
humanitarian assistance programme for the initial settlement and rehabilitation of returnees and displaced
persons in Zimbabwe;
8. Stresses the importance of maintaining the relief
efforts and the resettlement momentum for boat and
land cases in South-East Asia and urges ali Governments to provide opportunities for durable solutions to
these refugees;
9. Urges the High Commissioner to explore the
further elaboration of arrangements in order to facilitate the prompt and unhindered disembarkation of
refugees rescued at sea and their resettlement:
10. Recognizes the High Commissioner's leading responsibility in emergency situations regarding refugees
and takes note of his efforts to contribute to the improvement of the co-ordination and effectiveness of the
action of United Nations bodies and other relevant organizations in providing international humanitarian assistance to refugees and displaced persons of concern to
his Office;
11. Urges ali Governments in a position to do so to
contribute generously in order to provide the High
Commissioner with the necessary means to attain the
objectives of his humanitarian programme, taking into
account that the over-all financia] requirements of the
High Commissioner are on the order of $500 million in
1980 and that the same amount might well be required
in 1981.

73 rd plenary meeting
25 November 1980

'º See resolution 35/42 below.

1111

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Commitlcr

B

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1166 (XII) of 26 November
1957, 2956 B (XXVII) of 12 December 1972 and 3271 B
(XXIX) of 10 Decemher 1974 in connexion with the
Emergency Fund of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Noting recomrnendation F of the Executive Cornmittee of the Prograrnrne of the High Commissioner,4
Authorizes the United Nations High Cornmissioner
for Refugees to allocate from the Ernergency Fund up to
$1 O mi Ilion annually for refugees and displaced persons
in emergency situations for which thcre is no provision
in the programmes approved by the Executive Committee. it heing understood that the arnount made available
for one single emergency shall not exceed $4 million in
any one year and that the Fund is maintained at not less
than $4 million.
1

73rd plenary meeting
25 November 1980

35/42.

lnternational Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa

The General Assemhlr,
Recalling its resolutil,n 34/61 of 29 November 1979,
Taking note of resolution CM/Res.814 (XXXV) concerning the situation of refugees in Africa, adopted by
the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity al its thirty-fifth ordinary session, held at
Freetown from 18 to .~8 .June 1980, ·12
Having heard the statements of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, the Secretarv-General of the Organi1ation of African Unity and ·the United Nations
I-ligh Commissioner for Refugees•' on the serious situalion of refugees in Africa.
Grave/y concerned at the growing number of refugees
on the African contineni, who now constitute over half
the population of refugees 111 the world.
A warc of the consequent social and econornic burden
placed on A frican countries of asylum as a result of the
incrt.:ased inllux of refugees and the subsequent impact
on their dt.:velopment,
Bearing in mind the heavy sacrifices that the countries
of asylum are rnaking, despite tht.:ir lirnited resources. to
alleviate tht.: plighl of those refugees,
Appreciating the contributions made by donor countries as well as the assistance that the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations
lnternational Children's Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World
Food Programrne and other intergovernrnental and
non-governmental agencies have provided to refugees in
A frica,
Noting with Jeep regret the inadequacy of the
assistance provided lo the growing number of African
refugees,
Recognizing the universal collective responsibility to
share the urgent and overwhelming burden of the
" See Ojficial Records of"the General Assemhly. Thirty-fifrh Session.
Supplement No. 12A (A/35 12•Add 1), para. 69.
,. See A 35/4(,3 and Corr.1. annex l.
'' Official Record., of rhe Gennal A.uembly. Thirty-Jifth Session.
Third CommillPe. 'i I st meeting. paras. 1-X.
