S/2015/669

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 August 2015
Original: English

Letter dated 27 August 2015 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
On 7 August 2015, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2235
(2015), in which the Council reiterated its condemnation in the strongest terms of
any use of any toxic chemical, such as chlorine, as a chemical weapon in the Syrian
Arab Republic and expressed its determination to identify those responsible for
those acts. In that regard, the Council recalled the Protocol for the Prohibition of the
Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological
Methods of Warfare; the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction;
and Council resolutions 1540 (2004), 2118 (2013) and 2209 (2015).
To that end, the Security Council decided to establish a Joint Investigative
Mechanism for a period of one year with a possibility of future extension by the
Council, if it deemed it necessary, to identify to the greatest extent feasible,
individuals, entities, groups or Governments who were perpetrators, organizers,
sponsors or otherwise involved in the use of chemicals as weapons, including
chlorine or any other toxic chemical, in the Syrian Arab Republic where the fact finding mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
determined or had determined that a specific incident in the Syrian Arab Republic
had involved or had likely involved the use of chemicals as weapons, including
chlorine or any other toxic chemical.
I hereby submit to the Security Council for its authorization, in accordance
with paragraph 5 of resolution 2235 (2015), recommendations, including elements
of terms of reference, regarding the establishment and operation of an Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism. This submission is made in coordination with the Director-General of
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
In paragraph 6 of resolution 2235 (2015), the Security Council requested that,
after it had authorized the Joint Investigative Mechanism, I, in coordination with the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
undertake without delay the steps, measures and arrangements necessary for the
speedy establishment and full functioning of the Mechanism, including recruiti ng
impartial and experienced staff with relevant skills and expertise to fully implement
the responsibilities pursuant to resolution 2235 (2015), with due regard to be given
to the importance of recruiting staff on as wide a geographical basis as was
practicable.

15-14410 (E)

310815

*1514410*

S/2015/669

Furthermore, in paragraph 9 of resolution 2235 (2015), the Security Council
requested the fact-finding mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons to collaborate with the Joint Investigative Mechanism from the
commencement of the Mechanism’s work to provide full access to all of the
information and evidence obtained or prepared by the fact -finding mission,
including, but not limited to, medical records, interview tapes and transcripts, and
documentary material. The fact-finding mission would transmit all evidence and
findings to the Joint Investigative Mechanism. Based on its assessment of that
information, the Mechanism may request the fact-finding mission to provide
additional information or may decide that an additional investigation or additional
investigations are required.
Since the adoption of resolution 2235 (2015), I have been in close contact with
the Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
Ahmet Üzümcü, and staff members of our organizations have been working closely
in order to develop the requested recommendations and to plan for the
implementation of the resolution. Based on these consultations, and in coordination
with the Director-General, I wish to present my recommendations, including
elements of terms of reference, to implement our respective roles and
responsibilities pursuant to resolution 2235 (2015).
For the purposes of the Joint Investigative Mechanism, the United Nations and
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons shall operate within the
areas of their particular competencies, taking into account the complementary roles
of each organization.
The Director-General and I shall agree on a supplementary arrangement
pursuant to the Agreement concerning the Relationship between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, concluded in 2001.
Such an arrangement shall set out the modalities for cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in the
context of resolution 2235 (2015).
The Joint Investigative Mechanism shall demonstrate objectivity, and its
composition shall reflect comprehensive, professional and multidisciplinary
expertise to meet the mandate of the resolution.
In coordination with the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and the heads of other relevant international
organizations as appropriate, I shall undertake the recruitment of impartial and
experienced staff to provide the relevant requisite skill sets. Recruitment shall be
based on professional expertise and experience, with due regard to the importance
of recruiting staff on as wide a geographical basis as practicable.
I propose that the leadership of the Joint Investigative Mechanism comprise an
independent three-member panel to be supported by a core staff of professionals
grouped into three components. In this regard, the Mechanism shall be headed by an
Assistant Secretary-General with overall responsibility, and two Deputies at the D-2
level, responsible for the political and investigation components, respectively.
As noted, the leadership of the Joint Investigative Mechanism shall be
supported by three components. A political office, to be based in New York, shall
provide political analysis, legal advice, media relations and administrative support.
An investigations office, to be based in The Hague, shall provide chemical and

2/6

15-14410

S/2015/669

medical analysis, forensics, military ordnance analysis, investigation, and
information analysis. A planning and operations support office, to be based in New
York, shall provide support to the political and investigation components.
Given the particular nature of the responsibilities and operating environment
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism, I intend to fully use the authority invested in
me, including in the area of human resources, to promote the timely achievement of
the mandate of the Mechanism, while maximizing the safety and security of its
personnel.
With regard to its functions, methods of work and scope, the Joint
Investigative Mechanism shall conduct its operations in an independent manner and
shall be responsible for its report(s).
The Joint Investigative Mechanism, in fulfilling its mandate, shall ensure the
integrity and confidentiality of its work, including the protection of documents and
evidence, as much as possible while meeting its reporting requirements.
In paragraph 7 of its resolution 2235 (2015), the Security Council recalled that
in resolution 2118 (2013) the Council had decided that the Syrian Arab Republic
and all parties in that country should fully cooperate with the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the United Nations and stressed that that
included an obligation to cooperate with the Director-General of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and its fact-finding mission and the
Secretary-General and the Joint Investigative Mechanism. Such cooperation
included full access to all locations, individuals and materials in the Syrian Arab
Republic that the Joint Investigative Mechanism deemed relevant to its investigation
and where it determined that there were reasonable grounds to believe access was
justified based on its assessment of the facts and circumstances known to it at the
time, including in areas within the Syrian territory but outside of the control of the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, and also included the ability of the
Mechanism to examine additional information and evidence that had n ot been
obtained or prepared by the fact-finding mission but that was related to the mandate
of the Mechanism, as set forth in paragraph 5 of resolution 2235 (2015).
The fact-finding mission shall continue to operate under the authority of the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
The Joint Investigative Mechanism shall undertake activities to identify to the
greatest extent feasible individuals, entities, groups or Governments who were
perpetrators, organizers, sponsors or otherwise involved in the use of chemicals as
weapons, including chlorine or any other toxic chemical, in the Syrian Arab
Republic where the fact-finding mission determined or had determined that a
specific incident in the Syrian Arab Republic had involved or likely involved the
use of chemical weapons, including chlorine or any other toxic chemical. In
implementing its mandate, the Joint Investigative Mechanism shall undertake its
work in an impartial manner.
For this purpose, the Joint Investigative Mechanism may undertake activities
at: the location(s) where the use of toxic chemicals as a weapon is alleged to have
occurred, including locations directly relevant to the Mechanism, such as
hospital(s), and emergency response stations; any other location(s) within the Syrian
Arab Republic, including territories not under its control; and neighbouring and
other relevant States, as it may consider necessary or appropriate.

15-14410

3/6

S/2015/669

The Joint Investigative Mechanism shall liaise and coordinate with the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, opposition groups and the international
community, as it deems necessary.
In paragraph 11 of resolution 2235 (2015), the Security Council requested the
Joint Investigative Mechanism to complete its first report within 90 days of the date
on which it commenced its full operation, and complete subsequent reports as
appropriate thereafter, and also requested the Mechanism to present its report(s) to
the Security Council and inform the Executive Council of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. Those reports shall be transmitted under cover by
the Secretary-General to the Security Council.
It should be noted that the operation of the Joint Investigative Mechanism
shall be separate from the operation of humanitarian work, which provides
indispensable life-saving support to innocent people suffering from the conflict, and
from the political process, which is seeking to bring about a diplomatic solution to
the conflict.
The Joint Investigative Mechanism may have a “light footprint” in the Syrian
Arab Republic, deploying only those personnel whose presence is necessary to the
performance of their functions. The United Nations shall support the Joint
Investigative Mechanism and fact-finding mission deployments primarily in the area
of logistics, security and liaison, with support for communications, administration
and possibly other areas, as may be required.
With respect to cooperation with all parties in the Syrian Arab Republic and
Member States, I note that the extremely challenging mandate and dangerous
situation inside the Syrian Arab Republic will impact the activities of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism. Success will therefore depend on the full cooperation of
all parties, including the Government and other parties in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The Joint Investigative Mechanism may establish contact with and receive
information from any parties in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The United Nations shall engage, in its areas of responsibilities, with
international and regional actors, and with the Security Council and other
stakeholders, in furtherance of the implementation of resolution 2235 (2015) and
related resolutions of the Council. The strong support of the Council and key
stakeholders will be essential to the success of the Joint Investigative Mechanism.
The Syrian Arab Republic and all parties in that country shall cooperate fully
with the Joint Investigative Mechanism and shall provide full access to all locations,
individuals and materials in the Syrian Arab Republic that the Mechanism deems
relevant to its investigation and where it determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that access is justified based on its assessment of the facts and
circumstances known to it at the time, including in areas within the Syrian territory
but outside the control of the Syrian Arab Republic.
With regard to cooperation with the Syrian Arab Republic and all parties in
that country, for territory both under and outside the control of the Syrian Arab
Republic, full access shall be granted to the Joint Investigative Mechanism and the
fact-finding mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
as necessary. In order for the Mechanism to accomplish its mandate, it would be
necessary for all parties to pause hostilities in the areas in which the Mechanism

4/6

15-14410

S/2015/669

requires access for the period of its presence in those areas. This shall apply to the
fact-finding mission, as appropriate.
The United Nations shall do its utmost and use all means available to it to
work with all parties to ensure compliance with these requirements, including
through the good offices of my Special Envoy for the Syrian Arab Republic.
In light of the exceedingly complex security challenges which may limit the
means at the disposal of the Joint Investigative Mechanism, the support of the
Security Council, Member States and other stakeholders with influence over parties
in the Syrian Arab Republic is essential in respect of facilitating the full compliance
of all parties in the Syrian Arab Republic with its requirements.
With regard to cooperation with neighbouring States, at the request of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism, neighbouring States may contribute support and
assistance in facilitating its activities by providing, inter alia, information, security
and protection for the Mechanism and its personnel, equipment and documents,
access to victims or witnesses taking refuge on their territories, and transportation
and logistical support to the activities of the Mechanism within their territories.
The role of other Member States will also be critical. All other Member States
are called upon to offer their full support to the work of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism. In paragraph 8 of resolution 2235 (2015), the Security Council called
on all other States to cooperate fully with the Mechanism and in particular to
provide it and the fact-finding mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons with any relevant information that they may possess pertaining
to individuals, entities, groups or Governments who were perpetrators, organizers,
sponsors or otherwise involved in the use of chemicals as weapons, including
chlorine or any other toxic chemical in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The core staff of the Joint Investigative Mechanism shall be funded from the
regular budget. Additional expertise and activities shall be funded by voluntary
contributions as requirements continue to emerge. For that purpose, the SecretaryGeneral intends to establish a trust fund. The Mechanism shall make reports to
donors on the status of the trust fund.
In paragraph 10 of resolution 2235 (2015), the Security Council requested the
Secretary-General, in coordination with the Director-General of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, to report to the Council and inform the
Executive Council of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons as
of the date the Joint Investigative Mechanism began its full operations and every
30 days thereafter on the progress made.
It is envisaged that the monthly progress reports shall be in respect of both
Security Council resolutions 2235 (2015) and 2118 (2013).
The Joint Investigative Mechanism shall complete its first report within
90 days of its commencement of full operations and complete subsequent reports as
appropriate thereafter. The Mechanism shall transmit the report or reports to the
Security Council under my cover letter and inform the Executive Council of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
I would like to close by reiterating that the work of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism will be a challenging undertaking, and will require continued close
cooperation between the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and

15-14410

5/6

S/2015/669

the United Nations, and the support of the Security Council, Member States and key
stakeholders.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter urgently to the
attention of the Security Council.

6/6

15-14410
