S/PV.9190

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9190th meeting

Monday, 14 November 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Agyeman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Xing Jisheng
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Vinito
Mr. Gallagher
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Mr. Heines
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. Shaheen
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-68907 (E)
*2268907*

S/PV.9190

The situation in the Central African Republic

a challenging environment. The situation in the Central
African Republic remains fragile, and the country still
needs MINUSCA.

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Central African Republic to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Sylvie Valérie Baipo Temon, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Francophonie and Central Africans abroad of
the Central African Republic.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

14/11/2022

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/845, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, France, Ghana, India, Ireland,
Kenya, Mexico, Norway, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Against:
None

During the negotiations, France was attentive to
the position of each member of the Security Council.
We deplore the abstentions, as MINUSCA needs our
unanimous support.
France was also attentive to the position of the Central
African Republic. Consultations were held in Bangui
at the beginning of October, when a French delegation
visited to hear the expectations of the Central African
authorities. The draft resolution (S/2022/845) was
therefore amended, as reflected, first, in the possibility
of a strategic review being conducted once MINUSCA
has achieved full operational capacity and, secondly, in
MINUSCA’s continued support for the extension of the
authority of the Central African State throughout the
territory. We worked tirelessly to promote a consensus
in order to reconcile the sometimes-opposing positions
of the members of the Council, while aiming to preserve
MINUSCA’s mandate.
The resolution just adopted contains two key points
that I would like to briefly highlight.
First, it will enable MINUSCA to continue
providing support for the peace process in the
Central African Republic. The Council welcomes the
progress that has been achieved and encourages the
Central African authorities to continue their efforts to
implement the Luanda road map, with the support of
regional organizations and the countries of the region.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.

Secondly, the resolution addresses MINUSCA’s
freedom of movement. As the Council knows, freedom
of movement must be guaranteed, without restrictions. It
is a precondition for the force’s operational effectiveness
and essential for the safety of the Blue Helmets. We
recall the tragic attack at the beginning of October that
killed three Bangladeshi Blue Helmets. That is why,
through resolution 2659 (2022), the Security Council
reminds the Central African authorities to lift the ban
on night flights in the country.

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): France welcomes the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) in resolution 2659 (2022), which
maintains MINUSCA’s robust mandate as it operates in

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate France’s
full support for the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Valentine Rugwabiza, and
to pay tribute to the commitment of all MINUSCA
personnel working to bring about peace in the Central
African Republic.

Abstaining:
China, Gabon, Russian Federation
The President: The draft resolution received 12
votes in favour, none against and 3 abstentions. The
draft resolution has been adopted as resolution 2659
(2022).

2/11

22-68907

14/11/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Gabon supports the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) and the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic, Ms. Valentine Rugwabiza. However,
as adopted, resolution 2659 (2022) does not meet the
aspirations of the Central African Republic, which were
clearly expressed in a letter addressed to the members
of the Council.
Gabon has always advocated for a standing dialogue
between peacekeeping operations and host countries,
as well as for the consideration of the situation on the
ground and the real needs of local populations. An
effective mandate is a balanced and inclusive mandate
that can engage all stakeholders.
As a country of the subregion, Gabon has always
worked to restore peace and security in the sisterly
Central African Republic. The efforts of the Central
African authorities must be supported by a MINUSCA
mandate that is aligned with the will of the people of
the Central African Republic for stability and peace.
We therefore deplore the rejection during the
negotiations of the proposals put forward, in particular,
by the three African members of the Security
Council — Gabon, Ghana and Kenya — in support
of a strong commitment to restoring State authority,
which would undoubtedly help to build peace. We also
regret the lack of a differentiated treatment of armed
groups and the Central African authorities, as well as
the deletion of a well-defined deadline for the strategic
review of the Mission.
Finally, the resolution does not take into account
the efforts made by the Central African armed forces
to fulfil their obligations to defend and secure their
territory in difficult conditions, nor the measures
taken by the Central African authorities in the area
of justice and human rights in a particularly austere
economic context.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): Let me
start by thanking France, as the penholder, for its
work on this important mandate. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) deserves
the Council’s broad support for its efforts to bring
peace and security to the Central African Republic.
The United States voted in favour of the mandate
because its renewal empowers the Mission to continue

S/PV.9190

protecting civilians, supporting the peace process in
the Central African Republic and playing a stabilizing
role throughout the country. We also voted in favour
of the mandate renewal because MINUSCA has made
welcome advances in addressing the growing threat
posed by explosive devices, countering disinformation
and encouraging renewable energy use. Resolution 2659
(2022), which we just adopted, is further strengthened
by its responsiveness to the host Government’s requests,
as communicated by the Central African Republic’s
Foreign Minister, Ms. Baipo Temon.
We are pleased with the mandate’s unequivocal
support for peacekeeper safety and security, including
its call for full implementation of the status of forces
agreement and the authorization of night flights. We
welcome the Central African Republic’s attention to
that issue and the positive discussions in recent weeks
and look forward to seeing the ban on MINUSCA
flying at night lifted as soon as possible. Frankly,
we find it difficult to understand why some Council
members that purport to defend peacekeeper safety and
security objected to including language on night flights
in the mandate.
I would also like to highlight an important matter
that was left out of the resolution. Although the mandate
condemns the crimes of armed groups, it does not
specifically name the Kremlin-backed Wagner Group.
There is extensive publicly available information
that forces sent to the Central African Republic by
the Russian Federation have consistently obstructed
MINUSCA’s ability to fulfil its mandate. They
stand accused of egregious human rights abuses and
violations of international humanitarian law, including
some involving sexual violence, rape, summary
executions and torture. We should also convey our
disappointment with the unfortunate changes to the
preambular language on the Central African Republic
Government’s responsibility to protect all populations.
Although the mandate no longer specifically mentions
genocide, ethnic cleansing, war crimes or crimes
against humanity, we stress that the Central African
Republic has the primary responsibility to protect its
populations from all of those.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): My delegation thanks
France for facilitating the negotiations on resolution
2659 (2022), which was just adopted.
Kenya’s decision to vote for the resolution was
a fine balance between the notable improvement in

22-689073/11

S/PV.9190

The situation in the Central African Republic

the continued implementation by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) of its
mandate in support of the Central African Republic
and the critical need to improve the resolution in order
to increase its chances of being more successful. We
were persuaded by the need to give the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General time and
support to build on the new impetus. We stress the
importance of ensuring that MINUSCA coordinates
appropriately with the Government at all times. It is
also critical that both the Government and the Mission
carry out their respective mandates with clarity, a
willingness to consult and a spirit of professional regard
and propriety.
After consultations with the Central African
Republic, the three African members of the Security
Council — Gabon, Ghana and Kenya — presented
proposals that would have improved MINUSCA’s
mandate. While a few of the proposals were agreed on,
important ones were left out. The resolution is therefore
still not fully fit for purpose. We need to place that on
record if we are to see improvements during the next
renewal, because there remain critical gaps in the
Mission’s ability to deliver effectively on its mandate.
We would single out in particular the proposal for
promoting the task concerning the extension of State
authority, the deployment of security forces and the
preservation of territorial integrity from the category
of “other tasks” to “priority tasks”. The fact that it
was moved up in the “other tasks” category is still not
enough. In our considered view, that task, along with
the protection of civilians, is the raison d’être of any
peacekeeping mission that purports to robustly ensure
that the host State eventually assumes its primary
responsibility. The fact is that successfully implementing
that and other tasks would result in the acceptance of
any peacekeeping mission by host communities, as
well as the safety and security of peacekeepers and
the successful transitioning of the mission. We were
also hoping to have stronger language condemning the
activities of armed groups to send a strong message that
the Council abhors their destabilizing activity.
We urge the Council to revisit the important matter
of the independent strategic review of MINUSCA,
as requested by the Central African Republic, at the
earliest possible opportunity and with clear timelines.
On the overall conduct of the negotiations, we
regret the manifest geopolitical considerations that
4/11

14/11/2022

dictated the positions of certain delegations. The
attendant polarization, as it has come to characterize
discussions on matters concerning the Central
African Republic, destroyed any hope of consensus.
The net result is that civilians in the Central African
Republic suffer the consequences of rivalries they have
absolutely no interest in. We welcome the solid efforts
of the Government of the Central African Republic,
which have set the country on a path towards the
stabilization of the political and security situation. We
equally commend its frequent efforts to have its voice
heard and responded to in the Council, as well as its
commitment to cooperating with the United Nations.
In conclusion, Kenya reaffirms its respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Central
African Republic.
Mr. Heines (Norway): As we have reached
the end of a long process, we want to thank our
colleagues — especially France, as penholder — for
our discussions, which facilitated the possibility for the
continued support of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) to that country. We decided
to vote in favour of resolution 2659 (2022) due to the
importance of backing the Mission and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General’s support for
peace and progress in the Central African Republic.
As always, the troop- and police-contributing
countries are a critical component for that to even
be possible. We want to take a moment to once again
thank them all profoundly and remember those who
have made the ultimate sacrifice while serving the
United Nations in the Central African Republic. We see
it as our responsibility, as a member of the Security
Council, not just to send United Nations personnel to
help in the Central African Republic, but also to send a
message about ensuring their safety and security while
they carry out their tough and important jobs, including
through the availability of quick casualty evacuations
by air when needed — day or night.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): Ireland welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2659 (2022), renewing the
mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) for one year. In a context marked
by the persistence of violence and with a heavy price
being paid by the civilian population, humanitarian
22-68907

14/11/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

S/PV.9190

workers and peacekeepers, it was essential for the
Security Council to reaffirm its support for MINUSCA.

Republic, including by air and at night, as set out in the
Mission’s status-of-forces agreement.

Challenges to the freedom of movement of the
Mission, including continued restrictions on night
flights, about which the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General recently informed the Council (see
S/PV.9156), make it difficult for MINUSCA to fulfil
its mandate, given that night flights are essential for
the safety and security of peacekeepers. I echo the
Secretary-General in urging the Government to uphold
its commitment to take appropriate measures to fully
implement the status-of-forces agreement.

With this mandate, MINUSCA can continue to
provide effective support for long-term stability in
the country. It is now up to the Government to deliver
on its stated commitments to protect civilians and
human rights, take definitive steps on the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic and uphold MINUSCA’s freedom
of movement.

In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to France as penholder for its untiring
efforts to reconcile diverging views and secure
agreement on this important resolution.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA). We thank France for its efforts as penholder
to reconcile the differing views of Security Council
members. Delegations made difficult compromises.
The United Kingdom was disappointed by the loss of
agreed responsibility-to-protect language. We maintain
that the Government of the Central African Republic
remains primarily responsible for the protection of all
civilians from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity and that the issue will
remain a key factor in future conversations.
The mandate renewal was adopted in a difficult
political and security context. MINUSCA itself faces
significant challenges, but the Mission retains a key
role in helping to build long-term peace in the Central
African Republic.
While we recognize the recent overall reductions in
violations of the status-of forces-agreement, we remain
deeply concerned about the night flight restrictions
imposed by the Government. Such restrictions limit
the ability of MINUSCA to implement its mandate and
jeopardize the safety and security of peacekeepers and
civilians. We support the inclusion of new language
in the mandate to address that critical issue, and we
call on the authorities to ensure MINUSCA’s freedom
of movement, with unhindered and immediate access
throughout the territory of the Central African

Mr. Spasse (Albania): Albania voted in favour
of resolution 2659 (2022), on extending the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) until 15 November 2023. However,
we regret that, despite numerous and substantial
compromises, the resolution did not receive united
support. We commend the work of the penholder,
France, in reaching those compromises.
There is one particular issue on which our
delegation repeatedly expressed concern throughout
the negotiations — the language concerning night
flights. That is a long-standing issue, for which a
solution was not found during the bilateral discussions
between MINUSCA and the Central African Republic.
We stand ready to welcome any updates on resolving it.
Meanwhile, it is crucial that the Security Council send
a clear message that the safety and the ability of the
Mission to perform 24/7 is not in question.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our firm support
for resolution 2659 (2022). A strong, well-equipped
Mission that is able to react is a guarantee for the
implementation of its tasks in support of the national
authorities to promote peace and security and provide a
better future for its people.
Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): Since
the beginning of the year, the security situation in the
Central African Republic has seen positive progress.
The peace process is steadily moving forward, although
elements of uncertainty remain. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) is working
very hard to deliver on the tasks mandated by the
Security Council and has made important contributions
to improving the situation in the country. Under the
current circumstances, the Mission remains critical
to achieving peace and stability in the country. China
supports the extension of the Mission’s mandate, and

22-689075/11

S/PV.9190

The situation in the Central African Republic

we continue to support its work and that of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
At the same time, there was room for improvement
in the draft resolution (S/2022/845). As a major troopcontributing country, China attaches great importance
to the safety and security of peacekeeping personnel
and has always called for full respect for the statusof-forces agreement. Nevertheless, experience has
demonstrated time and again that differences between
the host country and United Nations peacekeeping
operations can be resolved only through dialogue and
negotiations. Merely resorting to pressure is not helpful.
United Nations peacekeeping operations should
define their priorities based on the needs of the host
country. Currently, the Government of the Central
African Republic continues to recover lost territory and
eagerly hopes that the Mission’s assistance in extending
State authority in regained territory will be prioritized.
Regrettably, however, the country’s request was not
reflected in resolution 2659 (2022). In addition, China’s
views on the security threat posed by armed groups and
the Mission’s independent strategic review were not
taken on board. Accordingly, China had no other choice
but to abstain in the voting.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian delegation abstained in the
voting on resolution 2659 (2022) to extend the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) for one year. On 5 November, the country’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ms. Sylvie Baipo Temon,
who is here with us today, circulated a letter addressed
to the members of the Security Council in which she
outlined the vision of the Central African Republic
with regard to the work of MINUSCA, the main goal of
which is to support the official authorities of the Central
African Republic in dealing with the challenges facing
them, above all the challenge of stabilizing the country
and creating the necessary conditions for establishing a
lasting peace.
Despite the lengthy negotiation process leading
to the adoption of resolution 2659 (2022), it in fact
addresses only one of the many issues of principle raised
by the Central African Republic — the termination
of the authorization of the French assistance to
MINUSCA — which is not in any way a concession, as it
merely reflects what France already announced publicly.
6/11

14/11/2022

In addition, Bangui’s proposals regarding the
mandate were not reflected in the document, which
disregarded the justified request to designate assistance
in maintaining State presence as MINUSCA’s priority
task. That amendment was supposed to faithfully
reflect the changed situation on the ground and support
further efforts by the country’s authorities to stabilize
the situation there, which, as we have seen, have already
produced results.
We cannot accept a text that equates all the parties
to the conflict and the armed groups with one another.
It is well known that the latter are responsible for the
overwhelming majority of cross-border crimes and
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights. Neither was it possible to avoid making public the
bilateral modalities between Bangui and MINUSCA on
the authorization of Mission night flights, which was
justified by purported concern for peacekeepers. Once
again, we recall that the key to ensuring the safety of
peacekeepers is contingent on constructive cooperation
with the authorities of the host country.
We wonder why the French penholder did not
include our proposed wording on the need to investigate
the supply chains used to deliver explosive devices
and their components deployed to the Central African
Republic, which led to the deaths of three peacekeepers
from Bangladesh. Emergency medical assistance was
provided to one of the wounded on 3 October by a
medical worker from a team of Russian instructors
in the area. The Council should focus on why those
explosive devices and components found their way into
the country instead of engaging in pointless witch hunts
and blame-laying. Besides what I have just discussed,
there were many other aspects that did not make it
into the final document. Had the French penholders
really wanted to, they could have drafted a truly wellbalanced document that responded to the vital interests
of the people of the Central African Republic. But they
preferred not to do that, which is why it was not possible
for us to support the document.
Nevertheless, we hope that the renewal of the
MINUSCA mandate will help to advance President
Touadera’s efforts to strengthen and expand the
Government’s presence in various regions of the
country, which among other things is essential to
addressing its humanitarian problems. We also count
on the professionalism and wisdom of Ms. Valentine
Rugwabiza, as she continues her intelligent leadership
of MINUSCA and the work of addressing emerging
22-68907

14/11/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

problems, in close cooperation with the Government of
the Central African Republic. We believe that building
a mutually respectful dialogue with the host country
based on trust and partnership should be a priority, while
taking into account Bangui’s concerns, including in the
area of security. Without that it is impossible for any
peacekeeping mission to fully implement its mandate.
Russia has always supported the work of the Blue
Helmets in the Mission, who occupy an important place
in the overall security architecture of the Central African
Republic. We continue to believe that MINUSCA is a
fundamental element in ensuring that our approach to
combating armed groups functions effectively. We will
continue to give active assistance via bilateral channels
to our friend the Central African Republic. Thanks
to the efforts of Russian trainers, the capacity of its
security forces has increased considerably, and the
governing authorities have significantly stabilized the
situation in their country. That means greater security
for civilians, better protection of human rights and a
better life for ordinary people. That is a fact, and no
smear campaign aimed at my country will change it,
because actions speak louder than words.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ghana.
I would like to begin by first of all thanking the
penholder, France, for its efforts in bringing about
the adoption of resolution 2659 (2022). Ghana voted
in favour of the resolution, but we did so in the wider
interests of the peace and stability of the Central
African Republic, and not because we were wholly
satisfied with the processes or the final text submitted
for adoption. We believe that the negotiations could
have been more consultative and taken into account the
views of all the members of the Security Council.
When the Council renewed the mandate of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) last November (see S/PV.8902), it did
so in the belief that the Mission would support the
Central African Republic’s authorities in protecting
its civilian population, which is threatened by physical
violence, fully implement its strategy for the protection
of civilians, safeguard State institutions, implement a
strategy for the extension of State authority and promote
and support the rapid extension of State authority over
the entire territory of the Central African Republic.

S/PV.9190

Since the implementation of the Mission’s mandate
began, the situation in the Central African Republic has
not been static. There have been developments requiring
legitimate adjustments to be made to the mandate. It was
in that context that the three African members of the
Security Council proposed that some of the mandate’s
tasks be considered priority rather than ordinary tasks,
in order to consolidate the gains made in the peace
process. Regrettably, that proposal was not considered,
nor were others such as the proposal to include, based
on the similarity of the circumstances, the language
that was agreed in paragraph 17 of resolution 2612
(2021), renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Its inclusion would have sent
an appropriate message communicating the Council’s
abhorrence of the activities of armed groups.
We also consider the views of host countries
important and had hoped that those views would have
been given due consideration in the negotiations on
the resolution, especially as the cooperation of the
authorities of the Central African Republic is needed if
MINUSCA’s mandate is to be successfully carried out.
We believe that in future negotiations, the views of all
Council members should be taken into account in order
to forge a consensus and send a united message from
the Council.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Francophonie and Central Africans Abroad of the
Central African Republic.
Ms. Baipo Temon (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): First of all, I would like to congratulate
Ghana on its presidency of the Security Council for the
month of November, and especially you, Mr. President,
for your excellent guidance of the discussion in today’s
meeting. I warmly thank the representatives of the
Security Council members here today and extend my
best wishes to them. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Central African Republic for her work and all of the
other representatives for their statements.
The topic of today’s meeting is extremely important
to the Central African Republic in particular, but also
to the Security Council, the organ with the primary
responsibility of ensuring peace, both around the
world and among the Member States of the United

22-689077/11

S/PV.9190

The situation in the Central African Republic

Nations. My country, the Central African Republic,
takes note that following the deliberations on the
draft resolution setting the terms for the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), the peacekeeping operation in
the Central African Republic, the penholder’s text was
adopted with 12 votes in favour and three abstentions as
resolution 2659 (2022).
I would first like to take this opportunity to thank
France, which as the Security Council’s penholder
on matters concerning the Central African Republic,
presented the text of the resolution, taking care to do
it with an attitude of openness to the Central African
Republic, as the concerned party. The Central African
Republic was pleased to receive a French delegation
on Central African soil to whom, on behalf of my
Government, I expressed our appreciation to France, as
well as our expectations and the urgent needs of the
MINUSCA peacekeeping operation.
The sensitivity of this subject is clear, owing to the
lengthy discussions that were necessary to bring the
text of the resolution to a vote. As far as the Central
African Republic is concerned, the text is unsatisfactory
because it does not take into account the needs and
expectations of our country or the aspects that are vital
to ensuring that the peacekeeping operation can be
more effective. The text adopted by a majority vote of
the Council today responds first and foremost to the
call for solidarity and support from the international
community, which is not in question, something that it
is important to remember.
It is also important to highlight the vigilance of
certain Member States, for which I am grateful and
which has ensured that the reality on the ground and the
situation in the Central African Republic have not been
diminished by a text that would have focused more on
geopolitical issues, directed by Powers to the detriment
of weak countries such as the Central African Republic,
and that would have diverged from the Security
Council’s primary mandate for the maintenance of
international security. The Central African Republic
would once again like to thank those Member States for
their vigilance.
The Central African Republic commends the
States that have supported the Central African cause
by effectively helping to ensure that the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations are not violated.
8/11

14/11/2022

The reaction to such violations is based on the degree
to which their continent resembles those of Council
members, with double standards applied — so that,
sadly, in Europe we see proactive solutions sought
for conflicts, sanctions against aggressors, arms
supplies and appeals for solidarity, whether voluntary
or compelled, while the attitude to conflicts in
Africa wavers, with peacekeeping operations whose
limitations and inability to effectively live up to the
situations they are placed in are clear for all to see.
Those peacekeeping missions lack adequate resources
and equipment to deal with heavily armed groups.
They are not sufficiently proactive and have overly
cumbersome methods of engagement on the ground,
where we see contingents arriving after the violence.
I will give two examples — houses burned down in
Kaga Bandoro in 2021 and nuns being burned to death
in their cars at the hands of armed groups in front of
powerless contingents.
To take the Kaga Bandoro incident, which is a
telling example. I would like to point out that, as
various houses were on fire, the contingent present in
the locality for many years was called on to help by the
population. However, it did not arrive at the scene of the
violence until the next day to see the dead burned alive
and count them for the purposes of a statement strongly
condemning the atrocities of armed groups.
We can continue the list of inconsistencies in
the decisions taken by the powerful, the permanent
members of the Council, with the support of States
chosen à la carte. Moreover, we note that the majority
vote here is also explained by the fact that many
Member States represented here are both judge and jury
as contributor States to peacekeeping operations in the
Central African Republic and elsewhere.
The Central African crisis will not be resolved by
summoning the State under attack, which is accused of
not being able to ensure respect for human rights and of
still experiencing an appalling situation in humanitarian
terms. Neither will it be resolved by sanctions to hide
the fact that nature abhors a vacuum and that futile
disputes are not acceptable when a State is in survival
mode, or by texts produced in comfortable ivory towers
and in complete isolation from the reality on the ground.
It should be noted that national and international public
opinion observes and judges the credibility of the
decisions taken within the Security Council.
22-68907

14/11/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

The world is nothing but conflict, which means
that, as with the League of Nations, there is an urgent
need to rethink the organ that guarantees international
security. The reform of the Security Council has
become inevitable, and a more balanced representation
of Africa in the Security Council can only be beneficial
to ensuring international security. With its experience
in conflicts, either as a victim or as an effective
supporter — I am talking about Africa’s contribution
in the First and Second World Wars — Africa, fairly
represented, could contribute to a better world. If even
history does not commemorate or pay tribute to our
African relatives who lost their lives in support of a
cause that they deemed just, then Africa has a duty to
remember history.
Moreover, it should be noted that a number of
powerful countries are responsible for various theatres
of conflict at the expense of the weakest. I would like to
mention Libya, Iraq, Palestine, Afghanistan, the Central
African Republic, Chad and so on. Similarly, there is
a disconnect between the humanitarian discourse and
humanitarian action, as we are all aware that 80 per
cent of the major donations from contributor States
are primarily used not for the human cause, but for the
running of organizations that champion the humanitarian
cause. Humanitarian action fuels humanitarian action
and the insecurity of an entire population, which is
made to rely only on humanitarian emergency plans,
not economic development programmes.
Furthermore, the text listing the good offices of
MINUSCA, even in matters of sovereignty, is proof
of a desire not to resolve the Central African conflict
but to maintain it, since we also know that the host
agreement imposed and signed in 2014 at a time of
extreme vulnerability deliberately maintains the
country’s dependence on the international community
in its efforts to preserve a sense of dominance.
Multilateralism seems to lose its meaning when
decisions are taken only on the basis of the bilateral
positions of Member States. I therefore call for selfreflection on the part of all in order to clearly accept the
consequences of destructive and often ill-timed actions.
Resolving the Central African conflict is simply
a question of political will on both sides. For that to
happen, we need to talk to each other at a human level.
I said it before, and I cannot reiterate it often enough,
that it is not enough to talk about being human; we

S/PV.9190

must practice being human and deal with conflicts in
their context.
With regard to the Central African conflict, let
us remain determined to support the efforts of the
Central African Government in its quest to restore
State authority throughout the country by supporting a
policy of decentralization, which, by holding municipal
elections, will make it possible to expedite the process
and promote local development, thereby bringing about
benefits for the population.
That is why the Central African Government
asked the Security Council to prioritize that task in the
MINUSCA mandate so that the protection of civilians
becomes a tangible reality for the population, which
is still waiting to see the results of a peacekeeping
operation that is vaunted as being robust, but whose
effectiveness on the ground is not apparent owing to
the ongoing activity of armed groups.
Let us remain committed to security sector reform
and restructuring. Let us overcome the sanctions that put
an end to the training of uniformed personnel under false
and unproven pretexts, driven by geopolitical stakes.
The Central African Republic would like to call
on the Security Council, short of acknowledging the
failure of previous solutions and peace missions, to
demonstrate insight by providing adequate support to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the Central African Republic so that, after 10 years,
the MINUSCA operation can see signs of an end to the
crisis. To that end, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General must have the freedom to use the
strength of her mandate and employ armed force to
deal with an ever-increasing insurgency, which shows
the limits of a peace operation that has no mission or
mandate to address the cause of the problem, namely,
armed groups.
A new insurgency emerging on Central African soil
will mark a failure of the resolution adopted today or
will provide grounds to the population, worried about
the lack of proactivity by troops from countries with
military experience in dealing with armed militias.
The Government and the people of the Central
African Republic reaffirm that no operation on Central
African soil — to date, there have been 13, including
the MINUSCA operation — has been free of human
rights violations. Since 2013, unacceptable crimes and
violations have been recorded: illicit trafficking in arms

22-689079/11

S/PV.9190

The situation in the Central African Republic

and natural resources by peacekeepers in particular and
the rape of minors by peacekeepers. Those crimes and
violations remain unaddressed by the Human Rights
Division of MINUSCA and the Human Rights Council,
which stayed silent until 2021, when the cause of
Central African victims became topical.
There are also reports of human rights violations
against personnel employed by MINUSCA officials. I
will not dwell on the illicit trade that is creating unfair
competition for local traders, as even onions, tomatoes,
potatoes and other staples are being exported in
violation of the host country agreement, which has also
reached its limits and is now hampering the country’s
economic development through unfair competition and
loss of earnings.
The Government is also aware of the difficulties
experienced by MINUSCA, particularly the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic, due to an operation that is not geared
towards achieving the objectives set. Through me, the
Government and the people of the Central African
Republic give the Mission all the support that it needs
to carry out its difficult task, and we urge the Council
to provide it with all the support and backing in terms
of equipment and mandate, not to politicize the mission,
as some actors would like, but to perform the priority
tasks of protecting civilians, restoring State authority,
strengthening the rule of law, combating impunity
and promoting security sector reform and support
for the political process, in conjunction with African
subregional organizations based on the principle of
subsidiarity. That must be done in accordance with the
basic principles of United Nations peace operations and
the sovereignty of the Central African Republic.
Together, we must continue the collective work
already started in order to bring the Central African
Republic out of this crisis situation, in which armed
groups want to confine it, so that we can break the
vicious cycle of human rights violations as a result of
poverty, instability and insecurity, since where people
are condemned to live in poverty, human rights are
always violated.
That is why the authorities of the Central African
Republic are requesting an evaluation of MINUSCA’s
work on Central African soil in order to focus on
effectiveness and, together, achieve our objectives.
I would like to share with the Council a comment
that is relevant to the situation in the Central African
10/11

14/11/2022

Republic, which was made by former American President
John Fitzgerald Kennedy, who said: “Our progress as a
nation can be no swifter than our progress in education.
The human mind is our fundamental resource”.
In other words, it is time for the Central African
Republic to build itself and train its own elites, its own
sons and daughters, who are committed to building a
prosperous State by drawing on their own resources.
It is unthinkable that, for generations, the daily life of
Central Africans should depend only on the goodwill of
the enemies of peace. As President Touadera has said
repeatedly, the people of the Central African Republic
have suffered greatly from misunderstandings and
misinformation, which has unfortunately gone on for
too long. Our people seek only peace and security for
their development.
The Government of the Central African Republic is
aware of the challenges it faces and asks that its tireless
efforts be recognized and supported by prioritizing the
actions that need to be taken to achieve the country’s
objectives, which are peace and stability. To do that,
we must focus on peacebuilding and the recovery of
the Central African Republic by stabilizing the country
to create the right conditions in which the Government
can go about its work.
The Government reiterates its readiness to work
in a coordinated manner with MINUSCA and in strict
compliance with its sovereignty in order to further
and strengthen the significant progress made with
the support of MINUSCA and all the technical and
financial partners of the Central African Republic.
The Government therefore reaffirms its willingness
to work with MINUSCA teams on night flights, in
accordance with the terms of the agreement between
the Government and MINUSCA, as well as the
regulations of international civil aviation and of the
Central African Republic.
I would like to point out that there is not, and
indeed has never been, a ban on night flights, although
there have been some constraints owing to the national
context and some difficulties related to the electrical
grid. MINUSCA’s freedom of movement has not been
impeded either, as reflected in the recent arrival of the
Bhutanese contingent in the Central African Republic
without the authorities having been notified beforehand.
In addition, the Central African Republic
once again calls for coordination and respect for its
sovereignty. In particular, it requests that vehicles that
22-68907

14/11/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

do not bear the emblem of the United Nations not be
used and that illegal weapons not be transported in
unmarked vehicles or in the direction of areas where
armed groups are very active. A regulation cannot
suddenly be subjected to conditions and pressure for
the sake of a Mission whose limits have moreover
been demonstrated elsewhere or with respect to which
evidence of abuse has been noted.
Let us work together to prevent the laying of mines
by armed groups and reduce the capacities of armed
groups, which go as far as to attack peacekeepers in
their bases. Let us work together for the development of
the Central African Republic, in particular in terms of
energy and infrastructure.
It is important to welcome the collective efforts
that have been made and that have made it possible to
achieve some important and unexpected gains, given
the chaos in which the Central African Republic found
itself in 2013. Let us avoid the cliché of friends versus
enemies, because your friends may not be our friends,
just as your enemies may not be our enemies. Beyond
geopolitical interests, the Central African Republic
wants to be a land of peace for all partners that share its
goal of ensuring security for its people, its territory and
its development.
We must therefore not forget the bloody aggression
perpetrated from house to house, which created
thousands of orphans and left families jobless and
displaced. The perpetrators remain free and ready to
take action because of the ambiguous message that
the Security Council and the international community
are sending them by not naming them explicitly in the
resolution, which blurs the international community’s
message in favour of the armed groups and to the
detriment of the victims, and because the peacekeeping
operations are not deterring the perpetrators and

S/PV.9190

lack the necessary effectiveness on the ground and
concrete action to support the Government’s efforts to
combat impunity.
Disputes over interference in the internal affairs
of the Central African Republic that stir up division
through misinformation create tensions within the
institutions of our Republic. We cannot counter
disinformation and incitement to hatred with more
disinformation and incitement to division and hatred.
Let us work together for a better world and a better
future for the Central African Republic. We can do that
if and only if we want to do it. Everything is a matter of
the will of people.
As Mr. Souleymane Boel said, “Marginalization is
rarely the choice of an individual or a State, but rather
the fate of a society whose poverty we want to maintain”.
I will conclude — and I apologize for having spoken
at length — by paying tribute to all those who have
lost their lives in the Central African Republic in this
despicable conflict perpetrated by the enemies of peace,
which we must have the courage to condemn not in grand
speeches but in a firm and factual manner. I refer in that
regard to my Central African compatriots, the Forces
armées centrafricaines, the internal security forces, the
Blue Helmets and our brothers in arms who have come
in the name of peace to the Central African Republic. I
express the gratitude of the people and the Government
of the Central African Republic to all partners who have
stood by our side seeking peacebuilding and economic
recovery, the international community, MINUSCA,
the African Union, the Community of Central African
States, the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region and all bilateral partners.
The meeting rose at 3.55 p.m.

22-6890711/11
