A /75/PV.39

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

39th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 8 December 2020, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Masuku
(Eswatini), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 76 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/75/70 and
A/75/340)
Reports on the work of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole on the Regular Process
for Global Reporting and Assessment of the
State of the Marine Environment, including
Socioeconomic Aspects (A/75/362 and A/75/614)
Letter dated 13 October 2020 from the
Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group of
the Whole on the Regular Process for Global
Reporting and Assessment of the State of the
Marine Environment, including Socioeconomic
Aspects (A/75/232/Rev.1)
Draft resolution (A/75/L.39)
(b) Sustainable fisheries, including through the
1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating
to the Conservation and Management of

Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks, and related instruments
Report of the Secretary-General (A/75/157)
Draft resolution (A/75/L.40)
Mr. Prasad (Fiji): This statement in my national
capacity is aligned with the statement delivered on
behalf of the Chair of the Alliance of Small Island
States earlier today (see A/75/PV.38).
I congratulate Singapore and Norway on their great
efforts to bring the draft resolution on oceans and the
law of the sea (A/75/L.39) to the General Assembly
in a difficult period. The global health pandemic has
made it even clearer that, in order to achieve the decade
of action on sustainable development, national and
international efforts must be transformative and bold.
The oceans will play a large part in those
efforts, which must include intensifying our efforts
to consolidate the international legal frameworks
for the protection of oceans, harnessing the United
Nations system for the development of sustainable blue
economies and outlining responsibilities for Member
States to protect the health of oceans and to move human
activity on the oceans into more sustainable pathways.
Pacific leaders have affirmed, through the Boe
Declaration on Regional Security and the Kainaki
II Declaration, that climate change remains the
single-most significant threat to the blue Pacific.
The consequences of rising sea levels, warming seas,
acidification and deoxygenation are intensifying across
the blue Pacific. The development progress of island

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-34864 (E)

*2034864*

A/75/PV.39

States is now hostage to those trends, which are a threat
to development, a threat to our food security, a threat to
our livelihoods and our economies and a growing threat
to our security.
A crucial element of international law is the basis
that it provides for determining maritime boundaries
and exclusive economic zones. The 1982 United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea provides the
legal foundation for designing those boundaries. The
work of the International Law Commission on the law
of the sea with respect to rising sea levels is therefore
of great interest to Fiji and many of the island States
of the Pacific that are facing growing pressures from
rising sea levels.
Our coastal communities look to international
law for comfort. Fiji joins the Pacific community in
restating a core element of our understanding of that
law. Once determined, maritime boundaries cannot be
affected by changes arising from human action. Rising
sea levels and climate catastrophes are a consequence
of human action. They affect communities and
indeed whole islands. Those changes are, in our view,
inconsequential for maritime boundaries determined on
the basis of international law. We are very clear on that.
If maritime boundaries were indeed to somehow be
affected by rising sea levels, it would be equivalent to
a victim of a crime being asked to compensate those
responsible for that crime. Fiji and the Pacific islands
did not cause sea-level rise. Fiji’s own domestic legal
frameworks and the Pacific’s regional frameworks
are being shaped to ensure that there is no ambiguity.
Fiji is doing so because the ocean is the foundation of
our identity and our existence and of our sustainable
development. Fiji therefore welcomes the International
Law Commission’s efforts to examine the issue of
maritime boundaries and sea-level rise, including its
implications for persons affected by sea-level rise.

08/12/2020

task of shaping the first global stocktake of progress
on the implementation of Sustainable Development
Goal 14. The second Oceans Conference will be an
important platform from which to link the progress on
marine protected areas and marine conservation with
new nationally determined contributions and with the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) process.
Fiji looks to both Italy and the United Kingdom
to help us deliver on the high ambitions of the twentysixth Conference of the Parties to the Convention,
which is crucial for ensuring that the progress being
made for the protection of oceans and the climate and
ocean pathways are firmly locked and embedded into
the UNFCCC process arising from the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change, which will mark its fifth year in a
few days’ time.
Fiji has been actively engaged in the negotiations for
the new treaty for the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction (BBNJ) and looks forward to working with
all Member States to satisfactorily conclude the treaty
in the new year. I think Ambassador Lee of Singapore
for her sterling efforts to maintain momentum on
the BBNJ.
The global health pandemic has shed new light on
the importance of marine biodiversity for medicine
and the future health of humankind. In welcoming the
draft resolution on sustainable fisheries (A/75/L.40), I
remind the General Assembly that Fiji and the Pacific
suffer from the double impacts of human action.
First, because of warming seas, fish are migrating
to cooler waters in the eastern Pacific, well beyond the
exclusive economic zones of the region.

I join our colleagues in congratulating the SecretaryGeneral of the International Seabed Authority on his
re-election and offer my delegation’s full support,
especially in the implementation of the Authority’s new
marine scientific research action plan.

Secondly, because of intensifying illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU), there
is growing pressure on regional fish stocks. The
international community needs to take cohesive
measures on two fronts — faster progress to net zero
IUU and the complete phasing out of IUU.

Fiji also joins its Pacific colleagues in looking
forward to the second United Nations Oceans
Conference and supports the Department of Economic
and Social Affairs and the excellent work of the Special
Envoy for the Ocean. I also wish the co-hosts, Portugal
and Kenya, every success as they undertake the difficult

The impacts of climate change on marine life has the
most acute and most direct impact on women across our
coastal communities. That is why we look to the United
Nations system to work with far greater coherence to
support the capacity of women across the ocean space,
including through their full and equal participation in

2/20

20-34864

08/12/2020

the science of oceans and shaping ocean policy and by
undertaking efforts to enhance their livelihoods.
We also look forward to working with Member
States to ensure that our biodiversity ambitions are
further expanded in Kunming, China, next year.
Many of our biodiversity ambitions will focus on
marine biodiversity.
We also welcome the United Nations Food Systems
Summit to be held in 2021, which offers a unique
opportunity to bring the challenge of sustainable
fisheries and marine economics to the centre of our
discussions on food, food security and food systems.
Everything I mentioned places new responsibilities
on ocean States like Fiji to further strengthen their
stewardship of life both within and beyond their
maritime boundaries. Fiji will draw on those efforts
as it finalizes its national oceans policy, which is
currently under way, and shapes its climate law
domestically — both will be concluded early in 2021.
Bringing much of our work and progress on
oceans together is the United Nations Decade of Ocean
Science for Sustainable Development, coordinated
by UNESCO’s Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission. The Decade is crucial and critical, not
only for driving the SDGs but also in helping Member
States to frame the best of ocean management policies
going forward.
For ocean States, all of those efforts are amplified
within the agenda item being discussed today. I thank
the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea
and the Secretariat for their excellent work in keeping
our work on track during this difficult period.
Mr. Arrocha Olabuenaga (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): The ocean is central to a more resilient and
prosperous world. It is a pillar of the global economy,
a source of livelihoods for more than 3 billion people,
a hub for the exchange of goods, a source of renewable
energy and the Earth’s principal lung. In times of great
health, economic and environmental challenges, it is the
obligation of all leaders to make responsible decisions
in order to move towards a sustainable ocean economy.
Mexico is a country with a maritime vocation and
recognizes that oceans are vital to the national and
international economy, as well as being a fundamental
part of biological and environmental cycles. In that
connection, we reaffirm our commitment to building
a sustainable ocean economy and promoting a

A/75/PV.39

sustainable approach to marine resources through our
participation in the High-level Panel for a Sustainable
Ocean Economy.
We join the 14 other States on the Panel in a
call for action to ensure the health and wealth of our
oceans, as well as their regeneration, so that they can
deliver economic, environmental and social value to
provide solutions to global challenges as part of our
responsibility towards future generations. Our actions
must be guided by the principles of inclusion, legality,
protection, precaution, resilience, solidarity, alignment
and sustainability, based on the best available science
and knowledge.
Mexico is committed to managing the seas and
oceans in a 100 per cent sustainable, integrated,
transparent and accountable manner and urges other
Governments to join us in that great effort.
In line with our maritime vocation, Mexico
highlights the contributions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) in
the 25 years since its entry into force. The role the
Convention plays in establishing an equitable, balanced
and universal legal framework is perhaps one of its
most relevant contributions to the development and
implementation of the international law of the sea.
In that context, the negotiations in the framework of
the Intergovernmental Conference on a legally binding
instrument under the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea for the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction are becoming highly relevant, not only
from the perspective of the United Nations Decade of
Ocean Science for Sustainable Development and the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) but also in
terms of the opportunity to expand that equitable and
universal legal framework to ensure the sustainable
management of all resources in our oceans in a
comprehensive and holistic manner.
Mexico welcomes the efforts made, despite the
unusual circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease
pandemic, to guarantee space for continued discussions
in order to develop agreements among participants in
the Intergovernmental Conference. Mexico joins others
in thanking President Rena Lee and her facilitators,
as well as all other delegations and actors, for the
work carried out during the extended intersessional
period. Nevertheless, we consider it necessary to urge
all stakeholders to remain committed to reaching an

20-348643/20

A/75/PV.39

ambitious and realistic agreement for the fourth and
final session of the Intergovernmental Conference.
Turning now to another issue, ghost nets constitute
a form of plastic pollution and, through the Global Ghost
Gear Initiative, Mexico has committed to improving
the health of marine ecosystems, protecting marine
life, reducing harmful effects on populations of various
aquatic species and safeguarding human health and
livelihoods. Mexico formally joined the initiative in
November, in line with its obligations under UNCLOS
to prevent, reduce and control pollution of the marine
environment, the goals set by the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development and the SDGs,
in particular Goal 14, as well as in accordance with
the International Guidelines on Bycatch Management
and Reduction of Discards, in which our country
participates on a voluntary basis.
To demonstrate our commitment to the issue, a
virtual seminar on a global approach to tackle the issue
of ghost nets was held in November in the framework
of Mexico’s pro tempore presidency of the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States. Actions
are being coordinated to define a national diagnostic
process to identify hotspots with a high density of ghost
nets in order to discuss a future national action plan to
address the problem.
Mexico recognizes that illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing threatens the sustainability of
fisheries worldwide. It is estimated that annual global
losses due to illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing amount to between $10 billion and $23.5 billion
dollars. Such fishing also results in the destruction of
fishing grounds and habitats, a decline in the value of
fisheries, the disruption of food chains, increased risks
related to food security and the disruption of the social
cohesion of communities.
In that connection, there is an imminent need
to prevent overfishing and illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing to reduce pressure on our oceans
and build resilience in a changing climate. Mexico
remains committed and willing to develop responsible
and sustainable fisheries, protect natural resources and
combat illegal fishing. National legislation provides for
inspection and surveillance in waters under national
jurisdiction in order to ensure the conservation and
sustainable management and use of fishery and
aquaculture resources.
4/20

08/12/2020

Mexico also has in place a satellite monitoring
system for fishing vessels, a national programme of
on-board observers to monitor the fishing activities
of vessels flying its flag and carrying out activities
in the high seas and a comprehensive fisheries and
aquaculture inspection and monitoring programme to
combat illegal fishing.
Mexico has always championed cooperation and
stresses the need for effective international coordination
to achieve the fulfilment and implementation of
common objectives. For that reason, we are proactive
participants in the framework of various forums and
organizations, including regional fisheries management
organizations such as the Inter-American Tropical Tuna
Commission and the International Commission for the
Conservation of Atlantic Tunas.
Our country places special emphasis on promoting
the selectivity of fishing gear to minimize discards
and catches of juvenile organisms and non-targeted
species, with special attention to avoiding the bycatch
of associated species. That includes, as a priority, the
adoption of measures aimed at the accounting, marking,
numbering and monitoring of fish aggregating devices
as fishing gear with reduced selectivity and a high catch
rate of juvenile tunas.
Finally, within the framework of the High-level
Ocean Panel for a Sustainable Ocean Economy, Mexico
is promoting the formation of a blue food coalition
with the goal of ensuring that 100 per cent of oceanderived food, including fisheries and aquaculture, will
be sustainably and responsibly sourced and processed
by 2030, through the identification and implementation
of actions to curb illegal and unregulated fishing.
In conclusion, the issue of oceans and the law of
the sea boils down to this: great challenges require
great action. We have the opportunities — and,
more important, the responsibility — to undertake
substantive, innovative and bold transformations
that will allow us to move towards a sustainable blue
economy that will enable us to build a more equitable,
resilient, prosperous and harmonious future in harmony
with nature, in which the protection and conservation
of the marine environment and economic productivity
go hand in hand.
Mr. Kawase (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to take this opportunity to thank Ms. Natalie MorrisSharma of Singapore and Mr. Andreas Kravik of
Norway for their excellent coordination. Japan also
20-34864

08/12/2020

wishes to express its appreciation for the contributions
of our fellow Member States and the invaluable support
of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea.
Japan strongly believes in the universality and
comprehensiveness of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), which regulates the
freedom of navigation and overflight, the freedom on
the high seas and the protection and preservation of
the marine environment, and the peaceful settlement
of disputes. We are of the firm view that promoting
and developing a predictable maritime order based on
UNCLOS is both the responsibility of, and of benefit
to, the entire international community.
Therefore, Japan has decided to co-sponsor the
important resolution entitled “Oceans and the law of
the sea” (A/75/L.39), which confirms our commitment
to a rules-based maritime order and covers a wide range
of oceanic issues.
However, we have observed developments that
go against the rule of law governing the oceans of
the world.
Taking into consideration the universality and
comprehensiveness of UNCLOS, all maritime claims
must be based on the relevant provisions of UNCLOS,
which is the basis for determining legitimate rights and
interests over maritime zones. It is unacceptable to make
legal assertions as if there were a general international
law to override matters that are comprehensively
covered under UNCLOS.
All maritime disputes should be peacefully resolved
based on international law, in particular UNCLOS,
and not by force or coercion. From the perspective of
the rule of law, Japan believes that it is the common
understanding of all States Members of the United
Nations that the judgements given through legitimate
procedures must be complied with. In that regard, we
welcome the relevant paragraphs of the Chairman’s
statement at the fifteenth East Asia Summit, held
this year, in which serious concerns were expressed
on developments in the South China Sea, including
land reclamation activities and serious incidents, as
well as the need to pursue the peaceful resolution of
maritime disputes.
On the issue of illegal fishing, we deem that every
State should respect the sovereign rights of a coastal
State in its exclusive economic zone. Each State should
also fulfil its duties and responsibilities under the

A/75/PV.39

relevant international law by effectively exercising
its jurisdiction and control over ships flying its flag.
However, we have been witnessing actions that go
against that rules-based maritime order in recent years
all over the world. The States concerned must cooperate
to tackle those situations.
Concerning the coronavirus disease — one of the
hardest challenges we are facing today — Japan dealt
with infections among crew members and passengers
on the Diamond Princess cruise ship early this year.
Among the stakeholders, Japan, as a coastal State, took
the initiative to handle the situation in order to prevent
the virus from spreading. Facing various and unknown
challenges, including the spread of the virus by people
without clear symptoms, Japan strongly recognized the
necessity of cooperation and close coordination with
relevant States and international organizations.
Japan will continue cooperating with other States
that share its belief in the importance of the rule of law
as a universal value and will persistently make efforts
towards a free and open Indo-Pacific.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Japan’s wish that
the draft resolutions on oceans and the law of the sea
and on sustainable fisheries (A/75/L.40), which are the
result of cooperative work by Member States, will be
duly adopted by the General Assembly.
Mr. Valtýsson (Iceland): “The ocean, the blue
ocean, captures the mind; what lies beyond the
far horizon?”
Those lines from a classic Icelandic poem come to
mind when looking back at the year 2020. Ocean affairs
have always captured our minds, but at the beginning
of the year no one could have foreseen the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic lurking on the horizon,
let alone the dramatic effects it has had on our way of
living, working and thinking.
The pandemic has also taken its toll on international
cooperation. The year that was expected to be a grand
year of international ocean events, commitments,
conferences and treaty-making ended up as a year of
status quo for ocean affairs. Almost all international
events were postponed or cancelled, and negotiations
here at the United Nations on the draft resolutions
on oceans and the law of the sea (A/75/L.39) and on
sustainable fisheries (A/75/L.40) were limited to
technical updates. Iceland supported that pragmatic
approach and is a co-sponsor of both draft resolutions.

20-348645/20

A/75/PV.39

The COVID-19 situation, however, has also
brought about some positive outcomes. It has taught us
how to adapt and improve our navigation skills in the
virtual world. We have seen that it is possible to keep
international relations going during travel restrictions
and lockdowns, albeit in a very different form.
Our immense gratitude goes to the people who
have kept our work on ocean affairs going: the online
facilitators of the omnibus draft resolution on oceans
and the law of the sea, Ms. Natalie Morris-Sharma of
Singapore, and of the draft resolution on sustainable
fisheries, Mr. Andreas Kravik of Norway; the President
of the Intergovernmental Conference on a legally binding
instrument under the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction, Ambassador Rena Lee of Singapore, and
her facilitators and staff; the acting Director of the
Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea,
Mr. Vladimir Jares, and his able staff; and all the other
hardworking people who have kept the United Nations
boat afloat under exceptional circumstances.
The pandemic has also taught us a valuable lesson.
Cooperation, science and resilience will get us through
even the most serious difficulties. That is a lesson we
should treasure.
One thing has not changed during this extraordinary
year. The ocean is still the same. Oceans and the law
of the sea are as important as ever, and the need for
international cooperation in this field has never been
more urgent.
Oceans and the law of the sea are of the utmost
importance to Iceland, as fisheries have always been a
fundamental pillar of the Icelandic economy. We have
a long-standing policy of science-based environmental
protection and the sustainable use of living marine
resources, which can be maintained only in harmony
with other nations. We strive to be active and constructive
participants in international cooperation on oceans and
the law of the sea, while also emphasizing the regional
control and framework for negotiating stocks and
environmental protection of species.
The International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea
is a cornerstone of the international system of oceans
and the law of the sea, and Iceland is honoured that an
Icelandic judge, Mr. Tomas Heidar, will be running for
re-election to a seat on the Tribunal in 2023.
6/20

08/12/2020

The new agreement within the remit of World
Trade Organization, which prohibits fisheries subsidies
that contribute to overcapacity, overfishing and illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing, will be a welcome
step on our long journey towards worldwide sustainable
fisheries. Although we were not able to meet target 14.6
of the Sustainable Development Goals and conclude that
agreement by 2020, we look forward to its conclusion
in the near future.
There are mounting challenges in the field of
oceans and the law of the sea. According to the World
Meteorological Organization, the past decade was
the warmest on record, and climate change is melting
polar ice, elevating sea levels and affecting the marine
ecosystem. The Secretary-General calls the situation a
climate emergency, and indeed those changes are clearly
felt in my country, where we lose 4 billion tonnes of our
glaciers every year.
Iceland is willing to do its part to meet those
challenges and has committed to achieving carbon
neutrality by 2040 and cutting greenhouse-gas
emissions by 40 per cent by 2030 under the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change. We are in the process
of stepping up those commitments even further, as
indicated in the updated Icelandic climate action plan
of 2020.
During our current chairmanship of the Arctic
Council, Iceland has prioritized Arctic marine issues,
with an emphasis on plastic pollution and the blue
bioeconomy, as well as climate and green energy
solutions. The complex challenges of the oceans are
best addressed through science, and we welcome the
Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development,
2021-2030.
Although international cooperation on oceans and
the law of the sea has been less than expected this year,
we are grateful for the work that could still be executed.
We are also pleased that solutions were found and
designed to facilitate future work, such as the possibility
of holding virtual meetings for the Commission on
the Limits of the Continental Shelf in order for that
Commission to continue its important work.
Beyond the horizon, we hope to find a promising
new year packed with all the ocean commitments and
events that could not be held this year. Ocean affairs
continue to capture our minds, and Iceland looks
forward to continued and reinforced international
20-34864

08/12/2020

cooperation on the conservation and sustainable use of
the oceans.
Mr. Fodda (France) (spoke in French): France fully
aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of
the European Union and its member States (see A/75/
PV.38) and would like to make several comments in its
national capacity.
We would like to thank Singapore and Norway
for having facilitated the negotiations on the two draft
resolutions on our agenda (A/75/L.39 and A/75/L.40) in
the current unprecedented circumstances.
The United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea establishes a fundamental balance between the
freedoms, rights and obligations of States and users of
all the seas and oceans. Its adoption in 1982 constituted
a decisive milestone in the enactment of international
rules applicable to the seas and oceans. The intention
of its negotiators was indeed to cover all aspects of the
various marine spaces — their limits and related rights,
the rights of navigation and passage and the protection
and preservation of the marine environment — as well
as the settlement of disputes.
The annual draft resolution on the law of the sea,
which we support, is a reminder of the unique scope
and universal aim of the Convention. France is fully
committed to its respect and proper implementation.
As the sustainable governance of the oceans and
cooperation among States are essential for world peace
and stability, it is crucial to defend them and to ensure
that all activities carried out at sea conform with that
global legal framework.
The Convention has also clarified the rights and
obligations of coastal States and the legal regime
governing waters adjacent to their territory. We are
firmly committed to that regime, which is why we
recently made a point of recalling that the provisions of
parts II and IV of the Convention must be fully respected.
The Convention further provides that maritime
delimitations must be carried out in accordance with
international law “in a spirit of understanding and
cooperation”, and to that end the International Court
of Justice has developed a reference method that is
followed by the International Tribunal for the Law of
the Sea and arbitration tribunals.
The legal framework established by the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea can be

A/75/PV.39

further strengthened. In order to respond to one of the
main challenges of our time, France actively supports
the ongoing negotiation of a legally binding instrument
on the conservation and sustainable use of marine
biodiversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction
(BBNJ). Together with our partners in the European
Union, we are fully committed to the BBNJ process. We
will continue our efforts to ensure that the negotiations
lead to a strong, effective and universal treaty, bringing
real added value to current governance of the high
seas and providing the tools necessary for the effective
protection and sustainable use of its resources.
Finally, France would like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute to the outstanding work carried out in their
respective functions by the three bodies established
under the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea.
First, the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf is tirelessly pursuing its essential
work and must be provided with viable resources.
Secondly, we welcome the work of the International
Seabed Authority, which is currently working on the
elaboration of the mining code and the continued
development of environmental protection measures.
Thirdly, we welcome the work of the International
Tribunal on the Law of the Sea and the election of its
new judges.
As a State party to the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea, France is and will remain fully
committed to ensuring the full implementation of the
Convention and upholding the rights and freedoms
it guarantees.
Ms. Cerrato (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, my delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his reports on oceans and the law
of the sea (A/75/70 and A/75/340) and the reports on the
work of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole on the
Regular Process for Global Reporting and Assessment
of the State of the Marine Environment, including
Socioeconomic Aspects (A/75/362 and A/75/614).
We also wish to thank Singapore and Norway for
their leadership in the consultative processes of the
draft resolutions to be adopted on oceans and the law
of the sea (A/75/L.39) and on sustainable fisheries
(A/75/L.40), which my delegation supports.

20-348647/20

A/75/PV.39

As a State party to the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea since October 1993, Honduras
recognizes the Convention as the legal framework
within which all activities in the oceans and seas should
be carried out. It is also of strategic importance as the
basis for activities and cooperation at the national,
regional and global levels in the marine sector.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has affected
all nations of the world — perhaps most severely
those with the least resources and the most vulnerable
populations. Honduras is in an area at high risk for the
impacts of climate change, and in November we suffered
the consequences of two devastating hurricanes, Eta
and Iota. The year 2020 has been intense and will be
a difficult year to forget, as the consequences of the
phenomena we have experienced will last for some
time. We must work very hard to recover and prepare
for future events.
In that regard, my country calls for the redoubling
of efforts at the global level to counter climate change.
This crucial moment must be seized to ensure that the
solutions adopted to address the pandemic follow a
green approach in order to protect the heritage of future
generations and achieve a resilient recovery.
Honduras also wishes to stress the urgency
of mitigating the impacts of marine pollution,
water acidification, habitat destruction, watershed
degradation, overfishing, biodiversity loss, unregulated
aquaculture and sea-level rise.
My country’s priorities include continued work
on national, regional and international programmes
and strategies to eliminate the use of plastic and the
accumulation of plastic waste in the seas and oceans
in order to achieve a healthy marine environment. In
that context, this year Honduras had the honour to
participate as a founding member in launching the
Group of Friends to Combat Marine Plastic Pollution, a
special event celebrated on World Ocean Day.
Honduras reiterates the importance of concluding,
at the upcoming fourth session of the Intergovernmental
Conference, an ambitious legally binding instrument
under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine
biodiversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction in
order to implement Sustainable Development Goal
14, which will allow, inter alia, the establishment of
effective cross-sectoral marine protected areas to
maintain the global health of the oceans, as well as
8/20

08/12/2020

capacity-building and the transfer of marine technology
for developing countries. My country therefore urges
that the constructive intersessional work under way
continue so as to conclude the treaty negotiations as
soon as possible.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that concerted
action is still required in order to protect underwater
cultural heritage, as well as to achieve gender equality
and women’s empowerment in all ocean-related sectors.
Mr. Proskuryakov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation attaches great
importance to the development of the international law
of the sea and the discussion of maritime issues in the
General Assembly.
We would like to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his reports on oceans and
the law of the sea (A/75/70) and on sustainable
fisheries (A/75/340), which provide a sound basis
for a comprehensive analysis of the current situation
and determination of future objectives to safeguard
the rights and interests of States and protect the
marine environment.
The central instrument that ensures effective
intergovernmental cooperation on oceans is the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 1982 — a
uniquely important and universal international treaty.
As a major maritime Power, Russia has done, and will
continue to do its best to strengthen the authority and
integrity of the Convention.
The importance of the world’s oceans for
humankind is steadily increasing. New opportunities
for the use of its rich resources are emerging, and the
range of economic activities in the ocean is expanding,
pointing definitively to the need to protect the marine
environment and encourage States to cooperate in order
to effectively resolve urgent issues.
We also attach great importance to the
work of the bodies established under the
Convention — the International Tribunal for the Law of
the Sea, the Commission on the Limits of the Continental
Shelf and the International Seabed Authority.
The work of the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf is becoming more active each year
as a result of the increasing number of submissions
by States to determine the limits of their continental
shelves beyond 200 nautical miles. In that context, we
20-34864

08/12/2020

A/75/PV.39

support the provision of adequate resources for the
effective fulfilment of the Commission’s mandate.

is a need to focus on a qualitative outcome that will lead
to consensus-based decisions.

We also consider it important to continue seeking
optimal ways to improve the conditions of service of
the members of the Commission in view of its increased
workload. In that connection, we underscore the need
for those States that have nominated experts to serve
on the Commission to fulfil their commitments to
guarantee the participation of members in its work.

In connection with the upcoming plenary meeting
of the thirtieth Meeting of States Parties to the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, we again
wish to stress the importance of preserving the current
mandate of that forum, which is to resolve administrative
and budgetary issues relating to the functioning of the
bodies established under the Convention.

We note the role played by the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea in the settlement of
disputes concerning the interpretation or application
of the Convention. Three new judges were elected
to the Tribunal this year, and we are convinced that
their experience, authority and professionalism will
contribute to the dynamic and highly competent
performance of the Tribunal’s functions.

In conclusion, my delegation supports draft
resolutions A/75/L.39 and A/75/L.40, to be adopted
today. Allow me to express my gratitude to the
facilitators of the informal consultations on the omnibus
draft resolution on oceans and the law of the sea,
Ms. Natalie Morris-Sharma, and on the draft resolution
on sustainable fisheries, Mr. Andreas Kravik. We
have all had to work together in new and unfamiliar
circumstances. However, despite the various challenges,
technical difficulties and different time zones, thanks
to the valuable facilitation of the Division for Ocean
Affairs and the Law of the Sea, we were able to reach
an agreement on the texts of comprehensive and
important documents.

We note the successful cooperation under the 1995
Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation
and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks, and related instruments and
the corresponding establishment of a network of
regional fisheries management organizations. Since
the Agreement entered into force, it has clearly proven
to be a reliable instrument for regulating fisheries
issues beyond national jurisdictions, while taking
into account the balance between sustainable fishing
activities and preserving the marine environment.
We encourage States to work together to improve the
effectiveness of existing regional and subregional
fisheries management organizations.
An issue that deserves our particular attention is
the negotiation of a legally binding instrument on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond areas of national jurisdiction.
This year, due to the coronavirus pandemic, the fourth
session of the Intergovernmental Conference on that
topic was cancelled. The draft document prepared by
the President of the Intergovernmental Conference
contains a wide range of bracketed alternatives
reflecting the diverse views of States. We hope that it
will be possible to hold the rescheduled fourth session
of the Intergovernmental Conference next year, and
in that regard we call on delegations to maintain a
balanced and coherent approach. We believe that there

Mrs. Barba Bustos (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Like other developing countries, Ecuador has seen an
increase in threats and challenges to the sustainable
use of our oceans and their resources. In that regard,
we welcome the reports of the Secretary-General on
oceans and the law of the sea (A/75/70 and A/75/340),
which warn of those threats and challenges.
Among the most frequently encountered threats
to the sustainable use of resources and the protection
of marine areas is illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing. Challenges in that area include the coordination
of the progress of catch documentation systems and the
international records of fishing vessels, the adoption
and implementation of the Agreement on Port State
Measures of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations and tackling the use of high seas
fishing practices that do not comply with the obligations
set out in the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea and other international instruments applicable
to the conservation and management of straddling fish
stocks and highly migratory fish stocks, which are
found within exclusive economic zones and in areas
beyond and adjacent to them.
The effective management of those areas in the
medium and long term has resulted in increased fish

20-348649/20

A/75/PV.39

08/12/2020

catches in the surrounding fishing areas, along with
other benefits such as job protection and increased
income, improved resilience to the adverse effects
of climate change and the safeguarding of small
businesses and local cultures that are intimately linked
to the marine environment.

Ukraine is pleased to join many others in
co-sponsoring the two draft resolutions under agenda
item 76 (A/75/L.39 and A/75/L.40). I would also
like to express our appreciation for the excellent
stewardship demonstrated by the facilitators of the two
draft resolutions.

Ecuador believes that there is an urgent need to
bolster scientific research into the impact of fishing
in international waters adjacent to exclusive economic
zones on aquatic biodiversity within the safe ecological
limits of marine reserves, while taking into account that
many protected species do not recognize human-made
boundaries and therefore travel among areas within and
beyond national jurisdictions.

This year is unprecedented. The coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic has significantly
affected and hindered progress in achieving the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, including
Sustainable Development Goal 14, some targets of
which we expected to achieve in 2020. Recovery from
the pandemic is a complex process that requires action
in many areas, from health systems to climate change.
We should not forget about the role of seas and oceans
in our search for solutions to the current crisis.

The Galapagos Marine Reserve is home to a
unique and fragile ecosystem. Given the current health,
economic and social crisis and its severe consequences
for the implementation of our environmental policies
and commitments, it is urgent that the international
community provide adequate support, through a
revitalized multilateralism, to the efforts of various
Governments that are already contributing to the
protection of marine biodiversity and remain committed
to doing so. Such initiatives not only contribute to the
achievement of the current globally agreed targets on
the Sustainable Development Goals, especially Goal
14, but also build the necessary confidence to commit
to a new target on ocean protection, which will bring
many other benefits for global biodiversity.
In that connection, Ecuador looks forward to the
fourth session of the Intergovernmental Conference on
an international legally binding instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction, to be
held next year under the able leadership of Ambassador
Rena Lee.

Decreased human activity has had positive impacts
on certain marine species and ecosystems; however,
the health of the oceans and their resilience and
productivity continue to deteriorate. It is therefore of
paramount importance that we pay more attention to
those problems and take resolute steps to address them.
I would like to emphasize that international cooperation
and coordination are crucial for successfully addressing
the challenges facing the oceans.
We acknowledge the need to enhance ocean
governance as a cornerstone for preserving and
protecting the marine environment and biodiversity,
as well as ensuring peaceful relations between States.
The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS) establishes the overarching legal framework
within which all activities related to the oceans and
seas must be carried out. By establishing a legal
order for seas and oceans, the Convention continues
to contribute to peace and security and cooperation
and friendly relations among all nations, as well as to
sustainable development.

Finally, Ecuador expresses its appreciation to
Mr. Andreas Kravik of Norway and Ms. Natalie MorrisSharma of Singapore, facilitators of the draft resolutions
on sustainable fisheries and on oceans and the law of
the sea, respectively, both of which Ecuador supports.

The Convention requires States parties to settle by
peaceful means any dispute between them concerning
the interpretation or application of the Convention.
Consistent with Article 33 of the Charter of the
United Nations and article 279 of UNCLOS, Ukraine
has strived to peacefully resolve its dispute with the
Russian Federation.

Mr. Ilnytskyi (Ukraine): The delegation of Ukraine
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the observer
of the European Union (see A/75/PV.38). I would now
like to make a few remarks in my national capacity.

Since early 2014, Russia has engaged in numerous
blatant violations of Ukraine’s rights under UNCLOS
and other relevant rules and principles of international
law, unlawfully excluded Ukraine from exercising

10/20

20-34864

08/12/2020

its maritime rights in the Black Sea, the Sea of Azov
and the Kerch Strait, exploited Ukraine’s sovereign
resources in those waters for its own ends and usurped
Ukraine’s right to regulate its own maritime areas in
those waters.
Through those violations of international law,
Russia is, inter alia, stealing Ukraine’s offshore
hydrocarbons and fisheries resources, harming the
livelihoods of Ukrainian fishermen and interfering
with navigation, including the navigation of vessels
heading through the international Kerch Strait and
towards Ukraine’s Sea of Azov ports.
On 16 September 2016, Ukraine served a
notification and statement of claim on the Russian
Federation under annex VII to UNCLOS and initiated
a dispute concerning coastal State rights in the Black
Sea, the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait.
On 19 February 2018, Ukraine filed a memorial
with the International Tribunal for the Law of the
Sea, establishing that Russia had violated Ukraine’s
sovereign rights in the Black Sea, the Sea of Azov
and the Kerch Strait. On 21 February this year, the
Tribunal rejected Russia’s preliminary objection that
the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over Ukraine’s case and
determined that it would hear significant aspects of
Ukraine’s claims, including those related to Russia’s
violations of UNCLOS in the Kerch Strait and the Sea
of Azov.
Moreover, on 25 November 2018, Russia engaged
in a wave of UNCLOS violations by detaining
Ukrainian military vessels and the personnel on board
in the Black Sea and near the Kerch Strait. Such actions
constitute a grave violation of UNCLOS with regard to
the immunity of warships.
On 1 April 2019, in accordance with the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, Ukraine
notified the Russian Federation of a dispute concerning
the immunity of three naval vessels and 24 servicemen
on board. By the order dated 25 May 2019 of the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, Russia
was obliged to immediately return the vessels and the
24 servicemen to the custody of Ukraine. It took the
Russians almost half a year to complete that return.
Today Russia continues to violate UNCLOS by denying
the immunity of military vessels and continues to
prosecute servicemen.

A/75/PV.39

Let me recall in that context that a renewed
resolution entitled “Problem of the militarization of
the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol, Ukraine, as well as parts of the Black Sea
and the Sea of Azov” (resolution 75/29) was adopted
just yesterday by an overwhelming majority of Member
States (see A/75/PV.36).
The General Assembly once again called upon the
Russian Federation, inter alia, to refrain from impeding
the lawful exercise of navigational rights and freedoms,
exercised in accordance with applicable international
law, including provisions of UNCLOS, including but
not limited to closure of sea areas under the pretext of
military exercises in the Black Sea, the Sea of Azov and
the Kerch Strait.
The Russian Federation was also called upon to
return to Ukraine unconditionally and without delay
all equipment and weapons that were seized from the
vessels Berdyansk, Nikopol and the tugboat Yani Kapu
during the unjustified use of force by the Russian
Federation on 25 November 2018.
Amid the COVID-19 pandemic, we have to
redouble our efforts to achieve the targets of Sustainable
Development Goal 14, including through enhanced
international cooperation and coordination, increased
capacity-building and the transfer of technology to
developing States. In order to be cohesive, effective and
long-lasting, such efforts must be undertaken within
the context of the legal framework set out by UNCLOS.
In conclusion, I would like to express our gratitude
to the Secretariat and the Division for Ocean Affairs
and the Law of the Sea for their work and constant
support this year.
Mr. Hernández-Chávez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile wishes to thank the coordinators of the draft
resolutions on oceans and the law of the sea (A/75/L.39)
and sustainable fisheries (A/75/L.40) for their efforts
to arrive at balanced texts that allow for consensus
among a large number of Member States, which is
why my delegation decided to co-sponsor those draft
resolutions. We understand and support the fact that, at
this session, members opted for a technical update of
the draft resolutions. Nevertheless, Chile believes that
there is still work to be done to incorporate substantive
aspects, which we hope will continue to be promoted at
the next session.

20-3486411/20

A/75/PV.39

08/12/2020

Chile also takes note of and appreciates the report
of the Secretary-General (A/75/340), which provides
updates on the matters for consideration set out by the
General Assembly. Chile also acknowledges the work
carried out during this period by the Division for Ocean
Affairs and the Law of the Sea on the various tasks
assigned to it.

conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction. In that
connection, Chile regrets that the fourth session of the
Intergovernmental Conference could not be convened
during 2020 due to the coronavirus disease. Our country
hopes it will be held in August 2021, as provided for in
the draft resolution we hope to adopt today.

For Chile, the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) constitutes the cornerstone
of international law for marine affairs, as it is the legal
basis for the development of activities in the oceans and
establishes a framework for cooperation, collaboration
and understanding among States for the conservation of
the ocean, the protection of marine ecosystems and the
sustainable use of its resources.

We also commend the leadership of the President
of the Intergovernmental Conference, Ambassador
Rena Lee, who has made significant efforts to organize
informal intersessional work within certain parameters
that are highly relevant to delegations that — like
Chile — value the fact that decisions will be taken at
the Conference, at which all States will be represented
in line with the standards set out in resolution 72/249.

The legal certainty provided by UNCLOS
represents a fundamental step forward in international
law given that, among other important matters, it
codifies rules of customary international law. Its broad
acceptance by much of the international community
contributes to making UNCLOS a robust legal regime
for the oceans, facilitating broad consensus-building
and the consolidation of science-based understanding
to advance a sustainable ocean economy, with a balance
between environmental protection and conservation
and economic productivity and prosperity.

We hope that the new agreement will provide us
with the legal framework to ensure the conservation
and sustainable use of biodiversity in waters beyond
national jurisdiction, which will allow for, inter alia,
the establishment of protected marine areas in the
waters in question with the aim of improving the health
of the oceans worldwide.

The establishment of protected marine areas and
precise definitions of the rights enjoyed by coastal
States over them, as well as the establishment of the
legal status of marine spaces in the high seas and the
extended continental shelf, are other elements to which
Chile attaches particular importance. Certainty about
the marine areas that constitute the legal territory of
each State has had a positive impact, as it allows for
the establishment of effective measures to protect
biodiversity and marine ecosystems. For example, to
date Chile has established protected marine areas across
an area that constitutes 43 per cent of its exclusive
economic zone, and in that regard is committed to the
establishment of robust ocean governance.
At the current session, Chile wishes to highlight
five issues it believes are important in the coming years
in terms of the ocean agenda and that should continue to
receive the particular attention of the General Assembly
under the item of oceans and the law of the sea.
First, Chile stresses the importance of developing a
new legally binding international instrument under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the
12/20

Secondly, Chile hopes that the various actors within
the multilateral system will take advantage of the
Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development
in order to continue accumulating scientific knowledge
on the ocean, ocean sustainability and the uses and
functions of ocean ecosystems, which will help to
promote international understanding of a sustainable
ocean economy and ensure that science serves as
the basis for decision-making. Chile firmly believes
that ocean management should be informed by the
best available science and knowledge and assisted by
innovations and technologies.
Thirdly, we believe that ocean pollution, in
particular plastic pollution, is an issue that the
international community must consider seriously and
systemically. In order to combat such pollution, which
profoundly impacts our seas, Chile has undertaken
individual efforts, in particular by implementing a ban
on single-use plastic bags in supermarkets and shops as
of February 2019.
We appreciate that many other States are
implementing similar measures, including in the Latin
American and Caribbean region. Other ideas have been
suggested in recent years, such as a ban on single-use
plastics and even an international agreement to address
the challenges posed by plastic pollution. Chile believes
20-34864

08/12/2020

that those proposals merit serious reflection and is
willing to consider them jointly in the framework of the
United Nations Environment Assembly.
The creation of a Group of Friends to Combat Plastic
Pollution — an initiative spearheaded by Norway, the
Maldives and Antigua and Barbuda and comprising
more than 50 States and other stakeholders — confirms
the existence of the concern and political will to
move forward in addressing the problem through
multilateral commitments.
Fourthly, I wish to place on record Chile’s interest in
combating illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing.
Throughout 2020, Chile has expressed its concern
about the recurring presence of fleets of foreign fishing
vessels engaged in fishing activities in the high seas
adjacent to our territorial waters. We are concerned
about the risk to the conservation and sustainable use
of resources, and therefore call on all States to prevent,
deter and address illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing. To that end, it is critical to strengthen the
actions of regional fisheries organizations in order to
promote the implementation of conservation measures
that ensure the development of sustainable fisheries.
It is also necessary to eliminate fishing subsidies
that contribute to overfishing and overcapacity and
to illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing. To
that end, we call for the completion of negotiations
on fisheries subsidies in the framework of the World
Trade Organization, while recognizing that, in order to
achieve a satisfactory outcome, members must reach a
comprehensive agreement that takes into account the
sustainability of fisheries resources and the needs of
the communities that depend on them as sources of
food, employment and livelihoods.

A/75/PV.39

also thank the Division of Ocean Affairs and the Law of
the Sea for its valuable support throughout the process.
Indonesia underscores its appreciation for the
process and welcomes the smooth consultations
completed for both draft resolutions, especially amid
the unprecedented crisis of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19). As the largest archipelagic State and a
maritime nation, Indonesia is pleased to co-sponsor
both draft resolutions. We are of the view that both
draft resolutions, among other things, remain critical
for reiterating the importance of oceans and law of
the sea as well as sustainable fisheries issues, thereby
reflecting the global interest in the development of
ocean governance and stressing cooperation in the
fisheries sector.
However, it is also our regret that, due to the
current circumstances of the pandemic, we could not
hold substantive negotiations on either of the draft
resolutions this year. Nevertheless, my delegation
would like to highlight the following elements.
First, with respect to the draft resolution on oceans
and the law of the sea, we welcome a number of updates,
particularly with regard to the use of the voluntary trust
fund to temporarily facilitate the virtual participation
of members of the Commission and delegations from
developing States in the work of the Commission and
its subcommissions.

Finally, our country expresses its support for the
process to develop a post-2020 global biodiversity
framework under the Convention on Biological
Diversity. We hope that the international community
will commit to protecting 30 per cent of the ocean by
2030, thereby ensuring the long-term preservation of
the ocean and its ecosystems.

Indonesia also commends the incorporation in
the draft resolution of international references to the
challenges being faced by seafarers due to COVID-19,
namely, to the resolution adopted by the Maritime Safety
Committee of the International Maritime Organization
resolution entitled “Recommended action to facilitate
ship crew change, access to medical care and seafarer
travel during the COVID-19 pandemic”, and to the
letter from the Secretary-General to the President of
the thirtieth Meeting of States Parties to the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea regarding
the plight of seafarers resulting from the impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic.

Mr. Koba (Indonesia): At the outset, my delegation
would like to thank Ms. Natalie Morris-Sharma of
Singapore and Mr. Andreas Kravik of Norway for
their able leadership in coordinating the informal
consultations and communications on the draft
resolutions on oceans and the law of the sea (A/75/L.39)
and sustainable fisheries (A/75/L.40), respectively. We

We are also delighted to announce in that regard
that Indonesia, with the support of Member States,
initiated the General Assembly resolution entitled
“International cooperation to address challenges faced
by seafarers as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic to
support global supply chains” (resolution 75/17), which
was adopted last week (see A/75/PV.32).

20-3486413/20

A/75/PV.39

08/12/2020

It is worth highlighting that the shipping
industry — in which seafarers play an essential
role — continues to serve as the backbone of the
international economy and global supply chains,
transporting more than 80 per cent of world trade.
Maritime transport is also imperative for ensuring the
delivery of vital medical supplies, food and basic goods
that are critical to the COVID-19 response and recovery.

relationship among States in their use of the ocean and
has made a major contribution to international peace
and security. The Convention has stood the test of time
and remains relevant for addressing current challenges.
As the constitution of the oceans”, it is indeed a
striking illustration of the collective contribution of the
international community to the vision of a more fair
and equal society.

The adoption by consensus of resolution 75/17 shows
once again the commitment of the General Assembly
to recognizing and supporting the role of essential
workers around the world, including seafarers, who
have committed themselves and are risking their lives
to protect the health, safety and well-being of others.

One of the most significant outcomes envisaged in
the Convention is the establishment of the International
Seabed Authority to control and administer the seabed
and its mineral resources beyond the limits of national
jurisdiction for the benefit of humankind as a whole.
The members of the Authority have been working
together to build a solid institutional architecture and
an ever-growing regulatory framework for the oversight
of international seabed activities, which currently
constitutes the most comprehensive and equitable
regime for governing access to, and the utilization of,
mineral resources and the protection of the marine
environment in areas beyond national jurisdiction.
Against that backdrop, four key issues relating to the
work of the Authority may be highlighted.

Secondly, with respect to the technical updates in
the draft resolution on sustainable fisheries, we fully
understand that the current unprecedented challenge
has led to the postponement of a number of important
events, including the postponement until 2022 of the
Review Conference of the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks, and related instruments, the postponement
until the second half of 2021, if conditions allow, of
the fifteenth round of informal consultations of States
Parties to the Agreement and the postponement of other
events and meetings.
Finally, Indonesia reaffirms its full support for,
and commitment to, the objectives, purposes and
universal principles enshrined in UNCLOS, as well as
the 1995 Agreement.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the International Seabed Authority.
Ms. Navoti (International Seabed Authority): It is
my great honour to deliver this statement on behalf of His
Excellency Mr. Michael W. Lodge, Secretary-General
of the International Seabed Authority, who could not be
present today in person to deliver his speech.
In the context of the annual debate on oceans and
the law of the sea, it is always relevant to recall the
contemporary importance for orderly international
relations of the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea. The Convention has established certainty
in the law of the sea and brought peace and order
to the oceans. It has also provided for an equitable
14/20

First, the work of the Authority has continued
relentlessly, notwithstanding the difficult context
of the pandemic situation. The Legal and Technical
Commission met remotely during the month of July and
managed to complete its agenda. The Commission made
progress in its work on draft standards and guidelines
for deep seabed mining operations. A set of draft
standards and guidelines were subsequently released for
stakeholder consultation. The Commission continues
to work on additional draft standards and guidelines,
which will be issued for consultation when ready.
The Finance Committee also met remotely on several
occasions between May and October and successfully
completed its agenda, including by recommending to
the Authority’s Assembly and Council a budget for the
biennium 2020-2021.
The Authority’s Assembly and Council also took
the necessary measures to resume their work and
opened the second part of the twenty-sixth session. To
that end, we drew heavily on the processes adopted by
the General Assembly and the Meeting of States Parties
to the Convention, including by resorting to the tool of
advancing work by the silence procedure in view of the
current extraordinary circumstances. In that context,
Ambassador Denys Wibaux of France was duly elected
President of the Authority’s Assembly for the twenty20-34864

08/12/2020

sixth session, and the retired Rear Admiral Mohammad
Khurshed Alam of Bangladesh was elected as President
of the Authority’s Council.
The Authority’s Assembly and Council are steadily
progressing towards completing their respective
programmes of work for the remainder of 2020,
centred around time-sensitive agenda items that need
to be disposed of before the end of the year. All other
agenda items have been postponed to 2021. In the case
of the Council, that includes continued work on the
draft exploitation regulations and the issue of the next
election of the Legal and Technical Commission.
Secondly, as mentioned at the past few sessions of
the General Assembly, the priority task of the Authority,
as identified by its Council, is to develop regulations for
the exploitation of marine minerals in the international
seabed area. Before the pandemic situation unfolded
across many parts of the world, the Council was able
to meet earlier in the year during the first part of the
twenty-sixth session. In that context, it continued its
consideration of the draft regulations on exploitation as
recommended by the Legal and Technical Commission.
The draft regulations, which have been developed over
several years, have already undergone many rounds of
global stakeholder consultations.
The Council also adopted a decision on working
methods for advancing discussions on the draft
regulations on exploitation, including the establishment
of three informal working groups to address some of
the issues identified as requiring further in-depth
discussions — the protection and preservation of the
marine environment; inspection, compliance and
enforcement; and institutional matters. As previously
mentioned, the work of the Council on the draft
regulations has been suspended until 2021.
Thirdly, I am pleased to draw the attention of
the General Assembly to important progress in the
implementation of the strategy to develop additional
regional environmental management plans. The
development process of regional environmental
management plans, which the Council decided to
undertake under the auspices of the Authority, serves as
a tangible expression of the Authority’s commitment to
the protection of marine environment of the international
seabed area. It is also another example of the application
of the precautionary approach by the Authority in
fulfilling its mandate under the Convention.

A/75/PV.39

The Secretariat has launched an ambitious
programme of online expert workshops to be completed
by the end of the year. In that connection, an online
workshop on the development of a regional environmental
management plan in the North-West Pacific was held
recently from 26 October to 6 November. Similarly,
an online workshop on the development of a regional
environmental management plan for the international
seabed area of the northern Mid-Atlantic Ridge, with a
focus on polymetallic sulphides deposits, was held from
23 November to 4 December. The Government of India
has also communicated its intention to host a workshop
on the development of a regional environmental
management plan for the Indian Ocean triple junction
ridge and nodule-bearing province in 2021.
The outcomes of those expert workshops will not
only contribute to creating a significant body of new
scientific work that will help to protect the marine
environment but will also provide a robust scientific and
technical basis for the work of the Legal and Technical
Commission in preparing its recommendations on the
development of regional environmental management
plans for consideration by the Authority’s Council.
Fourthly, in the light of its mandate on marine
scientific research under the Convention, the Authority
has developed an action plan to formalize and organize
its contribution to the United Nations Decade of Ocean
Science for Sustainable Development. Given that the
Decade will formally begin in 2021, the adoption of
the action plan has been identified by the Authority’s
Assembly as one of the priority matters requiring a
decision before the end of the year.
We also take this opportunity to express our sincere
gratitude to the Government of Argentina, which is
also chairing the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission (IOC) of UNESCO, for acting as champion
of the Authority’s action plan. We look forward to
working with Argentina and other willing partners,
including UNESCO and its IOC, on the implementation
of the action plan.
In conclusion, the Secretary-General wishes
to reaffirm his commitment to ensuring that the
provisions of the Convention are implemented on the
basis of equity and for the benefit of all humankind. He
therefore extends his sincere appreciation to the UnderSecretary-General for Legal Affairs and the Division
for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea for their
cooperation and the support extended to the Authority.

20-3486415/20

A/75/PV.39

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 76 and its
sub-items (a) and (b).
Before proceeding further, I should like to remind
members that action on draft resolution A/75/L.39 is
postponed to a later date to allow time for the review
of its programme budget implications by the Fifth
Committee. The Assembly will take action on the draft
resolution as soon as the report of the Fifth Committee
on its programme budget implications is available.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.40, entitled “Sustainable fisheries,
including through the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks, and related instruments”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat to make an oral statement.
Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The following statement
is made in the context of rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraphs 57, 58, 60, 63, 210
and 249 of draft resolution A/75/L.40, the General
Assembly would take the following actions.
The General Assembly would recall that the
resumed Review Conference agreed to keep the
Agreement under review through the resumption of
the Review Conference at a date not earlier than 2020;
note the agreement at the fourteenth round of informal
consultations of States parties to the Agreement that
the Review Conference should be resumed in 2021;
and take note of the decision of States Parties to the
Agreement, through a consultation by correspondence
conducted by the Chair of the fifteenth round of
Informal Consultations of States Parties to the
Agreement, to postpone the resumption of the Review
Conference on the Agreement to 2022 and invite the
General Assembly to take note of the decision and take
any appropriate subsequent steps.
The General Assembly would in that regard request
the Secretary-General to resume the Review Conference,
convened pursuant to article 36 of the Agreement, in
New York for one week in the first half of 2022, with
a view to assessing the effectiveness of the Agreement
16/20

08/12/2020

in securing the conservation and management of
straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks,
and to render the necessary assistance and provide such
services as may be required for the resumption of the
Review Conference.
The General Assembly would recall its request, in
paragraph 60 of resolution 74/18, that the SecretaryGeneral submit to the resumed Review Conference an
updated report, prepared in cooperation with the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and with the assistance of an expert consultant to
be hired by the Division to provide information and
analysis on relevant technical and scientific issues
to be covered in the report, to assist the Review
Conference in discharging its mandate under article 36,
paragraph 2, of the Agreement; and would also in that
regard reiterate its request to the Secretary-General to
develop and circulate to States and to regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements in a
timely manner a voluntary questionnaire regarding the
recommendations made by the Review Conference in
2016, taking into account the specific guidance to be
proposed at the fifteenth round of informal consultations
of States parties to the Agreement in 2021.
The General Assembly would request the SecretaryGeneral to convene the fifteenth round of informal
consultations of States parties to the Agreement, if
conditions allow, for three days in the second half of
2021: two days to focus on the topic “Implementation
of an ecosystem approach to fisheries management”
and one day to serve as a preparatory meeting for the
resumed Review Conference.
The General Assembly would request the
Secretary-General to convene, in the second half of
2022, with full conference services, without prejudice
to future arrangements, the two-day workshop that
was to have been held in 2020 pursuant to resolution
73/125, in order to discuss the implementation of
paragraphs 113, 117 and 119 to 124 of resolution
64/72, paragraphs 121, 126, 129, 130 and 132 to 134 of
resolution 66/68 and paragraphs 156, 171, 175, 177 to
188 and 219 of resolution 71/123, and to invite States,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and other relevant specialized agencies, funds
and programmes, subregional and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements, other
fisheries bodies, other relevant intergovernmental
bodies and relevant non-governmental organizations
20-34864

08/12/2020

and relevant stakeholders, in accordance with United
Nations practice, to attend the workshop.
The General Assembly would note the desire to
further improve the efficiency of and the effective
participation of delegations in the informal consultations
concerning the annual General Assembly resolution
on sustainable fisheries; decide that the informal
consultations on that resolution will be held in a single
round of consultations in November for a period of
six days; request the Secretary-General to provide
support to the consultations through the Division; and
invite States to submit proposals for inclusion in the
text of the resolution to the Coordinator of the informal
consultations no later than five weeks before the start
of the consultations.
Pursuant to the request contained in paragraphs
57 and 58 of the draft resolution, it is envisaged
that the resumed Review Conference in New York
would convene for one week in the first half of 2022,
comprising 10 meetings, one in the morning and one
in the afternoon for five days, with interpretation in
all six languages. That would constitute an addition to
the meetings workload of the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management in 2022 and
entail additional non-recurrent resource requirements
in the amount of $78,000 in 2022 under section 2,
“General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
Affairs and Conference Management”.
Furthermore, pursuant to the request contained in
paragraph 210 of the draft resolution, it is envisaged
that the workshop to be convened in New York in
the second half of 2022 would be comprised of four
meetings: one in the morning and one in the afternoon
for two days, with interpretation in all six languages.
That would constitute an addition to the meetings
workload of the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management in 2022 and entail additional
non-recurrent resource requirements in the amount of
$22,000 in 2022.
The dates for the meetings mentioned would have
to be determined in consultation with the Department
for General Assembly and Conference Management.
With regard to paragraph 63, the fifteenth round
of informal consultations of States Parties to the
Agreement would be serviced on an if-available basis.
Likewise, with regard to paragraph 249, the informal
consultations on sustainable fisheries would be serviced
on an if-available basis.

A/75/PV.39

In addition, the requests for documentation contained
in paragraphs 57, 58 and 210 would constitute an addition
to the documentation workload of the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management in New
York of eight pre-session documents with a total word
count of 52,800 words, three in-session documents with
a total word count of 2,200 words, and two post-session
documents with a total word count of 26,500 words,
in all six languages, in 2022. Additional non-recurrent
requirements for documentation would arise in 2022
in the amount of $261,400 under section 2, “General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council Affairs
and Conference Management”.
Furthermore, pursuant to the request contained in
paragraph 60, it is estimated that a non-recurrent amount
of $22,000 for consultancy services would be required
under section 8, “Legal Affairs”. The expert consultant
would assist in the preparation of the report to the
resumed Review Conference, in particular by providing
information and analysis on the relevant scientific and
technical issues to be covered in the report.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly
adopt draft resolution A/75/L.40, additional resource
requirements estimated in the amount of $426,800
would be included in the proposed programme budget
for 2022, under section 2, “General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council Affairs and Conference
management”, section 8, “Legal Affairs” and section
36, “Staff Assessment”, to be offset by the amount of
$43,400 under income section 1, “Income from Staff
Assessment”.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/75/L.40 and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/75/L.40: Angola, Austria,
Bulgaria, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Fiji, Georgia, Hungary, Indonesia, Latvia, Lithuania,
Maldives, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Palau, Panama,
Poland, Romania, Samoa, Tonga and Ukraine.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.40?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/89).

A/75/L.40

was

adopted

20-3486417/20

A/75/PV.39

The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of position on the resolution
just adopted, I would like to remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Yakut (Turkey): Turkey joined the consensus
on resolution 75/89, on sustainable fisheries, because
Turkey is fully committed to the conservation,
management and sustainable use of marine living
resources and attaches great importance to regional
cooperation to that end. However, Turkey dissociates
itself from the references made in the resolution to
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
and the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of
the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to
the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, to which it
is not a party. Those references should therefore not be
interpreted as a change in the legal position of Turkey
with regard to those instruments.
Mr. Guerra Sansonetti (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We express our
appreciation to Mr. Andreas Kravik of Norway for
facilitating the negotiations on resolution 75/89.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is not a State
party to the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea, or to the Agreement for the Implementation
of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to
the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks.
Therefore, the norms contained therein are not
applicable to my country either under customary
law or international custom, except for those that the
Venezuelan State has expressly recognized or will
recognize in future by incorporating them into national
legislation. Moreover, the reasons that prevented the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela from becoming a
party to those instruments remain unchanged.
The fisheries and aquaculture sector is a priority in
our national development plan, one objective of which
is the promotion of fisheries development. Venezuela
reiterates its commitment to applying the principles
of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and chapter 17 of Agenda 21, adopted by
18/20

08/12/2020

the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development in 1992.
At the same time, Venezuela is a party to various
international instruments promoting the preservation
and organization of fisheries. Similarly, our national
development plan is complemented by a broad set
of regulations allowing us to rely on programmes
aimed at achieving the conservation, protection and
management of marine biological resources, while
promoting their responsible and sustainable use in
a way that takes into account, inter alia, the relevant
biological, economic, food security, social and cultural
and commercial considerations.
Venezuelan fisheries law prohibits bottom
trawling, thereby establishing a sanctions regime for
non-compliance with conservation and management
measures, including measures for the control of
vessels flying the national flag and the monitoring of
fishing activity, including a system for inspecting and
monitoring their operations on the high seas that relays
pertinent data to the body responsible for fisheries
management, which makes it possible to determine the
exact geographical location in which fishing operations
are being carried out and whether they are in compliance
with the regulations established by law.
For the sake of consensus, our delegation joined in
the adoption of resolution 75/89. However, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela expresses reservations with
regard to its content, as it is not a party to the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea or to the
Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation
and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks.
Mr. Cuellar Torres (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
The Colombian delegation wishes to express its sincere
appreciation to Mr. Andreas Kravik of Norway for his
outstanding work as coordinator of resolution 75/89, on
sustainable fisheries. From the time of his assumption
of the role of facilitator, he conducted the discussions
in a dignified, transparent and constructive spirit that
is reflected in the text we just adopted.
Humankind has been faced this year with a unique
and enormous challenge due to the outbreak of the
coronavirus disease pandemic, which has changed even
the way we interact with oceans and fisheries. That
situation led Member States to take the decision to
20-34864

08/12/2020

postpone substantive discussions on the resolution just
adopted, which is why we considered only the relevant
technical updates.
However, while acknowledging the valuable
contribution represented by the resolution, my
delegation recognizes that it contains formulations
that the Colombian Government does not share with
respect to the 1982 United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), such as the view that the
Convention should be the only regulatory framework
governing activities conducted in the oceans.
Consequently, the resolution and our participation
in the process of its adoption shall not be considered
or interpreted to imply the express or tacit acceptance
by the Colombian State of the provisions contained
in UNCLOS. Colombia carries out its activities in
the marine environment in strict compliance with the
various international commitments that it has expressly
adopted or accepted and takes this opportunity to
reiterate that it has not ratified UNCLOS, and therefore
the provisions therein are neither enforceable nor
opposable for Colombia, except those that it has
expressly adopted or accepted.
The constructive spirit that guides our country on
matters pertaining to oceans and the law of the sea and
sustainable fisheries is based on our firm conviction
that all nations have a commitment and responsibility to
protect the sea and its resources, extensive biodiversity
and ecosystems, given that a sustainable future for the
world largely depends on the sea. Colombia is prepared
to work with other nations on the challenges facing
our oceans and to ensure that they are clean, healthy,
resilient, productive, predictable, accessible and safe.
For those reasons, Colombia expresses its
reservation with regard to any mention in the resolution
of the Convention as the only regulatory framework
that regulates activities in the oceans. We reaffirm that
we do not consider ourselves bound by its content.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position on the resolution
just adopted.
The exercise of the right of reply has been
requested. I remind members that statements in the
exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes
for the first intervention and to five minutes for the
second intervention and should be made by delegations
from their seats.

A/75/PV.39

Mr. Liu Yang (China) (spoke in Chinese): During
the current debate, the representatives of a number of
countries made irresponsible comments concerning the
South China Sea that China firmly opposes.
The United Nations is not the proper place to discuss
the South China Sea issue, but China must respond to
the rhetoric of those countries.
China’s position on the South China Sea has been
consistent and clear. China’s territorial sovereignty
and maritime rights and interests in the South China
Sea have an adequate historical and legal basis. China
has always been committed to resolving territorial
and jurisdictional disputes through negotiations with
the countries directly involved. China is committed
to working with members of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) on the joint
preservation of peace and stability in the South China
Sea and to maintaining friendly relations with its
neighbouring countries.
At present, thanks to the joint efforts of China and
the ASEAN countries, the situation in the South China
Sea remains stable in general. China and the ASEAN
countries are fully and effectively implementing the
Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China
Sea, while engaging vigorously in maritime cooperation
and advancing consultations on the Code of Conduct
in the South China Sea. Countries in the region are
striving to develop regional rules for joint participation,
joint compliance and shared responsibility. We hope
that all parties, especially countries outside the region,
will respect that.
The representatives of a number of countries have
made patently false comments that seek to mislead.
China would like to make its relevant positions known
in order to right those wrongs.
First, with respect to the freedom of navigation in
the South China Sea, the South China Sea is currently
one of the safest and freest maritime passageways in the
world. About 50 per cent of merchant vessels and one
third of global maritime trade passes through the South
China Sea. Each year, more than 100,000 merchant
vessels pass through the South China Sea
Indeed, the freedom of navigation conferred by
international law has never been a problem in the South
China Sea. What we should really guard against is the
use of the freedom of navigation by some countries as
a pretext to deploy warships and military aircraft in

20-3486419/20

A/75/PV.39

08/12/2020

the South China Sea as a way to flex their muscles and
threaten the sovereignty and security of coastal States.
All parties should firmly oppose that.

Ms. Ruhama (Malaysia): My delegation has taken
note of the statements made by several delegations
concerning the South China Sea.

Secondly, with respect to the so-called South China
Sea arbitration award, it should be emphasized that the
Arbitral Tribunal violated the principle of State consent
and tried the case ultra vires. There were obvious
mistakes in the determination of facts and the application
of the law, and the judgment violated the law. As such,
the award is null and void and not binding. China does
not accept and did not participate in that arbitration.
China does not accept or recognize the so-called
arbitration and will not accept any proposals or actions
based on that award. Some countries praise the South
China Sea arbitration award from time to time to serve
their own political purposes. To properly address the
South China Sea issue, the only practical and effective
approach is through negotiations and consultations.

I wish to place on record that Malaysia’s position
on the South China Sea issue, which is based on
its principles, remains unchanged. Owing to the
complexity and sensitivity of the South China Sea
issue, Malaysia is of the view that it must be managed
in a peaceful and rational manner through dialogue
and consultations, utilizing the appropriate forums and
diplomatic channels.

Thirdly, with respect to rights and interests in the
South China Sea, as a State party to the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, China enjoys the
legal rights conferred upon it by the Convention. It
should be noted, however, that the Convention does not
exhaust all the rules of the law of the sea. As stated in
the preamble of the Convention, matters not regulated
by the Convention continue to be governed by the rules
and principles of general international law.
Fourthly, with respect to territorial sovereignty in
the South China Sea, that does not fall within the scope
of the law of the sea. China’s territorial sovereignty and
maritime rights and interests in the South China Sea,
including its territorial sea baseline in the South China
Sea and its historical rights in the South China Sea, are
in line with international law and international practice.
Some countries have mistakenly exaggerated the role
of the Convention, which constitutes an erroneous
interpretation and application of international law.
Peace and stability in the South China Sea is the
common aspiration and expectation of the countries in
the region. China will continue to work with ASEAN
countries to build the South China Sea into a sea of
peace, a sea of friendship and a sea of cooperation.
We hope that all parties will view the South China Sea
issue objectively and rationally and play a constructive
role in that regard, while respecting and supporting the
efforts of the countries in the region to maintain peace
and stability in the South China Sea.

20/20

Malaysia firmly holds that matters relating to
the South China Sea must be resolved peacefully and
constructively in accordance with the universally
recognized principles of international law, including
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Ms. Gandini (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): In
response to the statement delivered by a Member State
in the current debate on oceans and the law of the sea,
Argentina wishes to state the following.
Argentina’s request during the preparation of
the second World Ocean Assessment, in line with its
communications submitted in a timely fashion to
the Secretariat, was that editorial directive ST/CS/
SER.A/42, of 3 August 1999, of the United Nations
Secretariat, which is applicable to all documents of the
Organization, should be complied with.
Mr. Proskuryakov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Regrettably, the delegation of Ukraine
once again expressed a number of politicized clichés,
unnecessarily complicating this constructive dialogue.
With regard to the maritime claims raised, we do
not consider them relevant to the agenda item under
discussion and do not consider the General Assembly
to be the appropriate forum for resolving the issue.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the exercise of the right of reply.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 76?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 76 and its sub-item (a).
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

20-34864
