RITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-THIRD

NEW

COUNCIL
RECORDS

YEAR

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2088)

. , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , q. . . . . . . . . . . . .

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in Namibia:
Report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to paragraph 2 of Security
Council resolution 43 1 (1978) (S/12827) . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2088thMEETING
Held in New York
fiesident: Mr. Ilja HULINSKk’

on Saturday,

30 September

(Czechoslovakia).

1978, at 10.30 a.m.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2087th meeting,
I invite the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia and the other members of the delegation to be
seated at the Council table.

Resent: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Venezuela.

At the invitation of the President, Miss Konie (President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took places at the Council table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2088)
4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I also
invite Mr. Nujoma, to whom the Council extended an
invitation at the 2087th meeting under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure, to take a place at the
Council table.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Namibia:
Report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant
to paragraph 2 of Security Council resolution
431 (1978) (S/12827)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nujoma (President
of the South West Africa People’s Organization) took a
place at the Council table.

Zhe meeting was called to order at Il. 2.5 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
first speaker is the President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, on whom I now call.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
Report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to
paragraph 2 of Security Council resolution 431 (1978)
(S/12827)

6. Miss KONIE (President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia): Allow me initially to express the sincere
appreciation of the delegation of the United Nations
Council for Namibia for this opportunity to address the
Security Council in its deliberations on Namibia at this
critical stage of the efforts of the United Nations in
fulfilling the solemn commitment made in 1966. On that
occasion, the General Assembly terminated the Mandate
exercised by South Africa over Namibia and assumed direct
responsibility for the Territory until independence.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2087th meeting,
I invite the representatives of Benin, Botswana, the Sudan
and Zambia to take the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

7. I should like, Mr. President, to congratulate you on
your presidency on the occasion of this meeting of the
Council, the consequences of which may so profoundly
affect the destiny of the Namibian people. I am certain that
your wise and experienced guidance will contribute to a
solution in full conformity with the aspirations of the
Namibian people to self-determination and genuine independence in a united Namibia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Boya (Benin),
Mr. Tlou (Botswana), Mr. Bakr (Sudan) and Mr. Mwale
(Zambia) took the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): In
addition, I have received a letter from the representative of
Guinea, in which he asks to be invited to participate in the
discussion. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite him to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote, in conformity
with the provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

8. Before I go further, allow me to take this opportunity
on behalf of the United Nations Council for Namibia to
express our deep sorrow at the death of His Holiness Pope
John Paul I.
9. The question of Namibia has had a long and frustrating
history in the United Nations. The refusal of South Africa
to abide by the decisions of the General Assembly and of

At the invitation of the Besident, Mr. Yansane (Guinea)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber,
1

with all parties concerned, with a view to establishing the
necessary conditions so as to enable the people of Namibia,
freely and with strict regard to the principle of human
equality, to exercise their right to self-determination and
independence, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations. At the same time, the Council called on the
Government of South Africa to co-operate fully with the
Secretary-General in the implementation of the resolution.
The efforts of the Secretary-General were not successful
and, by its resolution 342 (1973), the Council decided to
discontinue further efforts on the basis of resolution
309 (1972).

the International Court of Justice have posed the Organization a continuous challenge to its authority and prestige.
The refusal of South Africa to respond to the initiatives of
the United Nations regarding its withdrawal from Namibia
led the General Assembly in 1966 to terminate the Mandate
exercised by South Africa under the League of Nations.
The Assembly, by its resolution 2145 (XXI), assumed
direct responsibility for the Territory until independence.
In the following year the question of Namibia assumed the
status of a major question in the United Nations by virtue
of the convening of a special session of the General
Assembly devoted to the question of Namibia. By its
resolution 2248 (S-V), the Assembly established the United
Nations Council for Namibia with the responsibility of
administering the Territory until independence. From 1967
until 1978, when the General Assembly convened another
special session to deal exclusively with the question of
Namibia, South Africa has continuously refused to accept
the demand of the United Nations that it should withdraw
from the Territory to enable the United Nations to
supervise and control elections in order to transfer power to
he legitimate representatives of the Namibian people.

13. The efforts of the United Nations throughout the
decade to obtain the withdrawal of the illegal presence of
South Africa from Namibia have continually met with
failure as a consequence of the intransigence of South
Africa. During the same period, the Namibian people,
frustrated in all their attempts to achieve self-determination
and national independence by peaceful means, had no
alternative but to resort to armed struggle, initiated in
August 1966 under the leadership of SWAPO.

10. At its ninth special session, the General Assembly
adopted a Declaration on Namibia and a Programme of
Action in Support of Self-Determination and National
Independence for Namibia [resolution S-9/2] in which it
reiterated that Namibia was the direct responsibility of the
United Nations until genuine self-determination and national independence were achieved in the Territory and, for this
purpose, reaffirmed the mandate given to the United
Nations Council for Namibia as the legal Administering
Authority for Namibia until independence. The Assembly
reaffirmed, furthermore, the inalienable rights of the
Namibian people to self-determination, freedom and national independence in a united Namibia, in accordance
with the Charter and as declared in its resolutions
1514 (XV) and 2145 (XXI), as well as in its subsequent
resolutions and those of the Security Council relating to
Namibia, and the legitimacy of their struggle by all means
at their disposal against the illegal occupation of Namibia
by South Africa.

14. The armed struggle of the Namibian people under
SWAP0 has imposed on Namibian patriots enormous
sacrifices. These sacrifices have been recognized throughout
the years by the Namibian people, whose support for
SWAP0 has constantly increased. In spite, of all the
destructive propaganda by the enemies of the people of
Namibia, Namibians, other Africans and all peace-loving
peoples of the world have increasingly come to recognize
SWAP0 as the sole and authentic representative of the
Namibian people in their struggle to achieve selfdetermination, freedom and genuine independence in a
united Namibia. However, even today there are still those
who, for unclear ends, attempt to deny to SWAP0 the
credentials which have been given to it by the Organization
of African Unity and by the United Nations in recognition
of the tremendous sacrifices made by SWAP0 for the
self-determination and independence of Namibia.
15. The General Assembly, in recognizing SWAP0 as the
sole and authentic representative of the Namibian people,
has also been guided by the considered view of the majority
of the Members. The Declaration adopted at its ninth
special session, reaffirmed its full support for the armed
liberation struggle of the Namibian people under the
leadership of SWAPO, its sole and authentic representative.
It further expressed its conviction that the intensive armed
struggle by the Namibian people continues to be a decisive
factor in the efforts to achieve self-determination, freedom
and national independence in a united Namibia. The
Assembly commended the valiant people of Namibia, under
the leadership of SWAPO, for having intensified the armed
struggle for the liberation of their country from illegal
occupation by South Africa. It also supported the political
and diplomatic efforts of SWAP0 to secure genuine
independence for Namibia in accordance with all the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, and commended that organization for its
willingness to enter into negotiations for the achievement
of genuine independence for Namibia in conformity with
resolution 385 (1976) in its entirety. The Assembly has

11. The General Assembly has thus clearly condemned the
illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa and has
recognized the threat to international peace and security
posed by South Africa’s continued defiance of the decisions
of the United Nations.
12. What the international community has witnessed from
1967 to 1978 is the contempt of South Africa for the
considered decisions of the United Nations. During this
period, both the General Assembiy and the Security.
Council reiterated demands for the withdrawal of the illegal
occupation of Namibia by South Africa. The Council, by its
resolution 264 (1969), recognized that the General Assembly had terminated the Mandate of South Africa over
Namibia and assumed direct responsibility for the Territory
until its independence; it also decided to remain actively
seized of the matter. Subsequently, by its resolution
309 (1972), the Council invited the Secretary-General, in
consultation and close co-operation with a group of the
Security Council, to initiate as soon as possible contacts
2

thus recognized SWAP0 and South Africa as the interested
parties in negotiations for the achievement of a negotiated
settlement in Namibia.

renounce its schemes of unilateral action by recognizing the
just Proposals contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral.

16. The United Nations Council for Namibia is convinced
that the leadership of SWAP0 has shown great statesmanship and moderation in its discussions with the representatives of the five Western members of the Security Council
regarding a negotiated settlement of the question of
Namibia. While carrying on the armed struggle, SWAP0 has
always maintained the position that, whenever possibilities
arise for a meaningful negotiated termination of the illegal
occupation of Namibia by South Africa, SWAP0 will not
hesitate to lend its support to such efforts. SWAP0
encouraged and supported the efforts of several member
States in the Security Council which culminated in the
adoption of resolution 385 (1976). While remaining firm
and unswerving in defence of the inalienable rights,
legitimate aspirations and true interests of the oppressed
people of Namibia, SWAP0 has also demonstrated flexibility and a spirit of compromise in order to ensure progress
in the negotiations.

20. The General Assembly declared at its ninth special
session that it would continue to carry out its responsibilities in regard to the Territory of Namibia until genuine
independence had been achieved. These responsibilities will
be discharged through the United Nations Council for
Namibia in its capacity as the legal Administering Authority
for Namibia.
21. The United Nations therefore has thus unequivocally
stated its position on the question of Namibia. It is clear
that the full extent of the political commitment of the
General Assembly to the people of Namibia is recognized
by the overwhelming majority of its membership. The
commitment of the United Nations to the Namibian people
is not a technical one. It is not simply a ,question of the
supervision and control of elections in Namibia. The
General Assembly, by its solemn commitment assuming
direct responsibility for the Territory until independence,
established political obligations of the highest order which
the United Nations is bound to meet.

17. Unfortunately, South Africa has not responded in
good faith. After prolonged negotiations, the South African
Government has now officially informed the SecretaryGeneral that it intends to carry out so-called elections on its
exclusive responsibility in Namibia, thereby ensuring that
its own supporters will be manoeuvred into power through
fraudulent practices in the registration and in all stages of
the electoral process.

22. The Security Council must therefore, at all stages of
its consideration of the question of Namibia, bear in mind
the solemn commitment which is expressed not only in the
resolutions of the General Assembly but also in resolutions
of the Security Council itself. The need for scrupulous
adherence to principles enunciated therein and in the
documents now before the Council cannot be overemphasized if the United Nations is to bring about genuine
independence for the people of Namibia.

18. The report which the Security Council has approved
reflects a careful evaluation by the Secretary-General and
his staff of the complex political and administrative
conditions related to the presence of the United Nations in
Namibia. The clarifications presented by the SecretaryGeneral further emphasize the careful consideration of all
details of the report. The international community has
followed the efforts of the Secretary-General fully conscious of the complexity of his task and of the extraordinary demands which it has placed on his diplomatic
skills and judgement. The approval of this report is
additional proof of the profound confidence of the
members of the Security Council and of the Members of
the United Nations in the ability of the Secretary-General
to fulfil his responsibilities within the limits of the possible.

23. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
next speaker is the Administrative Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity, Mr. Edem Kodjo. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement,
24. Mr. KODJO (interpretation from French): It is a very
pleasant duty for the Secretary-General of the Organization
of African Unity to be able to bring to the Security Council
the point of view of our organization concerning the
problem which is the subject of the deliberations in the
Council today. But, first of all, I should like to tell YOU,
Mr, President, how pleased I am to see the work of the
Council presided over today by you, a brilliant representative of a country which is close, for many reasons, to the
hearts of the peoples of Africa. I should like to take this
opportunity to thank you, and through you your country,
for the assistance that you have always granted to the
liberation movements in Africa.

19. South African intransigence may well lead to the
failure of the efforts of the Security Council and of the
Secretary-General to resolve the question of Namibia and
thereby strengthen international peace and security in
southern Africa. Such a development would constitute a
grave and ominous turn of events. The international
community certainly will not tolerate for ever the total
contempt expressed by the Pretoria regime towards the
decisions and proposals put forth in good faith by the
United Nations. The aspirations of the peoples of southern
Africa for self-determination and independence must not be
treated lightly. The winds of freedom and national integrity
have on many occasions throughout history become CYclones of popular indignation, Let us hope against hope that
the Pretoria regime will be brought to its senses and

25. I am likewise pleased to express my great appreciation
to all the members of the Council for the unanimous and
positive response that they have given to our request to
participate in the debates of the Council. In SO doing, the
members of the Council have merely followed the course of
reason, wisdom and realism, because the Organization of
African Unity is an active party in the problem that iS
preoccupying us today.
3

26. It is not my intention to inflict upon the members of
the Council the catalogue of the numerous actions, political
as well as diplomatic, which the Organization of African
Unity has undertaken since its establishment in order to
demonstrate to them the interest, and especially the high
responsibility, which OAU has assigned to itself and is
committed to for the achievement of the effective independence of Namibia within the framework of its territorial
integrity and of its sovereignty fully assumed. It will be
sufficient for me to recall the case brought before the
International Court of Justice by the representatives of
Africa, and supported subsequently by OAU.
27. The Council will be equally pleased to know that the
diplomatic action conducted by the Organization of
African Unity has been crowned by the recognition of
SWAP0 as the authentic representative of the Namibian
people. Finally, the Council will also be interested to know
that, at its most recent meetings, the summit of the
Organization of African Unity adopted two important
resolutions on the question of Namibia. The texts of those
resolutions have been communicated to the Secretariat and
have already become official documents of the United
Nations (See S/12837/. I shall therefore not go into them
now. However, simply in order to explain my position
better, I should like to recall some of the passages. After
having taken note of the agreement of 12 July 1978
between SWAP0 and the representatives of the five Western
members of the Security Council, with a view to negotiating the settlement of the Namibian problem, the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government expresses its
satisfaction, in paragraph 1, with the signing of this
agreement by the parties concerned. In paragraph 4, the
Assembly

the proposals for a settlement made by the Western
members of the Council. Today the Council has before it
the Secretary-General’s report, which he lost no time in
preparing, in spite of the difficulties and the short time at
his disposal.
30. With regard to this report, I should like to say at the
outset that, in spite of its imperfections, the Organization
of African Unity fully and unconditionally supports it,
particularly the provisions relating to the personnel and the
date of the elections, provisions which in themselves shotrId
present no problem for men of goodwill.
31, We have studied the various proposals contained in the
report and wish to express our conviction that only the
acceptance and the implementation of the concrete measures it contains will, at the present stage of the development of the Namibian problem, allow the international
community to fulfil its historic mission in Namibia.
32. In the face of the systematic state of crisis which the
Pretoria regime would like to create in order to immobilise
the Organization, and more specifically the Council, in a
dubious impasse, there is a great temptation to denounce
the delaying manoeuvres, the diversionary tactics, the red
herrings and the oblique attitudes of the Pretoria r&lme.
Nevertheless, I shall not speak of this; I shall say no more
for the hour is grave and it is not the time to engage in
invective.
33. We consider that at this crucial moment no Government, no State Member of the United Nations, can afford
or should allow itself to commit an affront to the
international community as a whole, The Council has
already gone too far to be able to backtrack. And,
precisely, the hasty proposals for an internal settlement, the
Pyrrhic solutions being mentioned here and there, are
meant to block the positive action that has already been
taken by the Council. The Council, the chief guardian of
international peace and security and the conscience of the
world with regard to respect for the Charter, ought not to
tolerate such a situation.

“Requests the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations to proceed expeditiously
towards giving effect to resolution 38.5 (1976) as a
follow-up to the Luanda agreement”.
Further, in paragraph 5, it
“Declares that the United Nations must have effective
powers and authority to exercise supervision and control
regarding the transitional administration, the security
measures and the conduct of the election process”.

34. As for the Organization of African Unity, it first of all
wishes to express its complete readiness to participate as
such in the implementation of any measure advocated by
the Council. It then sincerely hopes that common sense and
reason will prevail, that the process described in the
Secretary-General’s report-and here we take the opportunity to congratulate and encourage him-will be respected
and that the outline proposed will be accepted and
implemented by all the parties concerned. For if this were
not to be the case, OAU would reserve its right to continue
and to increase its assistance of various kinds to SWAP0 so
as to enable it to intensify the armed struggle which it has
been waging for more than 14 years. This struggle has been
long and bloody, but SWAPQ, which has so far shown a
spirit of understanding, co-operation and conciliation, will
pursue it if it must and will win it because it is struggling
for the most just and noble of causes: the cause of freedom.

28. I have highlighted these particular provisions in order
to tell the Council that we in the Organization of African
Unity had perceived the Luanda agreement as the dawn of a
new era, one of effective, sincere and loyal co-operation
between the United Nations and the representatives of the
Pretoria regime.
29. Hence, having found within ourselves the necessary
strength and resolve, we accepted the proposals of the five
Western Powers. In conformity with the political philosophy of our Organization which advocates negotiated solutions whenever possible to conflicts which so often set
peoples and nations against each other, we also at that time
supported the decision of the Security Council empowering
the Secretary-General to send an emissary to Namibia to
study WlyS and means for the effective implementation of

35. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
next speaker is the representative of Botswana, who wishes
4

to make a statement in his capacity as Chairman of the
Group of African States for the month of September. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

42. The Council is meeting at a very critical time to deal
with the issue of the decolonization of Namibia, an issue
which has a great bearing not only on the peace, stability
and prosperity of Namibia, of southern Africa and of
Africa, but also on international peace and security. But,
just as the international community, through the agency of
the Security Council, was poised to put into effect the
Secretary-General’s decolonization plan, South Africa once
again demonstrated its arrogant challenge to and defiance
of the international community. It has rejected the
Secretary-General’s report, which is based on the Western
proposals which aim to implement resolution 385 (1976).

36. Mr. TLOU (Botswana): I should like, on behalf of the
African Group, to preface my remarks by expressing our
profound grief at the passing of Pope John Paul I. Our
condolences go to all concerned.
37. Mr. President, in my capacity as Chairman of the
African Group for the month of September, I should like,
on behalf of the Group, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. We most sincerely thank you and the other
members of the Council for affording us the opportunity to
participate in this very crucial debate. Your immense
diplomatic skill and experience and your well-known
commitment to the liberation struggle in southern Africa
enabled you wisely to steer these deliberations to the
adoption of the Secretary-General’s report yesterday.

43. In its proper perspective and historical context, then,
the rejection by South Africa, which is now clearly bent on
further entrenching itself in Namibia, should not so much
surprise us as in fact confirm Africa’s sceptical belief based
on historical and bitter experience, that the racist rulers at
Pretoria, whose double-dealing and unparalleled recalcitrance should be well known to all of us by now, have
never at any time meant to see a genuinely free and fair
democratic election in Namibia. They are scared stiff of
such an election since it is bound to put in power the true
leaders of the Namibian people, whose interests could never
be the same as those of the colonizers.

38. This debate is being held pursuant to resolution
431 (1978), which requested the Secretary-General to
submit at the earliest possible date a report on how he
proposed to implement the proposal for a settlement of the
Namibian situation contained in document S/12636, in
accordance with resolution 385 (1976). The Council now
has before it that report in document S/12827.

44. The primary aim of South Africa in Namibia is, as we
all know, to keep the popular vanguard party, SWAPO,
from achieving power, to install a pliant client regime which
will dance to Pretoria’s tune, and thus, in geopolitical
terms, to turn Namibia into an outpost of South Africa
from which attacks similar to the ones often launched
against Angola and Zambia could be staged. After all, South
Africa has proclaimed that its zone of military operations
extends right up to the equator. In the eyes of the South
African rulers free and fair democratic elections would
easily thwart this iniquitous plan. The Secretary-General’s
report is rejected, therefore, precisely because it guarantees
such an election.

39. The Secretary-General and the team he dispatched to
Namibia, headed by his Special Representative, Mr. Martti
Ahtisaari, ought to be congratulated for the expeditiousness
and impartiality with which they carried out the mandate
entrusted to them by this august body.
40. The Secretary-General’s report, which has benefited
from the input of experts and professionals of international
renown, has indeed been prepared in the light of objective
realities on the ground in Namibia and conforms to the
proposals of the five Western members of the Security
Council which initiated this exercise. Everyone concerned,
except of course apartheid South Africa, the occupying
colonial Power in Namibia, accepts the Secretary-General’s
report.

45. Purely and simply, then, these are the real reasons for
South Africa’s rejection, notwithstanding all the spurious
explanations and hollow justifications on the part of the
South African Government.
46. The most important point about South Africa’s
rejection and its declaration that it is now proceeding
unilaterally with sham elections aimed at presenting the
United Nations with a fait accompli is that we are reminded
very clearly-and we can ignore this reminder only at our
peril-first, that the word of the South African rulers on
matters of human freedom must never be taken at its face
value, for it is invariably calculated to hoodwink those who
are gullible and, secondly, that despite apparent deceitful
cosmetic changes the age-long dominant theme of South
African politics remains unchanged, and that is the aim to
dominate Africans in perpetuity, be they in South Africa
itself or in Namibia.

41. We, for our part, consider that the Secretary-General’s
report provides a sound basis for the decolonization of
Namibia in accordance with resolution 385 (1976). There is
no need for me to comment on the substance of the report
since the concerns of the African Group, especially on such
matters as the unilateral registration of voters by South
Africa, have already been brought to the attention of the
Secretary-General, We have taken note with satisfaction of
the Secretary-General’s explanatory statement of yesterday.
Besides, paragraph 6 of the resolution adopted yesterday by
the Council covers this matter. We have, as always, full
confidence in the Secretary-General, and we know that, if
adequately equipped by the Council for the task ahead, he
will execute his mandate with his characteristic brilliance
and commitment.

47. The South African white rulers have always held the
black man in utter contempt, and this unscientific and
deliberately distorted view of the African has been used to
deny the Africans in South Africa itself and now those in
5

mission entrusted to them by their forebears, who also, at
the turn of the nineteenth century, took up arms against
their colonizers. Because their cause is just their efforts will
be crowned with victory.

Namibia the inalienable right to rule themselves or to
participate meaningfully in politics at all. Their warped
view of African participation in politics is that manifested
in the Pretoria-dominated
and Pretoria-led so-called
bantustans, which are anathema to the international community, South Africa has sought throughout to turn
Namibia into a number of bantustans through its so-called
Tumhalle formula, which it is now pursuing with renewed
vigour. Until Namibia is truly independent in line with the
provisions of resolution 385 (1976), we should not relax
our vigilance lest we allow the apartheid regime to
implement its treacherous schemes.

52. As far as Africa is concerned, on the question of
Namibia we speak with one voice of solidarity, for this issue
occupies a special place in our hearts and minds. For Africa,
Namibia, with its port, Walvis Bay, which the colonizers
have annexed, must be free in its entirety. The unanimity
of Africa on this question was clearly demonstrated by the
two comprehensive resolutions adopted by our Heads of
State and Government at Khartoum. They have now been
circulated as the annex to document S/12837. Here 1,must
add that the statement of the OAU Administrative
Secretary-General that we have just heard confirms and
strengthens that position of OAU. Thus we come before the
Security Council under the supreme mandate of our Heads
of State and Government to participate in a meaningful
search together with others equally concerned for a final
and durable solution to the Namibian problem. For, indeed,
only through collective effort can we hope to achieve the
desired end.

48. Failure to exercise vigilance can only open the way for
the enemies of the Namibian people to sabotage the efforts
of the international community to effect a smooth transition to genuine independence. The lessons of history
instruct us that, because the interests of the colonizer and
the colonized are invariably irreconcilable, during the
decolonization process every step, every act and every
utterance of the colonizer should be cautiously analysed for
its true implications. Only in this way can we separate myth
from reality. South Africa, like any other colonizer, should
not escape this rigorous treatment, especially now that it
has again made its defiance manifest.
49. The fact that we have travelled this far along the road
towards the decolonization of Namibia is in itself a tribute
to SWAPO, the vanguard movement in the valiant struggle
of the Namibian people for self-determination and independence. The tenacity of SWAP0 on the battlefield and its
steadfast statesmanship and political realism on the diplomatic front have not only won it the admiration of a11
peace-loving and freedom-loving peoples but have also
enabled the negotiating process to progress this far. And all
this SWAP0 has been able to do despite unending serious
provocations by South Africa.
50. If this exercise, the last chance for a negotiated
settlement in Namibia, should fail-and we must not allow
it to fail-then the blame should be placed squarely on
South Africa. SWAP0 has fulfilled all that is required of it,
It has accepted the Secretary-General’s decolonization plan,
although quite rightly it expressed certain concerns, especially with regard to the illegal unilateral registration of
voters by South Africa. However , it has left this matter to
be dealt with by the Secretary-General, SWAP0 has also
declared in the clearest terms its preparedness to enter Into
a cease-fire agreement with South Africa-all this is in the
interest of peace. Hereafter no one can point an accusing
finger at SWAPO.

53. We are now embarking on a very delicate sacred
mission to decolonize Namibia. Our successwill ultimately
depend on our collective efforts and the political will to act
in the name of justice and fair play. The co-operation of
everybody, and most especially of the authors of the
proposals on which the Secretary-General’s report is based,
is imperative. We take note of the statements of the Foreign
Ministers of the five Western members of the Security
Council and we shall now await the matching of words with
action. In large measure, the success of our efforts will
depend on the faith we have in each other and in the
United Nations ability to act forcefully when occasion
demands. Without such faith and the political will to live up
to that faith, no matter how good the proposals may look
on paper, they will not go very far beyond the drawing
board.
54. The adoption by the members of the Council of the
Secretary-General’s report reflects their concern for the
emancipation of the Namibian people. Any hesitation on
their part would only have succeeded in giving encouragement to South Africa. But this is only the beginning of a
difficult task yet to be undertaken. We urge that the
concern demonstrated here by the adoption of the report
of the Secretary-General continues to be manifested as the
Council takes follow-up action to carry out its sacred
mandate.
55. But we must be realistic in the light of the actual
situation occasioned by South Africa’s rejection of the
Secretary-General’s report, We should unequivocally call
upon South Africa to give way to the United Nations
transition team in Namibia and make it abundantly clear
that South Africa will bear the full consequences of the
catastrophic situation that is bound to arise should it not
comply.

51. I shall not go here into the history of the struggle of
the Namibian people, which has entailed a lot of sacrifice
and suffering on their part. Many of their finest sons and
daughters have fallen for their just cause. All this is well
known and needs no repetition. It remains for me on behalf
of the African Group to pay a high tribute to the Namibian
people, led by their vanguard movement, SWAPO, for their
steadfast statesmanship in their quest for independence
despite the overwhelming odds against them. By taking
arms against the usurper rather than be slaves in their own
land, the people of Namibia are fulfilling the historic

56. If South Africa stands in the way of the SecretaryGeneral, then the Security Council should convene speedily
and adopt swift measures to implement its own decisions.
6

Indeed, such action on the part of SOUND Africa would not
only be a challenge to the credibility of the Council and its
five Western members in particular, but it would also
constitute a threat to international peace and security. The
whole region of southern Africa would be thrown into yet
deeper turmoil and the oppression of the Namibian people
would continue.

You adopted yesterday, be worthy of the trust that tne
Namibian people have alwaysplaced in the United Nations.
63. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia,
His Excellency Mr. Siteke G. Mwale, who wishesto make a
statement on behalf of the front-line States. I welcome him
and invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

57. That impending disaster can ‘be averted only by
implementing the plan of decolonization just adopted. As a
fnst step, the Council should in fact declare null and void
any unilateral action taken, or about to be taken, by the
racist South African regime, and we note with satisfaction
that paragraph 6 of the resolution adopted yesterday says
just that, The entity that arises out of a Pretoria-enforced
mock election, should South Africa proceed with that
election, must be ostracized by the international community. The Security Council should be consistent and
reject South Africa’s “internal settlement” as it rejected
that of Ian Smith in Southern Rhodesia. We are pleased to
note that paragraph 6 of the resolution already provides for
this.

64. Mr. MWALE (Zambia): I would begin by expressing
my delegation’s shock and grief at the untimely death of
Pope John Paul I. Although the late Pope’s tenure of office
wasbut a brief one, we have been made awarethat he had
already begun to gain admiration and to capture the
imagination of many millions of his followers throughout
the world.
65. Mr. President, I now wish to congratulate you most
warmly on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. Your country, Czechoslovakia, has for
many years consistently supported the just struggle of the
people of Namibia, Zimbabwe and South Africa for
freedom and independence. I am confident that under your
wiseguidance this meeting of the Council will make a major
contribution towards the fulfilment of the aspirations of
the Namibian people.

58, In the meantime, however, the international community should rally behind SWAP0 until such time as the
people of Namibia are allowed freely to choose their rulers
in a free and fair election. In his statement [2087th
meeting], the President of SWAP0 reaffirmed SWAPO’s
readinessto participate in such an election, SWAP0 should
be given political, diplomatic, moral and material support SO
as to be able to carry on the struggle should South Africa
remain defiant. Africa, for its part, will not be found
wanting in that respect.

66. My delegation is deeply honoured to participate in this
important meeting of the Council on behalf of the
front-lure States of Angola, Botswana, Mozambique, the
United Republic of Tanzania and, of course, Zambia. The
front-line States have continued to fulfil a solemn mandate
in support of the liberation struggle on behalf of the
Organization of African Unity. In that regard, our countries
decided to make a joint intervention on this all-important
issue of the independence of Namibia now before the
Council.

59. To the people of Namibia, those who are inside the
country and whom South Africa is trying to turn into
unwilling or willing instruments of its ill-conceived “internal settlement”, I say: “Do not be deceived. Look at the
turmoil in Zimbabwe following the so-called internal
settlement. South Africa’s Tumhalle formula is a recipe for
trouble in Namibia. No settlement which excludes SWAP0
can work. There is still time for you to draw back from the
precipice by co-operating with the United Nations rather
than with South Africa,”

67. The Security Council is currently faced with a most
critical and challenging situation concerning Namibia. Consequently, there is an urgent need for the Council and the
United Nations as a whole to undertake effective measures
to resolve the Namibian problem and thereby enable the
people of Namibia to exercise their inalienable right to
self-determination and genuine national independence.

60. TO those who have influence over South Africa I say:
“Use the leverage at your disposal to avert the impending
catastrophe”. Even at this late, eleventh hour, South Africa
C~II still retreat from the brink of disaster if it SO desires.
South Africa would be well advised not to spurn the hand
of peace extended to it, The alternative is too ghastly to
contemplate.

68. It is our consraereo view that the report of the
Secretary-General constitutes a suitable framework for an
urtemationally acceptable solution of the Namibian problem. Over-all, we find the report to be in conformity with
the proposal contained in document S/12636, which indeed
is the basis for the adoption of resolution 431 (1978).

61. To the Security Council I say: “The battle lines are
drawn at the instigation and choosing of South Africa and
the Council must now defend its prestige and credibility
with all the means at its disposal as provided for in the
Charter.” We are now standing precariously on the edge of
a precipice, between chaos and peace, and it is for South
Africa to choose which way we go.

69. On behalf of the front-line States, I wish to commend
the Secretary-General for his concise, clear and important
report. I also pay a tribute to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and United Nations Commissioner
for Namibia, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, for the serious and
dedicated manner in which he and his team carried out
their task.

62. Members of the Council, let your subsequent activities
in the decolonization process in Namibia, like the decision
7

70. The front-line States welcome the balanced manner in
which the report has been presented. It is of particular
significance that it contains adequate provisions for military
and civilian personnel to comprise the United Nations
Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG).
It cannot be
over-emphasized that the successful implementation of that
report and the fulfilment of resolution 385 (1976) are
contingent upon those provisions. It is quite evident to US
that the implementation of the report provides a viable
formula for resolving the Namlbian problem. It is alsoof
vital significance,therefore, that the Council has adopted
the report.
71. In view of the foregoing,I wish to addressmyself to
two elementswhich are essentialto the fulfilment of the
United Nationsmandatein Namibia.
72. First, there is need rur a peaceful, ordc
and
irreversible transfer of power to the oppressedpedple of
Namibia.The fulfilment of that fundamentalneed canonly
be guaranteedby the United Nations peace-keepingforce
andthe supportingcivilian componentof UNTAG, with the
co-operationof the international community. Thoseof us
who genuinelyespousethe principlesand objectives of the
United Nations with regardto Namibia ought to weIcome
the measures
proposedby the Secretary-General.
73. Secondly, there is need for free, fair and genuinely
democraticelections.That requirement demandsnot merely peacefuland orderly conditions but alsoproper registration of voters organized and conducted by an impartial
organ.That is a vital precondition if the transition is to be
orderly and fair.
74. In this connexion, it is a sourceof profound indignation and grave concern that the Pretoria regime has
embarkedon a seriesof manoeuvrescalculatedto frustrate
the processof the peacefultransition of Namibiato genuine
independence.The following serve as vivid examplesof
South Africa’s acts of bad faith:
(a) South Africa proceededwith its unilateral appointment of an “Administrator General” before the proposals
of the five Westernmembersof the Security Council were
consideredby the other party;
lb,J South Africa has goneaheadwith the registrationof
voters in defiance of the United Nations and in utter
disregardof objectionsraisedby the other party;
(c) South Africa attacked Angola and massacred
SWAP0
refugeesat Kassingawhile negotiationswere beingconducted herein New York;
ld] South Africa only recently carried out an attack on
Zambia resulting in the regrettable lossof humanlife and
extensive damageto property in the Sesbekedistrict;
fr/ SWth
AIrlia conrirldesto intensify its repressionof
the peopleof Namibia, ascharacterizedby its illegalarrests
of the membersof SWAP0 designedto wipe out the party
that has been acclaimed by the Uni-ted Nations and the
8

international community as a whole as the sole and
authentic representativeof the people of Namibia.
75. Such acts of bad faith are evidently detrimental to the
attainment of United Nations objectives in Namibia. Acts
of aggressionand unilateral measuresperpetrated by South
Africa can only aggravatethe already explosive situation,
We demand a fresh registration of voters under United
Nations supervision.We must not accept any measuresor
processesinitiated by South Africa unilaterally and in
defiance of the United Nations for the sole purpose of
prejudicingthe electoral process,thus rigging elections and
defeating the purpose of the United Nations to which
SWAP0 and Africa have remained ever so faithful. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General has an
obligation to ensurethe fulfilment of this requirement.
76. Ideally, SWAP0 would have demanded a proper
censusbefore the registration of voters but, in the spirit of
compromiseand in the interests of United Nations objectives, it hasset asidethat vital demand. I wish to stressin
this regard that the registrationof voters exercisecannot be
divorced from the over-all duties of the Special Representative, which must start upon the conferment of necessary
authority by the Security Council.
77. Within the context of ensuringa fair and free electoral
processin Namibia, the front-line States alsofeel that the
role of the police will be vital. We have taken note of the
provisionalfigure of 360 police officers that the SecretaryGeneral has recommended for secondment by Member
States to UNTAG. In our view, that figure is clearly
inadequatefor the effective monitoring of a large contlngent of prejudiced South African police envisaged to
perform a key and active role ln guaranteeinga peaceful
and orderly electoral process.Furthermore, in the view of
the front-line States, the United Nations Council for
Namibia remainsthe legal Administering Authority of the
Territory until independence.We hope and expect that the
Council will continue to be consulted at the various stages
of the presentprocess.
78. In his report, the Secretary-General has stressedthe
need for the neighbouring countries to co-operate ln
enforcing the cease-fireand the surveillanceof the borders
of Namibia. J wish to assurehim that, asin the past, our
countries will continue to co-operate with him ln this
commonendeavour.
79. The countries which I am privileged to represent
continue to make tremendous sacrifices in support of the
just struggleof the peopleof southern Africa. Our objective
is to securegenuineindependence.If meaningfu1independence can be achieved through negotiations, we will
continue to give full support to those negotiations. However, shoulda peaceful settlementof the Namibianproblem
remainelusive, we, the front-line States, on behalf of the
Organization of African Unity, will be left with no choice
but to continue to play our noble duty asreliablerear bases
in the struggleto liberate southern Africa,
80. The armed strugglewaged by the people’sliberation
army of SWAP0 and SWAPO’s phenomenal successes
on

the political and diplomatic fronts are the prime factors
which have led to the present phase in the protracted
struggle to liberate Namibia, a stage favourable to a
negotiated settlement. Without SWAPO’s victories, South
Africa would not have contemplated negotiating the terrnination of its illegal occupation of Namibia. Rightly, and
deservedly so, SWAP0 has over the years won international
recognition as the sole and authentic representative of the
Namibian people.

Affairs Of the Sudan, who wishes to make a statement as
representative of the current President of the Org~i;l.ation
of African Unity. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
87. Mr. BAKR (Sudan): First of all, I should like to
extend to YOU, Mr. President, my sincere congratulations on
the able manner in which you have conducted the
deliberations of the Security Council this month. I should
like also to thank you and the members of the Council for
according me this opportunity to address the Council on
the question of Namibia. It is indeed a great privilege and
honour to speak on behalf of President Nimeiri in his
capacity as the current President of the Organization of
African unity.

81. The actions of racist South Africa, on the contrary,
clearly demonstrate that the Pretoria regime is not serious
about negotiating the independence of Namibia. The
opportunity is not yet lost for South Africa to leave
Namibia honourably and peacefully. It must desist forthwith from its frantic attempts to install and impose a
non-representative puppet regime in Namibia.

88. When the Secretary-General submitted his report on
29 August, we expected that all the parties concerned
would approve it and authorize the Security Council to set
up the United Nations Transition Assistance Group to guide
the new State towards self-determination and independence. However, the South African r&me resorted to
delaying tactics, which in effect stalled the efforts of the
international community to bring this question to a positive
conclusion. In resorting to such tactics, Pretoria may have
suddenly realized that Namibia was in fact going to gain its
full independence, and that naturally raises an ominous
spectre for the apartheid regime in South Africa itself;
hence, the reaction of the South African authorities was
only too understandable.

82. Members of the international community, in particular
those countries which wield influence over South Africa,
have the grave responsibility of compelling the Pretoria
rbgime to relinquish its stranglehold on Namibia. We remain
convinced in this regard that the Western countries should
continue to use their leverage to ensure South Africa’s
peaceful compliance with the demands of the United
Nations and the will of the international community.
83. In this connexion, I should like to state our view
regarding the special responsibility of the five Western
members of the Security Council in respect of the
prevailing situation. It is our sincere hope and expectation
that the Five will not consider the adoption of the
Secretary-General’s report as an end in itself. The adoption
of the report by the Council should be considered as a
means of enabling the contact group of five to persuade
South Africa to withdraw from Namibia while the opportunity remains.

89. On the other hand, the jockeying for power of the
South African regime makes it imperative on all candidates
concerned to pose as the true standard-bearers of the white
supremacist attitudes and prejudices. Be that as it may, the
international community must not allow such posturing to
thwart the plans already laid down in order to bring to an
end the illegal presence of South Africa in Namibia.

84. The adoption of the report has symbolized the
determination of the international community to secure the
peaceful resolution of the Namibian question. By that act,
the bargaining position of the Western members of the
Council in their negotiations with South Africa should be
enhanced. The Five have therefore a particular responsibility to ensure the effective and speedy implementation of
the report. The international community will, quite naturally, eagerly await the fulfilment by the Five of that which
they set out to do.

90. It has now become clear that none of us should ignore
the fact that the South African rkgime will continue to
harbour designs which may ultimately have an adverse
effect on the progress of the Namibian people towards their
most cherished goal of independence and selfdetermination. In spelling out these doubts, we are in effect
referring to certain activities undertaken by the S0~t.h
African authorities to influence the outcome of the
forthcoming election.Thoseillegalactivitiesarespecifically
illustrated by the unilateral and unauthorizedregistration
of voters carriedout by thoseauthorities,which in our view
is designedto boost the ranksof would-bevoters for the
so-calledDemocraticTumhalle Alliance, a body which, as
the Council well knows, is closelytied to South African
interests.This particularactivity by South Africa could be
instrumentalin frustrating the aim of the Councilto set up
a truly independentState in Namibia.Wetherefore request
the Council to do its utmost, in its turn, to frustrate the
South African move.That, in our view, could be achieved
by scrappingthe registrationof voters so far undertaken
and proceedingwith it anew under the direct auspices
of
the Special Representativeof the Secretary-General.The
Speci,alRepresentativeshould set up an electoral commissionfor that purpose.We wish alsoto proposeto the

85. In conclusion, I would state that we have a unique and
timely opportunity to resolve the problem of Namibia and
thereby open a new chapter in the history of our
beleaguered region of southern Africa. The people of that
region have suffered far too long. The front-line States hope
that this opportunity will not be permitted to slip by, and
that all Member States will co-operate fully in the present
endeavour to resolve this vexing problem of Namibia and
thus avert the escalation of the already existing grave threat
to international peace and security, in the interests of the
goals and objectives of the United Nations.
86. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
next speaker is the Vice-President and Minister for Foreign
9

Council that the single-member constituency system should
be adopted for the purpose of the election. We believe that
that system would ensure the emergence of a strong
political force representing the mainstreams of genuine
nationalist sentiment in the Territory, which would ensure
stability and unity of purpose in the critical period which
would foilow the elections and the assumption of power by
the nationalist movement.

Namibia. The presence of African troops will of course hell
greatly in securing the confidence of the African populatior
of the Territory, and in particular that of the freedon
fighters, and will help to establish more firmly the
credibility and seriousness of purpose of the final solutiol
being worked out during the transitional period. The
presence of African troops will also act as a deterrent tc
any would-be trouble-makers who may try at the lag
minute to frustrate the aims and purposes of the interna
tional agreement.

91. There are certain conditions which must be ensured
before the elections can be held. Paramount among these
would be the establishment of a cease-fire in the Territory;
but a cease-fire can only be established between the two
contingent military forces, namely the nationalist forces of
SWAP0 and the colonial forces of the South African
rBgime. This means that a cease-fire agreement should be
hammered out between the two parties directly involved to
permit a true cease-fire to take effect immediately after the
signing of a formal agreement between the two sides and
the authentication of that agreement by the Special
Representative on behalf of the Security Council. Then and
only then would a state of peace be established and the
authority of the Council be recognized, especially by the
colonial Power in question. ‘The problem we feel the
Council should resolve at this juncture, and before the
United Nations moves into Namibia, is how to define
clearly and beyond any reasonable doubt the functions,
duties and powers of the Special Representative. This we
believe would ensure that the Special Representative would
be in a position effectively to supervise and control the
transitional administration, security, including the maintenance of law and order, and the organization and conduct
of elections.

95. Thirdly, the figure of 360 policemen proposed in the
report in ‘our view is not adequate for the purpose
especially if we have in mind the future stability of thf
Territory after the United Nations military presence ha;
been gradually reduced. We should aim now at a man
adequate figure and this we believe should be no less that
1,000. Of course, the new State could build on this figure
in the future in accordance with its needs, but at least i
would have an adequate basis to establish the force whicl
would enable it to maintain law and order in the Territory
96. Fourthly, as we have previously stated, nationalis
sentiment should be adequate!y reflected in all arrange
ments pertaining to the process of nation-building ir
Namibia and in this respect we feel that SWAPO, in itl
capacity as the genuine representative of the struggle of thr
Namibian people, should always be iecognized as such ant
should be consulted on every aspect and associated wit1
every measure undertaken b accordanc’e with the resolu
tions of the United Nations. We all recognize that the nex
few months will be a particularly critical period and W(
have to be alwayson the alert againstany move further tc
complicatethe situation or to block progresstowards tht
independenceof Namibia. I assureyou, that this wil
continue to be the attitude of OAU and its memberStates
At the sametime, we shallalways remain most willing tc
co-operatewith all concerned,if the end result is to be th<
full and unqualified implementation of United Nation:
resolutions.However, we shall not hesitate to face up tc
any challengefrom whatever quarter, if it is designedtc
block the path of the African struggle in general or tc
frustrate the sacrificesof the heroic Namibianpeopleundel
the leadershipof SWAPO.

92. The international community is fully aware by now of
the constructive role that the Organization of African Unity
has played in the affairs of Namibia, a role which has
enabled the United Nations and all peace-loving forces to
guide this newly emerging nation towards the fulfilment of
its most sacred aspiration, namely, the attainment of
self-determination and full sovereignty. Consequently, we
feel that OAU should be assigned a more active role in the
critical period which lies ahead of us. This active role could
be concretely reflected in the following measures.
93. First, senior Africans should be recruited for both
military and civilian components of UN’I’AG; in particular,
the deputy commander of the military force which would
be deployed in the Territory must hail from an African
country member of OAU. This criterion should also be
applied to the commander and deputy commander of the
police force. I do not have to elaborate on the reason
behind this proposal because I am sure it will be obvious to
all concerned.

97. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):Thr
next speakeris the representativeof Benin, whom I invite
to take a seat at the Council table and to make hi
statement.
98. Mr. BOYA (Benin) (interpretation from French).
Mr. President, the delegationof the People’sRepublic 01
Benin wishesto congratulate you most warmly on you)
accession
to the presidencyof the Security Councilfor thil
month. Your country, Czechoslovakia, and mine, the
People’sRepublic of Benin, maintain excellent relations
The recent co-operation agreementsbetween OUT tw(
countriesreflect the sinceredesireof our two peoplesan{
of our two Governmentsfurther to consolidatethe gooc
relations of friendship and of solidarity which SO fortu
nately exist between them. This friendship and solidaritl
are natural, since our two peopleshave suffered in thei)
own flesh the atrocities and crimesof foreign occupatiof

94. Secondly, in our view, the number of 7,500 men
proposed by the Secretary-General is adequate for the
purpose, but we again believe that the African countries
members of (3Al.J should be called upon to supply most of
the contingent:; required. The presence of African troops in
the ‘Territory during the critical period ahead will crown the
achievement of OAU in playing the major role within the
international community to secure the independence of
10

and domination. New threats of aggression still hang over
my country, and we are convinced that your country will
continue as in the past to lend its support to the cause of
the liberation of oppressed peoples and will oppose the
imperialist policy of colonial reconquest. Remembering
your personal qualifications as a skilful diplomat, my
delegation is certain that this debate will be conducted with
determination and responsibility.

responsible. That is a crafty way out of a political
embarrassment at little cost. My delegation understands
that Machiavellian game perfectly and vigorously denounces
the hypocrisy of the Western Powers.
103. One must be really naive or thoroughly dishonest to
seek to persuade anyone that 24 days would be sufficient
for the Secretary-General to make the Pretoria regime see
reason, a regime that has not only stepped up its repressive
measures against the SWAP0 leaders and supporters, whom
it arbitrarily imprisons, but has made public its hostility to
the Secretary-General’s report, its categorical refusal to
co-operate with him and its intention to proceed to hold
elections in December this year. In this it is consistent with
its policy of so-called internal settlement, which is nothing
but a unilateral declaration of independence, as was the
case in Rhodesia-a method well known to the imperialists
of putting in power puppet regimes which are totally
devoted to their cause.

99. On 27 July /2082nd meeting] my delegation spoke in
the Council on the question that we are now debating, Our
position was clearly stated. It is that the Namibian people
must recover its total independence and enjoy territorial
integrity. We bluntly reaffirmed, taking into account the
gluttonous appetite of the Pretoria regime, that Walvis Bay
was an integral part of Namibia. No one doubts that the
heroic Namibian people, under the guidance of SWAPO,
will consent to every sacrifice to continue its sacred struggle
for freedom and independence until complete victory is
achieved.

104. Mr. Sam Nujoma has amuysed perrectly me situation
that follows from the arrogant and intransigent attitude of
the Fascist and racist Pretoria regime. He said that the
situation “clearly constitutes a serious threat to international peace and security in terms of Chapter VII of the
charter” [2087th meeting, para 1441.

100. What we denounced in our statement was the guilty
complicity, the manoeuvres, the delaying tactics of certain
Powers which today claim to be the friends of the
Namibian people. In fact, for nearly two years the five
Western Powers have been undertaking certain diplomatic
activity with a barrage of publicity. All kinds of pressures
have been put on the Africans and in particular on SWAPO,
and, as President Sam Nujoma so rightly said in his
statement yesterday, the Western plan for a negotiated
settlement of the question of Namibia would never have
seen the light of day without the major concessions and
important compromises agreed to by the SWAP0 leaders.
That plan was presented to us as having received the
agreement and blessing of the Pretoria regime. But on 27
July, after the five Western Powers had used every
subterfuge and contrivance and all their diplomatic skill to
ensure that the Council would adopt resolution 432 (1978),
in which the principle of Namibia’s national unity and
territorial integrity was supported, the representative of the
Pretoria regime did not give up the claim to Walvis Bay;
before his masters he categorically rejected resolution
432 (1978) on the status of Walvis Bay.

105. Therefore, what is needed from those who wish to be
considered the friends of the Namibian people is no longer
prayers and hollow appeals addressed in profusion to the
inhuman Pretoria r6gime.
106. The truth is that the Pretoria rt?gime would be
nothing without the massive support given by the Western
Powers, in particular military and economic support. Thus,
if the Western Powers want to honour their commitmentsthe proposals for a negotiated settlement of the question of
Namibia contained in the Secretary-General’s report in no
way differ from those in the Western Powers’ plan-they
must stop subjecting the SWAP0 leaders to blackmail and
inadmissible pressures and, on the contrary, must face the
facts of life and take the energetic measures needed to
prevent South Africa from carrying out its diabolical
design: the unilateral declaration of independence. It would
be unseemly to come back to the Council to shed crocodile
tears. The only effective way to spare us this melodramais
by taking a courageous decision to apply the provisions of
Chapter VII of the Charter, in particular mandatory
economic sanctions against South Africa.

101. Given that arrogant and intransigent attitude of the
Pretoria regime, and given the splendid promises and
honeyed words of the five Western Powers, my delegation
stated that all that was happening that day was the
performance of a scenario astutely stage-managed by the
strategists of the Western Foreign Ministries, who well knew
how to choose their actors. My delegation clearly indicated
that any resolution hastily adopted would be nothing but a
snare, a trap cunningly placed on the path that was to lead
to the real independence of Namibia.

107. My delegation hopes that the five Western Powers
will not be unfaithful to their own commitments and that
they will succeed in persuading the Pretoria regime, which
proceeds further each day along the path of sheer madness,
to see reason.

102. My delegation listened closely to the statements of
the five Western Powers, but not once did I hear mention of
any effort by them to make the Pretoria regime heed the
voice of reason regarding its obligation to recognize the
territorial integrity of Namibia and the necessity for that
regime to take a closer look at and adopt the position in the
Western plan regarding Walvis Bay. The excuse is clear: it is
the Secretary-General who must now take the initiative and
if the whole matter fails the international community is

108. As for the Namibian people, Mr. Sam Nujoma has
clearly explained its position. Namibia and its people are
not and will never be prepared to commit national suicide.
They have learnt during the long struggle that independence
is not served on a silver platter, and that it is only by
intensifying the armed struggle and by inflicting decisive
defeats on the Fascist, racist, inhuman Pretoria regime that
jt will be compelled to come to the negotiating table and
recognize the independence of Namibia.
11

115. The “intransigence” of SWAP0 has often been
stressed, as it had expressed certain reservations regarding
certain aspects of the plan. Africans have frequently been
invited to make concessions, while being given to under
stand that the South African wolf had become a calm sheep
which would accept the Western plan. What a surprise!
They want to have us believe that the South African
tactical retreat is a victory for the Western Powers. In fact
the thousand and one initiatives taken by people of
goodwill in an attempt to find a peaceful solution have
regularly come up against obstacles raised by Pretoria.

109. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): 1
thank the representative of Benin for his kind words
addressed to my country and his appraisal of its role in
supporting the national liberation movements throughout
the world. Czechoslovakia, together with the other socialist
countries, is playing this role as a full member of the
socialist community. I wish to thank him also for the kind
words addressed to me personally.
110. The next speaker is the representative of Guinea,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make a statement.

116. This explains the growing scepticism in the international community with regard to the good faith of the
South African regime in the matter of arriving at a peaceful
solution, because it would seem today that wehave simply
succeeded in granting Pretoria the additional delay it
essentially requires to implement its so-called internal
settlement plan in Namibia. That is why today we must
recognize that the Secretary-General has fulfilled his
mandate in accordance with the Security Council resolutions. SWAPO, through its President, our brother Sam
Nujoma, has clearly explained the reservations of its party;
however it had to endorse the Secretary-General’s plan,
with all the confidence that the circumstances warranted.

111. Mr. YANSANE
(Guinea) (interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, the delegation of the State-party of
Guinea has the honour to congratulate you on Your
accession to the presidency of the Security C~und for the
month of September. The relations between your country,
Czechoslovakia, and the Republic of Guinea are the pride
of our two peoples, and this is par excellence the right time
and place to recall that after Guinea’s accession to
independence in 1958 it was precisely the aid we received
from your country, among others, which made a major
contribution to giving the lie to all the prophets of doom
according to whom the new State that came into being at
Conakry against the will of the imperialists would not last
more than three months, Today in this chamber, exactly 20
years later to the day, we can take legitimate pride in saying
,t,hat it was the refusal of Guinea in the referendum of
September 1958 that spelt the doom of colonial empires
and foreign dependency in Africa.

117. Throughout the diplomatic processes,SWAP0 and all
Africa have fully respected the stipulations of the intermediaries of goodwill. Who can now speak of intransigence,
after proof has been given a thousand and one times that
Pretoria is still faithless and lawless? The South African
Government, furthermore, has simply resorted to its old
tactic, and once again the Western Powers have facilitated
that attempt to win time in the hope of hanging on
indefinitely. During that time, no country of the subregion
has been free from threats or attack. In Botswana,Angola,
Mozambique, Zambia and Lesotho we daily register the
atrocious consequences of aggression perpetrated by the
Fascist Pretoria regime.

112. The question on the agenda of this meeting of the
Council is closely linked to this process of decolonization,
all the more so since in southern Africa it is quite simply a
matter of decolonizing Namibia and Zimbabwe and allowing the people of Southern Africa freely to decide their
own destiny,
113. We learned without surprise that Botha had come to
power in that region. Allow me to recall that this
well-known torturer and author of genocides in southern
Africa, is the product of a situation that has existed for a
long time. That man alone bears on his conscience the
deaths of hundreds of schoolchildren in Soweto, the
cold-blooded assassination of Namibian people and of
Angolans, Zambians and Mozambicans. This heir to Hitler is
the author of the famous law giving him the right of
intervention in any African country south of the equator to
preserve the apartheid regime. You will understand the rage
of the people of Guinea at seeing that all future negotiations to be carried out by the United Nations concerning
Namibia must be carried out with that man.

118. The Namibian decolonization process begun under
United Nations auspices has been betrayed. Those responsible are known. The proof is there that South African
soldiers are already proceeding to intimidate the people, in
order to hasten fixed elections prepared in all haste to
precipitate Namibia into the straitjacket of a so-called
internal settlement that would undoubtedly lead to the
most terrible confrontations ever known in Africa.
119. The full implications of the refusal of South Africa
to co-operate with the Secretary-General and the Security
Council are now quite clear. South Africa again challenges
the Organization, a challenge that is all the more decisive in
that no hypocrisy can now prevent the application of
Chapter VII of the Charter, unless it is desired to prolong
the farce in order to tire us out. In any case,we face a
flagrant threat to peace and security, and no artifice will be
able to persuade us that anything can prevent the implementation of radical measures, which will require concessions, no longer from SWAPO, but from those who have
never wished to yield anything to the peoples in chains:
that is to say, South Africa and its allies. As wasso rightly
stated by the President of SWAPO, brother Sam Nujoma:

114. Nevertheless, in July 1978 the Security Council
adopted two very important resolutions regarding Namibia.
In resolution 432 (1978) the Council recognized the principle of the territorial integrity of Namibia, including Walvis
Bay. Resolution 431 (1978) called on the Secretary-General
to submit as early as possible a report containing Ms
recommendations for the implementation of the Western
plan in accordance with resolution 385 (1976).
12

“We have been too patient. For goodness’ sake let us
not be asked any longer to destroy ourselves by forsaking,
in an inexplicable breach of faith, thousands upon
thousands of martyrs.”

and scrupulous compliance with the relevant decisions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly. Those
decisions contain both the basic principles for a just
solution to the problem and the necessary concrete
measures for the speedy ending of the unlawful occupation
of the Territory by the apartheid regime of South Africa
and the transfer of authority to SWAPO, the orgardzation
recognized by the United Nations as the sole lawful and
authentic representative of the people of Namibia.

120. The situation in Namibia is clear. The Security
Council is well aware of what has to be done, and the world
will judge the United Nations on the basis of the decisions
that result from these debates. May these debates fully
meet the expectations of our peoples, not only in Africa
but throughout the world, and quench our common thirst
for justice and legality for the exclusive benefit of the
fraternal people of Namibia. We ardently desire the happy
decision of a peaceful solution, even though we have every
right to remain sceptical. Historical examples of colonial
and criminal obstinacy have progressively led us to believe
that the freedom of peoples is always gained at gun-point
when they are confronted by Fascists and racists like those
who hold power in Pretoria. That is what history has
taught us.

127. The Czechoslovak delegation supports a peaceful
political solution of the Namibian problem, which must be
in accordance with the legitimate interests of the people of
that country. However, we could never agree to any
so-called settlement were it to by-pass the basic provisions
of the resolutions adopted by the Urdted Nations so far and
which, in substance, would be aimed at forcing upon the
Namibian people a neocolonialist solution. The age-long
heroic struggle of the people of Namibia for peaceful
independence and freedom must end with total victory. My
delegationsharesandsubscribes
to the following comments
madeat the meetingof the Security Councilon 27 July of
this year by the Presidentof SWAPO,Mr, Nujoma:

121. Therefore, no forum, no circumstance, seems to be
more appropriate forum in which and no more appropriate
circumstance than this, to join the Christian community
throughout the world, in short, the international community, and pay a tribute here to the deeply respected
memory of the late Father of the Churches, His Holiness
Pope John Paul I. It is our sincere hope that his valuable
lessons in human charity and brotherhood will be finally
and properly understood by those in southern Africa who
incessantly demand the defence of Western values and
Judeo-Christian ideas while they kill and assassinate, by day
and by night, in order to dominate the peoples and
continue to exploit them.

“We want only to makeabsolutelycertain, while we
can, that the independencethat finally comesto our
troubled Namibia, as it inevitably must, will be the
genuine and complete independencefor which our
people-the past generationsand the presentones-have
suffered, sacrificed and died.” [2082nd meeting,
par. 103.1
128. Havingdoubtsconcerningthe planfor the settlement
of the Namibianquestionwhich is containedin document
S/12636, the Czechoslovakdelegationconsidersit necessary to emphasizethe needto prevent a m-emergence
of a
situation where the United Nationswould be utilized asa
cover for a neocolonialistapproachto the solutionof the
problem.

122. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I
thank the representative of Guinea for his kind remarks
about my country.
123. As there are no other speakers inscribed on the list, I
shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of CZECHOSLOVAKIA.

129. Only a strict and consistentimplementationof those
resolutionswhich have beenadoptedduringthe discussion
of this problem in the United Nations over a number of
years can frustrate the plans of the Pretoria regime to
institute a “decolonization” in Namibiain accordancewith
its own designsand thoseof its henchmenor by meansof
the so-calledinternal settlementor anyother meansin fact
tantamount to the retention of powerin the country in the
handsof the South African racists.The fact that in regard
to NamibiaSouth Africa is pursuingpreciselythis purpose
is somethingwhich we cansubstantiate
with a vast body of
facts.

124. It was with a feeling of profound sorrow that we
learned of the sudden death of His Holiness Pope John
PaulI. In the name of the Czechoslovak delegation, I
should like to express our condolences to the Permanent
Observer of the Holy See to the United Nations.
125. The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic has always
consistently supported the just struggle of colonial and
dependent peoples for freedom, self-determination and
independence. Socialist Czechoslovakia, together with the
other socialist countries, has always supported and will
continue to support the full and final liquidation of all the
remnants of the shameful system of colonial domination.

130. Thosewho not in words but in deedscomeout in
support of the right of the peopleof Namibiato independencemust agreethat to achieveit it is necessaryto put
into practice-I repeat,to put into practice-the mostbasic
principles which have already been formulated in the
relevant decisionsof the Organisation.That means,in the
first place, the immediatecessationof thC occupation of
Namibiaby South Africa, the innnediutewithdrawalof ;ii
troops, police and administrationof the Pretoria regime
from all parts of Namibia,includingWalvis Bay, and ti:::

126. AS for the Namibian question, the position of the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic has been stated on a
number of occasions both in the Security Council and in
other organs of the United Nations. In brief, it consists in
the support of the inalienable right of the Namibian people
to self-determination and independence on the basis of full
13

of the plan inter aliu presuppose the presence in Namibia of
South African troops and all South African police forces;
they also give excessively great powers during the transition
period towards independence to the so-called Adminis.
trator-General, in other words, in essence to South Africa.
These provisions as well as certain other provisions of the
plan do not correspond to the decisions of the United
Nations, and it is clear that the recommendations contained
in the Secretary-General’s report do not represent the best
variant for the transition of Namibia to genuine indepen.
dence.

guaranteeing of the territorial integrity and unity of
Namibia, Those are precisely the principles which guide all
the activities of the United Nations with regard to Namibia,
a Territory over which the Organization has a special
responsibility.
131. While acting on the basis of the actual situation
which has arisen in Namibia as a result of the unlawful
actions of the South African administration, it is vital at the
same time to take into account all the comments made by
SWAP0 which were formulated in the letter of its President
dated 8 September 1978 [see S/12841]. By its presence in
Namibia, the United Nations must bring about a situation
where the Namibian people can freely exercise their lawful
rights without any hindrance and interference on the part
of the South African authorities.

133. However, taking into account the position of SWAPCi
and the African countries, the Czechoslovak delegation did
not object to the adoption of resolution 435 (1978) and
abstained in the vote on it. We must repeat for the record,
however, that the earlier position of my Government on the
question of the financing of the operation of the United
Nations in Namibia remains in force.

132. The foregoing considerations determine our attitude
towards the plan for the settlement of the Namibian
question, which is at the core of the proposed United
Nations action in Namibia. The point is that the provisions

Themeetingroseat 1.25p.m.

14
titho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

%U.S. 1.00 #(or equivalent

in other

currencies)

7S-70005-December

1979-2,20c
