OFFICIAL

RECORDS

l(‘j,f4’”
MEETING:

22 OCTOBER

i,i,l.,

”

.’
1976

“.

’

..‘.,

‘:

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Puge

. .... .. ......,.. ... ..... I.,. .. .

1

Adoption of the agenda , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . ,

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Emerge’ncy Force
(S/12212) . . . . , . . . . , . , . . . . . . , . . . * . . . . . . . . . . . , (1.. . . . . . . . . . . . I. * . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1964/Rev.l)

S/PV .1964

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Srcpplements of the Officid Records of the Security Counc’il. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutiorzs and
Decisions of the Security Counc’I’l. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative
on that date.

1964th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 22 October 1976, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Iqbal A. AKHUND

(Pakistan).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama,, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.

consider it appropriate to report to the, Council at an
earlier date, they would of course expect him to do so
and that he will continue his efforts to assist the early
resumption of the negotiations for a comprehensive
settlement in the Middle East.

1. Adoption of the agenda

4. Further, I have been asked by .the delegations of
China and the Libyan Arab Republic to say that they
will not participate in the vote on the draft resolution
and that, as a result, they do not stibscribe to the
agreed statement which I have just read on behalf of
the members of the Council.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Emergency Force (S/ 122 12)

5. Before the. Council proceeds to the vote, I call
on the Secretary-General to make a statement in
connexion with his report.

Provisional agenda (SlAgendail9WRev.l)

The meeting was called to order at 4.05 pm.
Adoption of the agenda
The agendn was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Emergency Force (S/X2212)

1. The PRESIDENT:‘The
Security Council will now
proceed with its examination of the item on its agenda,
which mentions the report of the Secretary-General
dated 18 October 1976 on the United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF) for the period 17 October 1975
to 18 October 1976.
2. I should like to direct the attention of the members of the Council to the draft resolution contained
in document S/12219. During consultations prior to
this meeting, an agreement was reached among the
members of the Council on the draft resolution, as
well as on the procedure to be followed, to the effect
that representat.ives wishing to speak would do so after
the vote on the draft resolution.
3. Under the provisions of operative paragraph I,
subparagraph (c,), of the draft resolution, the Security
Council would request the Secretary-General to submit
at the end of the period--that is, by 24 October 1977a report on the developments in the situation and the
steps taken to implement Security Council resolution
338 (1973). Members of the Security Coyncil have
asked me to make it clear that, should developments
occur which would lead the Secretary-General
to

6. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
The Security
Council has before it my report on UNEF, which
gives an account of the activities of the Force ovet
the past year. The report deals, among other things,
with the role of the Force under the Agreement
between Egypt and Israel of 4 September 1975 [SW
S/l1818 crud Add.l-4] and the Protocol of 22 September [SW S/l18/8/Atlr1.5 qf 10 O~~tober 19751. In
this connexion, I would like to emphasize that, as
mentioned in my report, both the area of operation
of UNEF and its responsibilities are greatly enlarged
under this Agreement.
7. In my report to the Council of 17 October 1975
[S//1849], I was obliged to propose to the Council
certain increases in the personnel and equipment of
the Force so that it could effectively carry out its
new tasks. In the light of experience over the past
year, it has been possible to make a reduction’in the
number of troops actually required as against the
estimate which I gave at that time. This has meant
that it has been possible also to make a reduction
in the budget estimates for the coming year as
compared with those for the past year. I wish to assure
the Council that I shall keep continuously in mind
the necessity of practising the utmost economy
consonant with efficient performance.
8. I have indicated in my report that in the present
circumstances I feel that the prolongation of the
mandate is essential in order to maintain quiet and to
create an atmosphere conducive t(, the active search
for a peaceful solution. In this regard, I note that the
preamble to the draft resolution now before the Council reflects the view expressed in my report that, in the

absence of progress in efforts to implement
338 (1973), the situation in the Middle
inevitably remain unstable.

resolution
East will

political wisdom of the States directly concerned.
We must recognize that in spite of the arrangements
that have been made and other things that have been
done to maintain peace, the situation in the Middle
East will inevitably remain unstable and dangerous
unless progress is achieved towards the implementation of the resolutions of the Security Council.

9. As you, Mr. President, mentioned in’ your remarks
to the Council a few moments ago, it has always
been the practice for the Secretary-General to keep
the Council informed of significant developments.
I wish to assure the members of the Council that
I shall not fail to do this should circumstances at any
time require it.

16. In ‘this regard, the President of Romania, Nicolae
Ceaugescu, speaking just a few days ago to a group of
press correspondents from the United States, said:
“The maintenance of a state of tension in the
Middle East constitutes a serious danger to peace
not only in that area but also throughout the world.
For its part, Romania, which is in the vicinity of
that area, had a direct interest, as indeed have
other European States, in establishing at the earliest
possible date a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East. In this regard, the resumption of the Geneva
Conference with the participation of the interested
countries and other States able to make a contribution to a more rapid solution of this problem could
be an important initiative.
I believe that those
primarily concerned should finally come to realize
that it is not possible to bring about peace in the
Middle East without the withdrawal of Israel from
the Arab territories occupied as a result of the 1967
war and without a settlement of the Palestinian
problem, including the creation of an independent
Palestinian State. Furthermore,
recent events in
Lebanon have shown that the Palestinian problem
must be solved as soon as possible. It is true that a
lasting peace cannot be achieved unless the independence and territorial integrity of all States in the
Middle East are guaranteed.

10. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the
procedure agreed upon previously, I shall now put to
the ‘vote the draft resolution contained in document
s/12219.

In fi/r~~lr: Benin, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan,
Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America
Agtrinst:

None

Il. The PRESIDENT:
A number of representatives
have expressed the wish to make statements following
the voting and I shall now call on them.
12. Mr.

DATCU (Romania) (i,lterpr~etation front
The Council, on the expiry of the mandate
of UNEF, has before it two reports dated 18 October
of the Secretary-General, one relating to the activities
and functioning of UNEF which we are considering
under the agenda item, and the other, relating to the
efforts made by the Secretary-General to implement
Security Council resolution 338 (1973) [S/122/0].

“In this regard, I consider that the United Nations
could play a, much bigger role than it has played SOD
far. I believe that it is regrettable that the Unitemd
Nations has not been involved more directly in the
solution of Middle East problems, and it is my belief
that in the future a more important role should be
given to the Organization not only in Geneva but
more generally with regard to all initiatives aimed
at bringing about a solution to this problem. I believe
‘that in fact we should now contemplate a new
approach, namely, a global solution and not a
partial solution of problems, because any parti’al
approach can only serve to complicate matters and
create new dangers for peace in the Middle East
and in the world as a whole.”

French):

13. From the first report it emerges that UNEF
discharged its functions in an exemplary fashion, and
the Romanian delegation would like to congratulate
all the members of the Force on that accomplishment.
14. We should also like to take this opportunity to
express our warm gratitude to the Secretary-General
for the efficiency with which he has conducted the
operations of UNEF and also for his initiatives and
tireless efforts to promote the resumption of negotiations with a view to a just and lasting settlement of
the Middle East problem, initiatives and efforts which
we should like to see continued in the future.

17. We share the view of the Secretary-General ‘as
stated in his report that: “The presence of UNEF in
the Egypt-Israel sector has undoubtedly been a major
factor in the maintenance of the cease-fire” and that
the essential role of the Force should be “to maintain
quiet and to create an atmosphere conducive to the
active search for-the peaceful solution of underlying
political problems” [S/122/2, prrra. 431. Consequently,
we feel that the activities of UNEF form part of the

15. Of course, peace’ and tranquillity
have been
maintained in the area, but that is due above all to the
2

search for a proper solution to the Middle East
problem. Security Council resolution 338 (1973), within
the framework of which the mandate of UNEF was
extended, has still not been complied with. Tension
in the Middle East is still as strong as ever; the
situation in that area is extremely
unstable and
insecure, and a new military outbreak could occur
there. Furthermore, there cannot be peace and there
will not be peace in the Middle East in general until
the reasons for the Middle East conflict have been
eliminated.
These are: the occupation by Israel of
Arab territory, the deprivation of the Arab people of
Palestine of its inalienable rights and the continuing
state of war.

const,ructive measures which are conducive to the
maintenance of a propitious atmosphere for efforts to
bring about a resumption of negotiations. It was in
this spirit that the Romanian delegation voted a few
moments ago in favour of the draft resolution whereby
the mandate of UNEF has just been extended for one
year.
18. I ‘should like to take this opportunity to express
to you, the President, Mr. Akhund of Pakistan, the
deep gratitude of the delegation of Romania for your
persevering energetic and patient efforts, which made
this positive result possible.
19. As has been stressed on other occasions, and
within the mandate of UNEF itself, the Force must
operate with the full co-operation of the parties. We
are aware of the fact that the Force is on Egyptian
territory and that in taking any decision concerning
the activities of that Force it is very important to have,
above all, the consent of that country. That is why
we should like to pay tribute to the Egyptian Government for its patience in agreeing to a new extension
of the mandate of UNEF and for its determination
to abide by peaceful procedures within the political
framework offered by the Organization in its attempts
to claim its inalienable rights.

25. The Soviet Union did not make any objection to
the new extension of the mandate of UNEF in the
Egypt-Israel sector, but we cannot fail today to give
thought to what the almost automatic extension of
UNEF’s mandates will lead to. This is already the
fourth year that this has happened. In the final analysis,
the Security Council in setting up this Force, by no
means considered it an end in itself. The Emergency
Force has always been only one of the means of
creating a favourable situation for a comprehensive
settlement in the Middle East, In the absence of
progress in this extremely important matter the Force
is becoming a means of freezing the situation in the
interests of those who occupy Arab territory.

20. The extension of the mandate of the Force is a
positive and necessary fact, but it cannot be an end in
itself. The activities of the Force cannot be viewed as
anything but a provisional measure of limited duration;
otherwise it would mean perpetuating instability,
injustice and, in particular, foreign military occupation.

26. The Soviet Union is convinced that the present
situation in the Middle East requires immediate efforts
to ensure a breakthrough there in order to achieve a
comprehensive
political settlement.
The basis for
such a settlement has long been obvious, It has
three organically linked and mutually interdependent
elements.

21. That is why we recommend to the States concerned that they make the most of the new extension
of the mandate of UNEF,
redouble their efforts and
begin as soon as possible real negotiations with a view
to solving the fundamental problems of establishing
the just and lasting peace which is so greatly
desired by their peoples.

27. The first is the withdrawal of Israeli troops from
all Arab territories occupied as a result of the aggression committed by Israel in 1967, Such a settlement
would be just to the Arab States, which are the
victims of Israeli aggression. It would provide for their
return to the territories belonging to them and for the
restoration of their sovereignty over those territories
and would eliminate the threat of new aggression.

22. Mr.

LA1 Ya-li (China) (interpretation
from
With regard to the question of the extension
of UNEF, the Chinese delegation has always held
a different position in principle. Basing ourselves on
that position, we did not participate in the vote on
the draft resolution.
Chimse):

28. The second element is to meet the lawful
national demands of the Arab people of Palestine,
including the demand to exercise its inalienable right
to create its own State. Such a solution would be,
just to the Palestinian Arab people and derives from
its right to create its own independent State.

2.3. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretutionfioom Russiutz): The Security
Council has just adopted a resolution extending the
mandate of UNEF in the Middle East. The question
of extending the mandate of the Force cannot be
viewed in isolation from the general overall context
of the situation’iri the Middle East and in isolation
from the fundamental task of achieving a comprehensive settlement in that area.

29. The third element is international guarantees for
the security and inviolability
of the frontiers of all
States in the Middle East, including Israel, and their
right to an independent existence and development.
Such a solution would be just to all countries in the
area, including Israel. It would ensure for Israel conditions of peace and security within recognized
frontiers.

24. We note with regret and concern that the past
year was not used as it should have been for a real
3

I

30. The urgent need for a comprehensive political
settlement in the Middle East on this basis is quite
obvious, and a forum exists for this purpose and is
recognized as politically acceptable by all parties
concerned-the
Geneva Peace Conference on the
Middle East. We can no longer postpone a resumption
of its work. The course of events in the Middle East
is too dangerous. Anyone who opposed the resumption
of the work of the Geneva Peace Conference would
be assuming a very heavy responsibility.

promotion of compliance with Council decisions, the
exercise of the utmost economy in expenditures for the
maintenance of UNEF, and the strength of the Force.
At the same time, the delegation of the Soviet Union
would like to stress the necessity that the United
Nations Secretariat and the UNEF Command keep
very close watch on the matter of exercising the
utmost economy in expenditures for the Force and the
matter of reducing the strength of the Force when
circumstances make that possible.

31. In this connexion, the Soviet Union recently took
a new initiative by putting forward its proposal for a
settlement in the Middle East and a resumption of the
Geneva Peace Conference, circulated on 7 October this
year [S/12208, NLZIZ~X].The Soviet Union proposes the
immediate resumption of the work of the Geneva
Peace Conference with the participation
of all
interested parties, including, of course, the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO).

36. Mr. LECOMPT
(France) (ittterpr~tcrtion J%NH
Frc/tch): The decision that the Coun,cil has just taken
under your capable and lofty guidance, Mr. President,
might appear to be a routine decision. It is not,
however, either useless or without merit. The renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Emergency
Force in the Sinai is obviously useful because it means
that in the coming year it will continue to be understood that the adversaries in the 1973 war will place
their confidence in the United Nations so that they
may remain separated from each other and may make
further attempts to reach a true peace settlement.
There is merit in our resolution because we are
providing those who wish to assist in the reaching of
a peaceful solution with the means of seeking such a
solution with the co-operation of the two parties concerned, one of which has part of its territory occupied
by the other.

32. The Soviet Union has put forward concrete
proposal for the agenda of the Conference: the withdrawal of Israeli troops from all Arab territories
occupied in 1967; the restoration of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian ,Arab people, including
its right to self-determination and the creation of its
own State; the guaranteeing of the right to an independent existence and the security of all States which
are direct parties to the conflict-the
Arab States
which are neighbours of Israel on the one hand and the
State of Israel on the other-and the granting to them
of appropriate international guarantees; and a cessation of the state of war between the Arab countries
concerned and Israel. That agenda, which includes all
the key aspects of a settlement, takes into account the
lawful rights and interests of all the sides directly
involved in the conflict.

37. As we know only too well, the present problems
in the Middle East are so serious, their implications
are so vast, their consequences are often so dramatic
-as we see from the events taking place not far from
Sinai-that there can be a certain feeling of disappointment at simply prolonging an existing arrangement in
a particular part of the overall scene, at taking measures
of a static nature that simply maintain what is already
there, when all the world agrees on the need to set in
motion a major movement towards peace.

33. The Soviet Union is convinced that a real
possibility exists for eliminating the root causes of the
Middle East conflict and reaching an agreement on a
comprehensive settlement at the Geneva Peace Conference.

38. I would say once again that there really is no
contradiction here. The maintenance of UNEF is a
necessary, although not sufficient, condition for any
attempt at a solution in the Middle East. As the
Secretary-General states in his report, the presence
of the Force remains essential “to maintain quiet and
to create an atmosphere conducive to the active search
for the peaceful solution of underlying political
problems” [ibid.].

34. The delegation of the Soviet Union made no
objection to the extension of the mandate of UNEF in
the Egypt-Israel sector-but on the firm understanding
that real and urgent steps will finally be taken to
achieve a comprehensive settlement in .the Middle
East. In that connexion, the Soviet delegation would
draw attention to the timely warning contained in the
Secretary-General’s report that

39. Perhaps we should go even further and recognize
all the positive results of the presence of the Force,
whose functions and responsibilities were considerably
expanded as a result of the Agreement of 4 September
1975 between Egypt and Israel [see, S/l1818 and
A&&l-4]. The Force played a role, and an important
role, in the improvement of the situation by making
it possible to redeploy the opposing forces, in conditions that have been described as exemplary, thanks
to the discipline, the understanding and the sense of
duty of all the members of the Force, whatever their

“If there is a continuing lack of progress in efforts
to implement Security Council resolution 338 (1973),
the situation in the Middle East will inevitably
remain unstable in spite of peace-keeping and other
arrangements.” [S/122/2, paru. 43.1
35. We should like to note with satisfaction the
Secretary-General’s efforts in connexion with the
4

rank. Moreover, the United Nations Force has given
its full assistance in various humanitarian activities
in the Sinai. And what has been the most remarkable
has been the conditions in which the Force has carried
out its task. As the Secretary-General’s report states,
the Force has “enjoyed the full co-operation of the
parties” in carrying out the functions assigned to it
[S/12212, pnra. 421. Of course, some minor difficulties
have arisen, there have been some complaints-indeed
it would have been astonishing if there had not been;
but corrective measures have been sought and, in the
final analysis, we must congratulate ourselves on the
fact that there has been no serious violation of the
cease-fire or of the Agreement of September 1975.

remain unstable in spite of peace-keeping and other
arrangements.” [Ibid., pnra. 43.1
43. We are bound to regret that United Nations
provisions regarding the settlement of the Middle East
problem have not yet been fully implemented and
that the time that has elapsed since the adoption of
resolution 338 (1973)-a considerable time-has not
been fully utilized to achieve progress in the search
for a solution.
44. Certainly efforts have been made, and some gdodwill has been shown. This is, not discouraging. In
particular I should like once again to pay a tribute
to the remarkable contribution of the SecretaryGeneral and his assistants in this task of peace. I am
sure, we are all sure, that the Secretary-General is,
as he has told us, ready once more to make further
efforts for the cause of peace in the Middle East, in
the same direction as that taken by the Cotincil, which
has been entrusted ‘with the ultimate responsibility
for the maintenance and consolidatidn of peace in the
world. There is no doubt that the experience the
Secretary-General has acquired in this matter will be an
important reason-among others-for the hopes we
place in the resumption of negotiations that are as
needful as they are urgent.

40. The renewal of the mandate of the Force, which
would not have been possible without the assent of the
two parties, constitutes
a further manifestation
-following
on the Agreement of September 1975of their good will. I should like once again to salute
their attitude, which is perhaps not always sufficiently
understood or supported. To speak of the “dynamics
of peace” is one thing; to put that into practice, to
create and maintain the delicate conditions making it
possible, is another thing. For that, real political
courage must be shown-the kind of courage shown
by one of the great apostles of peace of our century,
a former French Minister for Foreign Affairs, Aristide
Briand. In one of his speeches in the League of Nations,
Briand made the following observation, which is very
instructive in the context of the situation in the Middle
East:

45. Today I shall once again briefly recall the background to the action we must take. In the opinion of
the French delegation, any lasting peace settlement
in the Middle East must be based on three fundamental
principles: withdrawal from the territories occupied
by Israel in 1967; recognition of the right of the
Palestinians to a homeland; and recognition of the right
of all the States in the region to live in peace within
secure, recognized and guaranteed frontiers. In regard
to the guarantees of the future settlement I should
like also to recall that my country is prepared actively
to contribute to a system of overall guarantees so
as to strengthen peace in the region.

“A country does not go down in history as a
great country because of the heroism of its sons on
the battlefield or because of their victories there.
A country becomes great if, in the midst of difficult
events, in trying times when it is often difficult
for the voice of reason to be heard, it is able to
resist being carried away, it remains patient, and it
has recourse to the law to confirm its legitimate
interests.”

46. Therefore, we express the hope that as soon as
possible the conditions for a resumption of the Geneva
Conference will be met and that there will be
genuine negotiations that will finally make it possible
to deal with the essential problems and with the
implementation of the principles I have just recalled.
An overall settlement covering all the aspects of the
conflict increasingly appears to be the proper means of
facilitating the establishment of the expected peace.
We must all act in such a way as to preserve the
peoples of the region from a new conflict. It is my
delegation’s most ardent wish that the year we have
set ourselves will be fruitful in developments which
will open the way for actions more concrete than the
mere interposing of an emergency force, so that we
may attain the peace to which we all aspire.

41. The extension of the mandate of the Force
bears‘ witness to the renewed confidence of the countries that have accepted that renewal in the possibility
of reaching a just and lasting settlement in the Middle
East by peaceful means. That, display of confidence
must not be in vain,’ because in this respect, the
despair of peoples deprived of their rights grows in
proportion to their dashed hopes.
42. This means that the presence of UNEF can be
justified only if.there is an active search for peace.
That is the meaning of the resolution just adopted,
since it contains a provision callirig upon all parties
concerned immediately to implement Council resolution 338 (1973). That is also the opinion of the
Secretary-General himself. In his report he does not
fail to emphasize that, “if there is,a continuing lack
of progress in efforts to implement resolution 338
(1973), the situation in the Middle East will inevitably

47. Mr. VINCI (Italy): My delegation voted in favour
of the draft resolution in document S/12219. The
reasons for our decision are quite obvious. I shall
5

55. We could not.agree more with the view expressed
by the Secretary-General in his statement and in paragraph 43 of his report that, if there is going to be
a continuing lack of progress in the efforts to implement resolution 338 (1973), the situation in the Middle
East will inevitably remain unstable despite peacekeeping and other arrangements.

sum them up by sayirig that my Government fully
shares the view of the Secretary-General, who in his
comprehensive and enlightening report states, “I consider the continued presence of UNEF in the area
to be essential” [S/122/2, prrrcr. 441.
48. There are grounds for comfort in dealing with the
present item. In fact, my delegation considers that the
United Nations is indeed conducting a successful
operation in the Sinai peninsula. As is indicated in
paragraph 2 of the Secretary-General’s
report, the
situation in the area of operations of the UNEF
has remained stable and the Force has continued
efficiently to discharge its mandate. We further note
that, as is indicated in paragraph 43 of his report, in
the opinion of the Secretary-General the presence of
UNEF has undoubtedly been a major factor in the
maintenance in the Egypt-Israel sectors of the ceasefire called for by the Council.

56. We have appreciated the efforts carried out for
that purpose by the Secretary-General himself and by
interested parties. We should like to assure the Council
that Italy favours and effectively promotes the continuation of those efforts in close co-operation with the
other members of the European Community+
57. Mr. SHERER (United States of America): The
Council has acted today to continue for a period of
one year the essential peace-keeping services of UNEF
in the Sinai. The Emergency Force has played an
indispensable role in helping to maintain the ceasefire called for by the Council in resolution 338 (1973)
and reaffirmed in the Agreement between Egypt and
Israel of 4 September 1975 [ihid.]. Maintenance of the
cease-fire, however, was only one element of the
carefully balanced formulation
contained in resolution 338 (1973). In renewing UNEF for an additional
year we must remind ourselves in the most urgent
terms that negotiation of a just and durable peace was
the ultimate purpose of that resolution.

49. In short, the UNEF operation is a success, and
the 4,174 young men the Council has sent to the
Sinai to prevent war and to keep peace in the area
are most valiant representatives of the Organization
and individually
and collectively
embody all the
United Nations stands for.
50. That being the case, may I add that we should
all be, grateful to those who helped to bring about this
achievement.

58. In welcoming this renewal the United States
wishes to reiterate its commitment
to a determined
effort to achieve an overall settlement in the Middle
East acceptable to all the parties. In this regard
I would recall that Secretary of State Kissinger said on
30 September in speaking to the General Assembly:

51, First 1 should like to pay a tribute to, the
Secretary-General,
who very wisely and generously
supervised and instructed the process which eventually
led to the assumption of new functions and responsibilities such as those indicated in paragraph 2 of his
report under the terms of the Agreement and the
Protocol of September 1975 [sep S/l 1818 unti Arid. I-51.

“The United States will do all it can to assure
that by the time this Assembly meets next year it
will be possible to report significant progress towards
a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.“’

52. I should like again to express our thanks and
appreciation to all the countries that contribute to
the Force-namely,
Australia,
Canada, Finland,
Ghana, Indonesia, Poland and Sweden, as well as to
the countries that contribute to the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization in Palestine (UNTSO),
which, as we know, provides UNEF with a special
task force. I personally take some pride in the services
rendered by the Italian officers in UNTSO.

That pledge is equally appropriate
the Council’s deliberations today.

in the context of

59. The performance of the UNEF Command in
responding to its expanded responsibilities during the
past year has been exemplary in every respect. The
territorial scope of its activities stibstantially widened
as a result of the Agreement of 4 September 1975.
In addition, as the Secretary-General
noted in his
report, UNPF has to an increased extent been called
upon to exercise its good offices to resolve problems
in the implementation of that Agreement which might
otherwise have posed difficulties. We were fortunate
that during this critical period the United Nations
peace-keeping forces in the Middle East were ably
led by Lieutenant-General
Ensio Siilasvuo. Oul
appreciation goes also to Lieu’tenant-General
Liljestrand for his efforts as Commander of UNEF for the
past 14 months.

53. UNEF has succeeded in setting up a highly
disciplined, well-organized and efficient tinit. I wish
once again to acknowledge the commendable manner
in which it has carried out its functions and to pay a
tribute to its Commanding
Officers, LieutenantGeneral Ensio Siilasvuo and Lieutenant-General
Bengt Liljestrand.
54. We extend our congratulations also to the two
Governments involved, those of Egypt and Israel, for
the wise stand they have taken. In particular, we wish
to express our appreciati0.n to the Cairo Government
for the further consent it gave for the stationing of the
Force.
6

60. The Secretary-General
has noted in his report
that UNEF has enjoyed the full co-operation of the
parties concerned in discharging its complex and vital
responsibilities. We should like to pay tribute here to
the constructive
spirit in which both sides have
approached their responsibilities
in fulfilment of the
cease-fire and subsequent agreements.

and maturity of the attitude.of the United Nations and
international opinion, and invoke reexamination
of
the entire question and the mode of dealing with it,
67. Hence, for that reason the delegation of the
Libyan Arab Republic did not participate in the debate
On the present item or in the vote on the draft resolution contained in document S/12219.

61. We are particularly gratified to observe that the
Secretary-General
has been able through judicious
management to reduce the UNEF budget for the
coming year without
sacrificing
its. operational
effectiveness in any way. I heartily congratulate him
and his staff for this achievement.

68. Mr. RYDBECK (Sweden): As a consequence of
the Agreement between Egypt and Israel of 4 September 1975, [see S/118/8 and Add.l-4] a number of
essential new tasks were assigned to UNEF in addition to those already given to the Force at the time of
its creation. The deployment of UNEF was changed
considerably and the area which it has to cover became
vastly expanded. Its responsibilities are thus far more
extensive and complex now than those with which
it had been entrusted previously. The assignment of
these new tasks has increased the importance of the
role that UNEF has to play in the area. The decision
just taken by the Security Council is therefore of great
importance as it establishes a basis for another year of
UNEF peace-keeping activities.

62. Mr. ELHOFARI
(Libyan
Arab Republic):
Mr. President, as this is the first occasion that my
delegation has had to address the Security Council
this month, allow me, first of all, to extend to you on
behalf of the delegation of the Libyan Arab Republic
our sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. My delegation is gratified to
see an eminent diplomat of a sister country, with which
we maintain close and affectionate ties, presiding over
the Council. We are deeply satisfied with the efficient
manner in which you have been conducting the
Council’s deliberations,
a manner which, indeed,
reflects the familiar vigour and fervour of the people
of the great country that you represent. Those of us
who have been privileged to know you over the years
are not at all surprised by the striking calibre of the
leadership that you have revealed.

69. With increased responsibilities assigned to it,
UNEF has become an integral element in the implementation of the new Agreement. The Force is not
only crucial for the fulfilment of the Agreement, but
it is a central element in the delicate structure that
constitutes the present political and military situation
in the Middle East. The Secretary-General states in
his report that

63. On behalf of Mr. Kikhia, I thank the esteemed
members of the Council for their most kind words of
praise and congratulations
for the manner in which
he presided over the deliberations of the Council
during the month of September.

“The presence of UNEF in the Egypt-Israel sector
has undoubtedly been a major factor in the maintenance of the cease-fire called for by the Security
Council and reaffirmed in the Egypt-Israel Agreement.” [S/12212, puru. 43.1

64. Also on behalf of the Libyan Arab Republic
delegation, I should like to express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General
for his earnest endeavours
as well as for his excellent report to the Council in
connexion with the item under discussion.

The Secretary-General also concludes that “the continued presence of UNEF in the area [is] essential”.
[Ihid., pnru. 44.1 The Swedish Government fully shares
this view of the Secretary-General.
70, However, as other delegations have already
pointed out, UNEF remains in the Middle East not to
serve as a substitute for a settlement but to provide a
foundation for negotiations towards a settlement.
The presence of UNEF must not be allowed to have
the effect of causing the quiet now prevailing in the
area to degenerate into stagnation. The paramount
reason for the continued presence of UNEF is to
serve as a means of helping further negotiations by
providing time and ensuring calm in the area.

65. The position of the Libyan Arab Republic
regarding the renewal of the mandate of UNEF is we11
known and has not altered. As was previously stated by
the Libyan delegation in the Council on 28 May
last, resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), on which
the presence of UNEF is based, are “irrelevant as
a framework for any just and lasting solution to the
Palestine problem and to the Middle East question”
[1923rd meeting, paria. 711.

66. We contend that General Assembly resolu. . tions 3236 CXXIX) and 3237 (XXIX), reaffirming the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people; resolution 3376 (XXX), proposing means designed to enable
the Palestinian people to achi,eve their national rights;
and resolution 3379 (XXX), condemning Zionism as a
racist movement, elucidate the profound changes in

71. The prolongation of the mandate for a’ period of
one whole year should give all the parties ample time
to take real and positive steps towards negotiations.
If; however, the time given is not utilized for efforts
towards implementation of resolution 338‘ (1973), the
tension could rapidly increase. As the Secretary7

76. In recent months, developments of a particular
nature in the Middle East may-have had the effect of
obscuring the fundamental realities of the Middle East
problem, but the real situation in the Middle East has
tended to take on an increasingly disquieting aspect,
The reality of aggression, occupation and injustice
has become subordinated to a situation the underlying
cause of which is to be found in the displacement of the
Palestinians from their homeland. We must be on guard
against being distracted from the substantive issue. We
must focus firmly on the crux of the Middle East
problem. My Foreign Minister, Comrade Wills, did this
in the general debate when he said:

General states in his report, the situation in the area
is “unstable in spite of peace-keeping and other
in this
arrangements”
[ihid., p NI’II. 431. Inactivity
respect could therefore be extremely dangerous.
Sweden strongly urges all concerned to undertake
renewed efforts.
72. I want to use this opportunity to express my
Government’s sincere appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral and his staff for their dedication and untiring
efforts in connexion with UNEF and its operations
and especially for the extremely smooth and efficient
way in which the new and considerably more difficult
task has been carried out.

‘tin the Middle East the restoration of the rights
of the Palestinian people remains the siue quc~ /IO/~
of a just and lasting peace. Huddled in refugee
camps, subjected to the crumbs of international
compassion, the Palestinians still await the restoration and exercise of their inalienable... rights.“2

73. In conclusion, I also wish, on behalf of my
Government, to pay a warm tribute to the Chief Coordinator
of the United Nations Peace-keeping
Missions in the Middle East, Lieutenant-General
Ensio
Siilasvuo, to the Commander of UNEF, LieutenantGeneral Bengt LiIjestrand, and to the officers and
men of UNEF. Having had the opportunity to visit
the area recently and to talk to the generals, to other
officers and to a considerable number of soldiers,
I came away with a strong impression of the considerable responsability each one of them faces in their
daily work, of the keen awareness on their part
-officers and men alike-of this responsibility and of
the calm, skilful, efficient and courteous way in which
they all perform the complicated and difficult tasks
entrusted to them.

My Foreign Minister went on to reiterate the three
principles on which, in Guyana’s view, a Middle East
peace hinges: ,first, the right of the Palestinian people
to a homeland; secondly, the right of all States in the
area, including the State of Israel, to exist within
boundaries that are universally recognized; and,
thirdly, the withdrawal of Israel from all Arab territories occupied since 5 June 1967.
77. However, a Middle East peace still seems all too
elusive. As you said in your statement, Mr. President,
members of the Council expect that the SecretaryGeneral will assist in the early resumption of negotiations for a comprehensive settlement in the Middle
East. It is time indeed to regain the momentum. It is
time to reconvene the Geneva Peace Conference, with
the involvement of all interested parties, including
importantly
the representatives of the Palestinian
people, the PLO.

74. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): One year ago, when
the mandate of UNEF was extended for an unprecedented period of one year, my delegation expressed
the cautious hope that the year-long extension would
provide the opportunity for movement towards a
comprehensive Middle East settlement..Now,
a year
later, our hopes have not yet been realized. The
Secretary-General,
in his report to the General
Assembly and the Security Council, has informed us
of his efforts to bring about a resumption of negotiations aimed at achieving a just and lasting Middle
East settlement. Those efforts have so far been
unsuccessful.

78. Before concluding, I wish to pay tribute to the
troops that serve in the Emergency Force and to
those countries that have so selflessly supplied them.
I should like in particular to congratulate the forces
and their officers for performing their trying andl
arduous duties with such commendable efficiency in
a widely expanded Area. Finally, our congratulations
and thanks go to the Secretary-General and his hardworking staff.

75. My delegation has, however, voted in favour of
the extension of UNEF’s mandate, because we agree
that the presence of the United Nations peace-keeping
forces has been instrumental in maintaining a ceasefire between Egyptian and Israeli forces. Furthermore, committed as Guyana is to the peaceful settlement of,disputes, we continue to harbour the hope
that the fresh breathing space offered by the renewal
of the mandate will underscore the need to redouble
efforts to achieve a comprehensive
Middle East
settlement. At the same time, we wish to warn, as on
previous occasions, against any tendency to see the
renewal of the mandate of UNEF as a routine and
procedural exercise. We do not subscribe to the
indefinite passage of resolutions in such a manner.
They can in no way stand as a substitute for a peace
settlement.

79. Mr. MURRAY
(United Kingdom): My delegation was pleased to vote in favour of the draft reseelution we have just adopted renewing the mandate 0:f
UNEF for a further year. There can be no doubt of
the important role played by UNEF in maintaining
the cease-fire and in carrying out the tasks assigned
to it under the Egypt-Israel Agreement [see Slil8Jlg
and Add. J-41. Despite the progress that has been
made, the underlying situation in the area remains
dangerous. We agree, therefore, with the judgement
of the Secretary-General that the continued presence
of the Force remains essential at the present time.
8

80. At the same time, I wish to reiterate what we
have said at previous meetings of the Council on this
question, that the principal aim of the Force should
be to provide the necessary conditions of calm within
which efforts towards the conclusion .of a just and
lasting settlement can progress. It cannot and should
not serve as a substitute for a settlement but should
serve as an instrument to help in the search for a
real peace. My delegation welcomed the conclusion
of the Egypt-Israel Agreement last year as an important
step towards an overall settlement in the Middle East.
It is a source of great satisfaction to my delegation
to note from the report of the Secretary-General that
the implementation of the Agreement has been carried
out satisfactorily and that it. has been maintained
without significant violations during the past year. At
the same time, we cannot but regret that for a number
of reasons the Agreement has not yet been followed
up by further progress. I should like once more to
stress the importance that we attach to making use of
the time provided by the extension of the mandate to
get the negotiating process restarted and to press on
with efforts to achieve,a just and lasting settlement,
without which there can be no real security in the
Middle East. As the Foreign and Commonwealth
Secretary said, speaking in the general debate in the
Assembly a little over two weeks ago:

84. My delegation noted with satisfaction from the
Secretary-General’s
report that the co-operation of the
parties concerned had enabled the Force to discharge
its responsibilities
in a satisfactory manner, and thus
the cease-fire had been observed by both parties.
85. We wish to express our sincere appreciation to
the Governments
which have provided troops; to
Lieutenant-General
Siilasvuo, Chief Co-ordinator of
the United Nations Peace-keeping Missions in the
Middle
East; to Lieutenant-General
Liljestrand,
Commander of UNEF; to the officers and men of the
Force; to its civilian staff and the military observers
of IJNTSO assigned to assist them; and, of course,
to the Secretary-General and all his staff, who have
been so helpful in maintaining this extraordinary force
at its high level of performance.
86. While UNEF is playing a more important role
in the area than ever before, my delegation cannot
fail to emphasize once again that UNEF is not in the
Middle East to serve as a substitute for a settlement
but to provide the time and climate which are essential
for negotiations leading to a peaceful settlement.
87. It is true that efforts have been made at several.
levels to resume negotiations for a just and durable
peace in the Middle East, as called for in resolution 338
(1973); but, as the Secretary-General
has rightly
pointed out in his report, if there is a continuing lack
of progress in efforts to implement
resolution 338
(1973), the situation in the Middle East will inevitably
remain unstable in spite of peace-keeping and other
arrangements. We therefore attach great importance
to the meaning of subparagraphs ((I) and (L;) of paragraph 1 of the resolution just adopted, namely, that
the Security Council should call upon all the parties
concerned to implement immediately its resolution 338
(1973) and request the Secretary-General to continue
to follow closely the development of the situation and
the steps taken and inform the Council thereof as
deemed necessary.

“no one can guarantee in advance that negotiations
will lead to a lasting peace, but, unless the opportunity is grasped now, the chances of success will
surely diminish as time passes.“”
81. Once again I should like to express our gratitude
to the Secretary-General and to Lieutenant-General
Siilasvuo and their respective staffs for the skill and
efficiency with which they have carried out their tasks
in the past year. We are grateful also to those countries which have made the role of UNEF possible by
continuing to provide troops. The Secretary-General
has drawn attention in his report to the increased size
and complexity of the responsibilities which UNEF
has had to undertake under the new Agreement. The
way in which the Force has responded and adapted
itself to these new tasks and the success with which
it has carried them out, in sometimes difficult circumstances, does credit to all concerned. I should like,
therefore, to join others who have already spoken
in paying tribute to the Secretary-General and all
those responsible for the operation of UNEF for the
exemplary way in which they have carried out this
essential task.

88. It is the hope of my delegation that the time
gained by the extension of the mandate of UNEF
for one year will not be wasted and that renewed efforts
will be made by all the parties concerned to establish
the necessary conditions for an early resumption of the
negotiating process, including the Geneva Conference,
so that genuine negotiations can be arranged without
delay to deal with the difficult problems that stand in
the way of a just and lasting peace in the area.

82. Mr. ABE (Japan): The Japanese delegation was
pleased to vote for the resolution which the Council
has just adopted renewing the mandate of the ‘UNEF
for one year.

89. Before concluding, I should like to pay tribute to
you, Mr. President, for the role you have played so
efficiently in bringing about the unanimous adoption
of this resolution.

83. The Force is now deployed in an area more than
four times the size of the former area of disengagement,
and its responsibilities
under the new Agreement
between Egypt and Israel [ihid.] are far more extensive
and complex than those it had previously assumed.

90. Mr. ILLUECA
(Panama) (i/II~Jr’pr’rtclticlrr
jkonr
Spar~ish): My delegation wishes to place on record its
gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his report on
the situation in the Middle East [S/122/0] and his report
9

on UNEF,

which we are considering under the agenda
item That report provided the Council with authentic
data for the preparation of the draft resolution in
document
S/12219, which we have just adopted,
renewing the mandate of UNEF for one year as has
been done in the past.

a request from the representative of Saudi Arabia
to address the Council on this matter. If I hear no
objection I shall invite him to do so, and thereafter
I shall make a statement on behalf of my delegation.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bwoody,
representative of Saudi Arabia, took a place at the
Council table.

91. The resolution adopted today responds fundamentally to the statements and wishes of the SecretaryGeneral as set forth in the reports I have mentioned.
The content of the reports must be borne in mind
not only by members of the Council but in particular
by the ‘parties to the conflict, the PLO and the coChairmen of the Geneva Peace Conference.

98. The PRESIDENT:
Saudi Arabia.

99. Mr. BAROODY
(Saudi Arabia): Thank you,
Mr. President, for according me the opportunity to
make a short statement, although I am not a member
of the Council, and I have taken note of the fact that
only members of the Council have addressed themselves to the question before the Council. However,
since no one raised any objection to my making a short
statement, I can promise members that I shall not
exacerbate matters by going into the genesis of this
question or into its substance. I shotrId like rather as
an old-timer in the Organization, as one who witnessed
what has happened since 1947, leaving aside the 1973
conflict, to draw the attention of my colleagues to
certain facts. As I have said, I shall not delve into
the substance of the matter, but I must draw certain
matters to the attention of those who have been kind
enough to finance the peace-keeping operations. Of
course, there is our colleague from China who did not.
participate in the vote and our colleague from Libya,
who also did not participate in the vote.

92. This is an appropriate time to express our
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his indefatigable
efforts for the restoration of peace in that region in
accordance with the resolutions of the Council, and
also for the miracle he performed in effecting savings
in the operating budget of UNEF in a manner compatible with its effective functioning.

:/

93. We also express our gratitude to the officers and
men of the UNEF contingents for the exemplary
manner in which they have been discharging their
difficult and delicate task. We therefore appeal to the
appropriate persons and authorities to give UNEF
all the co-operation and respect it deserves so as to
enable it to function as an integrated military unit, and
therefore to abolish the restrictions imposed on the
freedom of movement of the personnel of certain
contingents, since that type of discrimination
is not
desirable, advisable or helpful in improving the
situation.

100. Saudi Arabia could have been a member of the
Council two or three times over the period of 30 years
having been a signatory of the Charter, but we
refrained, hoping that the five major Powers had
enough wisdom to resolve the questions of security,
the more so because they had the right of veto. Even
if we were members of the Security Council and the
five Powers were opposed to any decision that the
others might have arrived at in contravention of the
decision the five Powers had taken, our decision would
be null and void because of the veto. That is why
I salute my colleague from China and my colleague
from Libya for not having participated in the vote.

94. The delegation of Panama wishes to place on
record that, when we voted in favour of the resolution
adopted today, we did so in the conviction that it is
a necessary measure which cannot be postponed, but
not a permanent measure which freezes a situation; it
is a provisional measure applied until such time as,
to quote the Secretary-General,
a just and lasting
settlement of the Middle East problem is reached.
95. We believe that, to attain that goal, the negotiating
process must be reactivated as soon as possible by
a resumption of the Geneva Conference with the
participation of the PLO, since in this case the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people must be taken
into account.

101. However, I must mention one thing. From m!r’
humble knowledge of the world situation, I note that
we started extending the mandate by periods of six
months: from October 1973 to April 1974 the mandak
of the Force was extended for six months [wsolntioi?
341 f/973)], then again between April 1974 and Ottober 1974 [resolrrtion 346 (1974)], and again, from Octalber 1974 to April 1975 [resolrltion
362 (1974+.three
periods of six months each-and then there were two
periods of three months each [reso/r/tiom
386 (1975’)
trrrti 371 t/97.5)]. Now the Council has adopte’d a resolution to extend the mandate for a period of one
year. Are we so optimistic as to believe that nothing
will happen in the meantime that might perhaps
endanger the lives of the soldiers from the countries

96. I conclude by expressing to you, Mr. President,
the gratitude of my delegation for your brilliant
diplomatic negotiations which have been decisive in
securing approval today of this resolution which not
only renews the mandate of UNEF but also appeals to
the parties-and
this is very important-to
implement
immediately
resolution 338 (1973).
97. The PRESIDENT:
No other Council member
wishes to speak at this stage, but I have just received
10
1‘

I call on the representative of

making up the Force, from Australia, Canada,
Finland, Ghana, Indonesia, Poland, and Sweden, countries which we thank and praise for providing 4,174
troops.

create a conflict that could also plunge us all into the
abyss of a world war.
106. Who can guarantee that it will not, because there
are extraneous interests there, the interests ofthe major
Powers, and spheres of influence? Can we afford to
continue with that policy of spheres of influence-this
is my region, the other is yours, and do not interfere?
But the major Powers-I
do not have to name
them-do
interfere. Who can guarantee that they will
not interfere in each other’s spheres of influence?
The whole concept of spheres of influence ‘is wrong;
but, since we still go by policies predicated upon
spheres of influence, there is no assurance that there.
will be no conflict.

102. I come from the area. I am from the region of
the Middle East, The Middle East is a boiling kettle,
aside from what is happening in Palestine and the
neighbouring region, Why did the Council not renew
this peace-keeping operation for three months or for
six months? We are told, of course, that it was so
that the negotiators could have a sufficient period in
which to negotiate. We have been negotiating since
1948. What has happened’? There were conflicts in
1956, 1968 and 1973-major conflicts. Are we fooling
ourselves? Do we want to gain time? Is it a question
of detente? Does the word detente have a magical
significance to each member? Has it been repeated
so often that members finally believe in it? We would
like to believe in it. I am not going into the substance
of the matter. I promised the Council that I would not
do so. But I believe this is a travesty of what we
expect from the Council, which has the duty of bringing
about peace, not only in the Middle East but in any
region where there is a conflict. Is the Council gaining
time? Human behaviour is not a mathematical
formula. It is not one of the pure sciences. Political
science is not a pure science. The pure sciences are
chemistry, physics and astronomy. We do not know
how humans behave from day to day, let alone from
month to month and from year to year.

107. I hope that there will not be, but what precautions are we taking? None whatsoever. I notice how
generous the major Powers become when it is a
question of protecting the relative status yuo in
their spheres of influence: $83 million of taxpayers’
money, which could be used for peaceful purposes.
108. That is the statement I wanted to make. It did
not deal with the substance of the matter, but we shall
have occasion to deal with that in the Council as well
as in the General Assembly.
109. The PRESIDENT:
There are no further
speakers, and I should like now, with the Council’s
permission, to make a brief statement in my capacity
as the representative of PAKISTAN.

103. Had this been the first extension for which we
had asked, well and good. There have been six
extension periods, with abortive results. We know
that some members support the idea of the Geneva
Conference. We know that the other party in the
dispute, namely Israel, does not seem to be anxious
to go to Geneva unless the Palestinians are not
present as a separate entity. Again, I do not want to
be tempted to go into this question, because I may
touch on matters of substance. But what assurance do
members have that there will not be a conflict within
a few months? Are you prepared to jeopardize the
lives of those troops from those seven countries,
which we thank? What are we doing here-trying
to
find a common denominator for the interests of members of the Council, especially the major Powers on the
Council, as we have done whenever we could not
solve anything and had to arrive at a consensus
instead? I have become nostalgic about the veto when
many times a consensus has meant nothing at all.

110. The Council has adopted this afternoon a resolution extending the mandate of UNEF for another
year. My delegation voted in’favour of the resolution
since we agree with the Secretary-General
that the
presence of UNEF in the Egypt-Israel sector continues to be a major factor in the maintenance of the
cease-fire. We note with satisfaction that the Force
has continued to provide its good offices to the parties
in dealing with urgent problems on the ground. I should
like to pay my delegation’s tribute to LieutenantGeneral Liljestrand, the Commander of the Force, and
Lieutenant-General
Siilasvuo, the Chief Co-ordinator
of the United Nations Peace-keeping Missions in the
Middle East, as well as to individual members of
the Force for the devotion with which they have
performed their difficult tasks. We note in particular
and with deep appreciation the humanitarian
tasks
performed by the Force, making possible family
reunions, student exchanges and the crossing over of
persons from one side to the other.

104. Mr. President, you will forgive me for speaking
in an emphatic manner, because I speak not as a
representative of a country that is a Member of the
United Nations but rather as a human being. Remember the Charter. It does not say, “We, the States
Members of the United Nations”; it says, “We, the
Peoples of the United Nations”.

111. When extending the mandate of the Force last
year the Council decided, inter’ alia, to call,upon all
the parties concerned to implement
immediately
Council resolution 338 (1973) and the SecretaryGeneral was requested to submit at the end of the
period a report on the developments in the situation
and the steps taken to implement resolution 338 (1973).
We have studied carefully the Secretary-General’s

105. The region is a powder keg. Again, I shall not
60 into matters of substance. A few sparks might
11

report of 18 October 1976 as well as his report on the
situation in the Middle East [S/122/0] of the same date.
We note that the Secretary-General sent his personal
representative to the Peace Conference on the Middle
East, Under-Secretary-General
Roberto Guyer, to
undertake an exploratory mission in the Middle East
and that the Secretary-General himself made contacts
with the representatives of the parties at United
Nations Headquarters. However, there has been no
visible progress towards a settlement of the Middle
East dispute in accordance with resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973). The replies received by the
Secretary-General from the two co-Chairmen and the
parties concerned put into sharp focus once again
important differences of view among the parties concerned on the course of action to be followed. Thus
there has in fact been very little movement forward
during the last year towards the implementation
of
resolution 338 (1973).

peaceful solution of underlying political problems. The
elements of a lasting peace, as defined in resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973), include the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from all occupied Arab territories.
113. The delegation of Pakistan maintains that real
peace cannot return to the Middle East unless all
Arab territories occupied by Israel are vacated and
the inalienable rights of the Palestinians, including
their right to self-determination
and to independent
nationhood, are fully recognized and implemented
without reservation. A peace settlement would also
ensuie the security and the right to live in peace of all
the States of the region. In supporting the extension
of the mandate of UNEF, my delegation wishes to
emphasize that efforts towards a just settlement of
the Middle East dispute, in accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the resolution joust
adopted, should be pursued with determination and
vigour. We agree that the time has come to convene
the Geneva Peace Conference. We hold that if the
Conference is to succeed all the parties concerned,
including the PLO, should be able to participate in it
at all stages. In this regard the Secretary Genenal’s
efforts towards a settlement of the dispute will h:ave
our full support.

112. The Council met last year to renew the mandate
of UNEF in the wake of the Sinai Agreement of
4 September 1975 [see S/l1818 and Add.i-41. That
Agreement had generated hope that it might lead to
the complete withdrawal of Israeli forces from the
occupied territories, thus bringing about a lasting
settlement of the Middle East dispute. As many
representatives have pointed out, the continued
presence of UNEF in the Sinai, while necessary
for the maintenance of the cease-fire, is not and cannot
be a permanent or long-term arrangement. We fully
endorse, therefore, the Secretary-General’s
view that
the primary role of the peace-keeping force is to create
an atmosphere conducive to the active search for the

The meeting rose rrt 5.40 pm.
Notes
’ OfJicicrl

Records

of the Genrml

,4ssernh/y,

Plenary Meeti,lg.s,
11th meeting, para. 191.
2 Ibid., 6th meeting, para. 316.
.1/hid., 17th meeting, para. 65.

12

Thirty-first

Scs.sion,

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
or write to: United Nations,
Sales Section.
New York or Geneva.

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications’des
Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aup&
des ventes,
New York ou Genbve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES NATIONS

UNIES

sent en vente dans les librairies
et Ies agences
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
B : Nations

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
N ueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLKATIONS

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas est!tn en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00300

dbpositaircs
du
Unies. Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Secci6n de Ventas,

83-60801-April

1985-2,200
