A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/69
20 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 88
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/52/618)]
52/69.

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in
all their aspects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965 and all other relevant resolutions,
Recalling in particular its resolution 51/136 of 13 December 1996,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization,1
Affirming that the efforts of the United Nations in the peaceful settlement of disputes, including through
its peacekeeping operations, are indispensable,
Welcoming the expansion of the membership of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
Convinced of the need for the United Nations to continue to improve its capabilities in the field of
peacekeeping and to enhance the effective and efficient deployment of its peacekeeping operations,
Considering the contribution that all States Members of the Organization make to peacekeeping,
Taking note of the widespread interest in contributing to the work of the Special Committee expressed
by many Member States, in particular troop-contributing countries,
Bearing in mind the continuous necessity of preserving the efficiency and strengthening the effectiveness
of the work of the Special Committee,

1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/52/1).

98-76357

/...

A/RES/52/69
Page 2

1.

Welcomes the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations;2

2. Endorses the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee contained in
paragraphs 34 to 91 of its report;
3. Urges Member States, the Secretariat and relevant organs of the United Nations to take all necessary
steps to implement the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee;
4. Reiterates that those Member States that become personnel contributors to United Nations
peacekeeping operations in years to come or participate in the future in the Special Committee for three
consecutive years as observers shall, upon request in writing to the Chairman of the Committee, become
members at the following session of the Committee;
5. Decides that the Special Committee, in accordance with its mandate, shall continue its efforts for
a comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects and shall review
the implementation of its previous proposals and consider any new proposals so as to enhance the capacity
of the United Nations to fulfil its responsibilities in this field;
6. Requests the Special Committee to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly at its fiftythird session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-third session the item entitled
"Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects".
69th plenary meeting
10 December 1997

2

A/52/209.
