A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/219
4 March 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 114
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/51/748)]
51/219.

Programme planning

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/234 of 21 December 1982, 38/227 A of
20 December 1983, 41/213 of 19 December 1986, 45/253 of 21 December 1990,
47/214 of 23 December 1992 and section I.B of its resolution 48/218 A of 23
December 1993 and its decision 50/452 of 22 December 1995,
Having examined the proposed medium-term plan for the period 1998-2001,1
Having considered the views of the Main Committees of the General
Assembly on the proposed medium-term plan for the period 1998-2001,
Having also considered the report of the Committee for Programme and
Coordination on the work of its thirty-sixth session,2
Having further considered the report of the Secretary-General on the
programme performance of the United Nations for the biennium 1994-19953 and
the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services on strengthening the role of evaluation findings
in programme design, delivery and policy directives,4
I

1

A/51/6 (Perspective), A/51/6 (Note) and A/51/6 (Progs. 1-25).

2

A/51/16 (Parts I and II); see Official Records of the General Assembly,
Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 16.
3

A/51/128 and Add.1.

4

A/51/88, annex.

97-77083

/...

A/RES/51/219
Page 2

MEDIUM-TERM PLAN FOR THE PERIOD 1998-2001
1.
Adopts the proposed medium-term plan for the period 1998-2001,5
together with the relevant recommendations of the Committee for Programme and
Coordination6 and the additional conclusions and recommendations contained in
the annex to the present resolution, taking into account the views of the Main
Committees of the General Assembly;
2.
Reaffirms that the medium-term plan, as adopted, is the principal
policy directive of the United Nations and shall serve as a framework for the
formulation of the biennial programme budgets;
3.
Stresses the importance of ensuring that the medium-term plan
reflects all mandated programmes and activities, and decides to include
reference in the approved version of the plan to the legislative mandates
relevant to the work to be carried out;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to propose revisions to the
Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of
the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation,7
taking into account the views expressed by Member States thereon, and to
submit such revisions to the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its
thirty-eighth session;
5.
Reaffirms the role of the Committee for Programme and Coordination
as the main subsidiary organ of the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council for planning, programming and coordination;
6.
States;

Emphasizes the importance of the consultative process with Member

7.
Also emphasizes the importance of the contribution of the
sectoral, regional and central intergovernmental bodies, in particular the
Main Committees of the General Assembly, in reviewing and improving the
quality of the medium-term plan and its revisions;
8.
Regrets that some programmes of the medium-term plan for the
period 1998-2001 were not reviewed by the relevant intergovernmental bodies;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to take all appropriate measures,
including ad hoc measures, and to submit proposals to the General Assembly at
its fifty-second session, so as to enable the Main Committees of the General
Assembly as well as the sectoral, functional and regional bodies effectively
to review the relevant portions of the medium-term plan or its revisions, with
a view to facilitating their consideration by the Committee for Programme and
Coordination and the Fifth Committee;

5
A/51/6 (Progs. 1-25); see Official Records of the General Assembly,
Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 6.
6
See A/51/16 (Parts I and II); see Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 16.
7

ST/SGB/PPBME Rules/1(1987).
/...

A/RES/51/219
Page 3

II
STRUCTURE
1.
Notes with concern that the Secretary-General, in presenting the
programme structure of the medium-term plan for the period 1998-2001, did not
take fully into account the recommendations of the Committee for Programme and
Coordination and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions or the views and opinions expressed by Member States, as requested
in decision 50/452;
2.
Decides to approve the programme structure of the medium-term
plan, subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3.
Decides also to maintain disarmament as an independent programme
in the medium-term plan;
4.
Decides further to adopt programme 19 (Human rights) without
prejudice to consideration by the General Assembly of the ongoing process of
restructuring the Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat;
5.
Decides to review in depth the structure of the medium-term plan
at its fifty-fifth session, through the Committee for Programme and
Coordination;
III
PRIORITIES
1.
Stresses the importance of priority-setting as an integral part of
the planning, programming and budgeting process;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to present to the Committee for
Programme and Coordination at its thirty-eighth session recommendations on
priority-setting, including at the subprogramme level, within the medium-term
plan for the period 1998-2001;
3.
Also requests the Secretary-General to implement the medium-term
plan in accordance with the agreed overall priorities as contained in the
annex to the present resolution;
IV
PROGRAMME PERFORMANCE REPORT
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the programme
performance of the United Nations for the biennium 1994-1995;3
2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination6 regarding the report of the Secretary-General on
the programme performance of the United Nations for the biennium 1994-1995;
V
OTHER CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE FOR PROGRAMME AND COORDINATION
1.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination at its thirty-sixth session6 that have not
otherwise been approved by the General Assembly at its fifty-first session;

/...

A/RES/51/219
Page 4

2.
Notes with concern the low rate of implementation of the selfevaluation of the programmes, as reflected in paragraph 269 of the report of
the Board of Auditors.8
89th plenary meeting
18 December 1996
ANNEX
Conclusions and recommendations on programmes and subprogrammes
of the medium-term plan for the period 1998-2001
Introduction and priorities
1.
The medium-term plan is a translation of legislative mandates into
programmes. Its objectives and strategies are derived from the policy
orientations and goals set by the intergovernmental organs. In this respect,
the medium-term plan constitutes the principal policy directive of the United
Nations.
2.
In response to the need to address efficiently and effectively
persistent problems, as well as to respond to emerging trends and challenges
of the future, the Organization will, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, give priority to the following areas of work during the
implementation of the medium-term plan for the period 1998-2001:
(a)

Maintenance of international peace and security;

(b)
Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable
development, in accordance with relevant General Assembly resolutions and
recent United Nations conferences;
(c)

Development of Africa;

(d)

Promotion of human rights;

(e)

Effective coordination of humanitarian assistance efforts;

(f)

Promotion of justice and international law;

(g)

Disarmament;

(h)
Drug control, crime prevention and combating international
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations;
Programme 1.

Political affairs

Paragraph 1.1
The General Assembly approves the proposal contained in paragraph 46 (a)
of the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination.

8

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session,
Supplement No. 5 (A/51/5), vol. I, sect. II.
/...

A/RES/51/219
Page 5

At the end of the paragraph add:
The programme also includes the promotion of a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement of the question of Palestine in accordance with all
relevant United Nations resolutions.
Paragraph 1.3
The General Assembly approves the proposal contained in paragraph 46 (b)
of the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination.
In the third line, for recent resolutions 47/120 A read relevant
resolutions, including resolutions 47/120 A
Paragraph 1.4 (b)
The General Assembly approves the proposal contained in paragraph 46 (c)
of the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination.
Paragraph 1.4 (d)
The General Assembly approves the proposal contained in paragraph 46 (d)
of the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination.
Paragraph 1.4 (h)
The General Assembly approves the proposal contained in paragraph 46 (e)
of the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination.
At the end of the paragraph, insert:
as well as assistance to and cooperation with the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People in the
implementation of its mandate
Paragraph 1.5
The General Assembly approves the proposal contained in paragraph 46 (f)
of the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination.
Paragraph 1.6
The General Assembly approves the proposal contained in paragraph 46 (g)
of the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination.
Paragraph 1.7
The General Assembly approves the proposal contained in paragraph 46 (h)
of the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination.
Paragraph 1.8
The General Assembly approves the proposal contained in paragraph 46 (i)
of the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination.
Paragraph 1.9
The General Assembly approves the proposal contained in paragraph 46 (j)
of the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination.

/...

A/RES/51/219
Page 6

Paragraph 1.10
Replace the first sentence with the following:
In implementing the subprogramme, the Department will strive in
particular to reinforce the Organization's capacity for early warning
and good offices, and for non-military measures to prevent disputes from
escalating into conflicts, as well as for resolving those which have
erupted, while fully respecting the principles of sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of Member States and
non-intervention in matters that are essentially within the domestic
jurisdiction of any State, as well as the principle of consent, which is
an essential element for the success of such efforts.
Paragraph 1.11
The General Assembly approves the proposal contained in paragraph 46 (l)
of the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination.
Paragraph 1.12
Replace the last sentence with the following:
Contact with relevant regional organizations, non-governmental
organizations and other private and academic research institutes,
without compromising the impartiality of the United Nations, will also
be maintained as part of this subprogramme to assist the
Secretary-General in his political contacts with Member States.
Paragraphs 1.13 to 1.18
Replace the text of the paragraphs with the following, as a separate
programme:
1.13.
The mandate for the programme on disarmament stems from the
Charter of the United Nations and from the aims and purposes proclaimed
by the General Assembly. The implementation of this programme should be
guided by the priorities established in the relevant General Assembly
resolutions and decisions. The Centre for Disarmament Affairs is
responsible for implementing this programme.
1.14.
The first objective of this programme is to provide
organizational and substantive secretariat support to multilateral
bodies entrusted with deliberation and/or negotiations on disarmament
issues, including the meeting of States parties and other international
meetings related to multilateral disarmament agreements.
1.15.
The second objective is to follow and assess current and future
trends in the field of disarmament and international security in order
to assist Member States, and to enable the Secretary-General also to
assist them, in their search for agreement. Apart from substantive
issues involved in the deliberative and/or negotiating process, this
activity should address the challenges arising from the implementation
of the relevant General Assembly resolutions as well as relevant
treaties.
1.16.
The third objective will be to support and promote regional
disarmament efforts and initiatives using approaches freely among the
States of the region and taking into account the legitimate requirements
of States for self-defence and specific characteristics of each region.
Regional solutions will be more vigorously pursued as regional conflicts
/...

A/RES/51/219
Page 7

increasingly pose a threat to peace and security. Regional dialogue on
crucial disarmament and security issues will be advanced through,
inter alia, the organization of conferences.
1.17.
The fourth objective consists of providing impartial, factual
information on the disarmament efforts of the United Nations to Member
States, parliamentarians, research and academic institutions and
specialized non-governmental organizations through the disarmament
information programme and by providing Member States with full access to
all relevant databases, including on disarmament. This would include,
as appropriate, organizing open-ended conferences, seminars and
workshops for informal exchanges of views on arms control, disarmament
and international security issues. The disarmament fellowship programme
will continue to be pursued with the primary objective of promoting
further the disarmament expertise of Member States, particularly in the
developing countries. Member States will be assisted in addressing
specific disarmament concerns through the provision of training and
advisory services.
1.18.
The fifth objective would be to continue to inform the public
on an objective and updated basis of the United Nations disarmament
activities. In this context, the three regional centres for peace and
disarmament established in Nepal, Peru and Togo should be utilized.
These centres should address the important security problems in their
respective regions and subregions in a balanced manner.
1.19.
This programme is expected to enable Member States to conduct
deliberations and negotiations on disarmament issues in a smooth and
efficient manner; facilitate the task of the Secretary-General in the
conduct of his relations with Member States on disarmament matters;
contribute to an integrated approach to issues relating to the
maintenance of peace and security; and facilitate the exchange of ideas
between governmental and non-governmental sectors with a view to
promoting a better understanding of United Nations endeavours in the
field of disarmament.
Paragraph 1.19
The General Assembly approves the proposal contained in paragraph 46 (v)
of the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination, with the
following modification:
After in accordance with the insert relevant
Paragraph 1.21
The General Assembly approves the proposal contained in paragraph 46 (w)
of the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination.
Paragraph 1.30
Replace the text of the paragraph with the following, as a new
subprogramme:
The objectives of the subprogramme are:
(a)
To promote the decolonization process in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly for the seventeen remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories;

/...

A/RES/51/219
Page 8

(b)
To strengthen the dissemination of information on
decolonization in order to mobilize world opinion and to ensure the
provision by the specialized agencies and institutions associated with
the United Nations of assistance to the peoples of the
Non-Self-Governing Territories.
The Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples will continue to examine the application
of the Declaration and to seek suitable means for its immediate and full
implementation in all Territories that have not yet exercised their
rights in accordance with the Charter and relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly. It will formulate specific proposals to this effect,
examine the full compliance with the Declaration and other resolutions,
formulate specific proposals for the elimination of the remaining
manifestations of colonialism and report thereon to the General Assembly
and enlist worldwide support for decolonization. The Special Committee
will continue to dispatch visiting missions periodically to colonial
Territories, in consultation with the administering Powers, so as to
enable the Special Committee to obtain first-hand information on
conditions in those Territories; examine the views, expressed orally or
in writing by peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and also
the views of the representatives of non-governmental organizations and
individuals with a knowledge of conditions in those Territories; and
assist the General Assembly in making arrangements, in cooperation with
the administering Powers, to secure a United Nations presence in the
Non-Self-Governing Territories to observe or supervise the final stages
of the process of decolonization.
The Department of Political Affairs will continue to assist the
Special Committee in the implementation of its mandate, as well as the
General Assembly, in connection with issues under this subprogramme, as
appropriate. To that end, the Department will:
(a)
Provide substantive servicing to the Special Committee and
its visiting and other missions, as well as to the General Assembly when
they review issues relating to decolonization;
(b)
Undertake research, analytical studies and reports on
conditions in the Territories;
(c)
Provide assistance to the Special Committee in the
preparation of its reports to the General Assembly;
(d)
Collect, review and disseminate basic material, studies and
articles relating to decolonization;
(e)
Promote, in cooperation with the Department of Public
Information, a publicity campaign on decolonization. Subject to the
relevant decisions by the Special Committee, this will entail organizing
panel discussions and seminars, producing and disseminating
publications, organizing exhibits and coordinating international
activities aimed at the elimination of colonialism, including liaison
with international organizations and individuals concerned with the
problems of decolonization;
(f)
Promote flows of assistance from specialized agencies and
institutions associated with the United Nations to the people in the
Non-Self-Governing Territories.

/...

A/RES/51/219
Page 9

Paragraph 1.31
Replace the paragraph with the following:
The General Assembly Affairs Division will provide the required
substantive services and prepare reports of the Trusteeship Council if
it should meet, in accordance with its rules of procedure.
Paragraph 1.33
In the last line, after their insert inalienable
Paragraph 1.34
The General Assembly approves the proposal contained in paragraph 46 (z)
of the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination.
Replace the second sentence with the following:
The Division for Palestinian Rights, which works in consultation with
and under the guidance of the Committee, is responsible for providing
secretariat services in support of this subprogramme.
Paragraph 1.35
The General Assembly approves the proposal contained in paragraph
46 (aa) of the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination.
Replace the second sentence with the following:
The Middle East peace process gave rise to renewed hopes for final
settlement and opened new possibilities for supportive action by the
United Nations.
Paragraph 1.36
Replace the paragraph with the following:
A third objective will be to heighten awareness of all aspects of
the question of Palestine by providing forums to facilitate
consideration of relevant issues and promote dialogue among parties
concerned, Governments, United Nations bodies, non-governmental
organizations and prominent personalities.
Paragraph 1.37
Replace the paragraph with the following:
A fourth objective will be to continue to provide information on
the question of Palestine and continue the development of the United
Nations computer-based information system on the question of Palestine
(UNISPAL), in cooperation with relevant departments of the United
Nations Secretariat, including the Department of Public Information, and
United Nations organs, organizations, bodies and specialized agencies,
as well as non-governmental organizations.
Programme 3.

Outer space affairs

Modify the title of the programme to read:
Peaceful uses of outer space
/...

A/RES/51/219
Page 10

Programme 4.

Legal affairs

Paragraph 4.9
At the end of the paragraph, add:
The negotiation, where required, of status-of-forces agreements between
the United Nations and the host Governments in connection with the
activities of United Nations peacekeeping operations will also form an
important objective of this subprogramme. In this regard, due
consideration should be given to the obligation of United Nations
officials in the conduct of their duties to observe fully both the laws
and regulations of Member States and their duties and responsibilities
to the Organization.
Programme 6.

Africa:

New Agenda for Development

Paragraph 6.2
In the tenth line, for is to be read was
Paragraph 6.6
In subparagraph (a), after New Agenda insert in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 51/32
Paragraph 6.8
In subparagraph (b), after New Agenda, insert including those agreed
upon at its mid-term review;
Paragraph 6.10
In subparagraph (b), after New Agenda and insert the complementary role
of
Add a new subparagraph (d) reading:
(d)
To promote and strengthen subregional and regional
cooperation and integration through appropriate programmes, especially
those identified in the mid-term review of the United Nations New Agenda
for the Development of Africa in the 1990s.
Programme 7.

Economic and social information and policy analysis

Paragraph 7.5
At the end of the paragraph, insert:
and provide for improved coordination and cooperation between the United
Nations and other relevant statistics-producing intergovernmental
organizations

/...

A/RES/51/219
Page 11

Programme 8.

Development support and management services

Paragraph 8.1
Replace the paragraph with the following:
The general purpose of the programme, for which the Department for
Development Support and Management Services has responsibility, is to
support the efforts of the developing countries, in particular the least
developed countries, as well as countries with economies in transition,
to create and support a favourable climate for sustainable development.
Thus, it should support, by means of technical cooperation, the
activities of Member States aimed at strengthening their administrative
and financial systems for development, consolidating institutional
capabilities and infrastructures and implementing economic and social
policies, according to their national development priorities, so as to
contribute to sustainable development. To this end, the programme makes
available to the developing countries and those with economies in
transition, technical know-how and personnel specialized in the fields
of public administration and finance, economic and social policy and
planning, as well as the planning and management of natural and energy
resources.
Subprogramme 8.1
Modify the title of the subprogramme to read:
Public administration, finance and development
Programme 9.

Trade and development

Paragraph 9.3
Replace the first sentence with the following:
At the ninth session of UNCTAD, Governments recognized that
development had evolved from a narrow focus on economic growth and
capital accumulation to a multidimensional process, with the ultimate
goal of bettering the human condition.
In the second sentence, after confront insert growing
Paragraph 9.5
Replace the paragraph with the following:
At its ninth session, UNCTAD, as part of the United Nations system
and a contributor to its revitalization, has adopted far-reaching
reforms, as embodied in the Midrand Declaration and "A Partnership for
Growth and Development", adopted by consensus at that session of the
Conference, which encompass its programme of work, its intergovernmental
machinery and the reform of its secretariat, including its
complementarity with the World Trade Organization, inter alia, by making
its analysis of trade and development available to the World Trade
Organization, and its cooperation with the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization and relevant organizations. In consequence,
UNCTAD is adapting itself to new economic and institutional modalities
created by the process of globalization, the conclusion of the Uruguay
Round of multilateral trade negotiations and agreements, and the
creation of the World Trade Organization.

/...

A/RES/51/219
Page 12

Add a new paragraph 9.5 (bis) reading:
UNCTAD will continue its role as the focal point within the United
Nations for the integrated treatment of development and interrelated
issues in the areas of trade, finance, technology, investment and
sustainable development.
Add a new paragraph 9.5 (ter) reading:
UNCTAD will deal with the problems of the least developed
countries, sustainable development, poverty alleviation, the empowerment
of women and economic cooperation among developing countries in a crosscutting manner. While concentrating on its main activities and
objectives, UNCTAD will pay due attention to the outcome of global
conferences.
Paragraph 9.11
Add a new subparagraph (e) reading:
(e)
To continue the work of UNCTAD, in accordance with its
mandate, in assisting the Palestinian people to develop capacities for
effective policy-making and management pertaining to international
trade, investment and related services. In this regard, UNCTAD should
take into account the work done by other international organizations in
order to enhance synergies, avoid duplication and coordinate related
activities.
Paragraph 9.17
In the fourth line, after developing countries insert , such as
landlocked and small island developing States,
Paragraph 9.21
In the second line, for Least Developed Countries, read Least Developed,
Landlocked and Island Developing Countries
Paragraph 9.22
Add a new subparagraph (c) reading:
(c)
To ensure the effective implementation of the Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States, particularly as it relates to the specific role assigned to
UNCTAD in the areas of trade research and analysis.
Paragraph 9.23
Delete the paragraph.
Paragraph 9.24
The last sentence should read:
In accordance with the outcome of the ninth session of the Conference,
in particular paragraphs 106 and 113 of "A Partnership for Growth and
Development", least developed countries will constitute a cross-cutting
issue in the work of UNCTAD and the sectoral issues will be dealt with
by the divisions of UNCTAD within their respective mandates.

/...

A/RES/51/219
Page 13

Programme 11.

Human settlements

Modify the title of subprogramme 4 to read:
Assessment, monitoring and information
Programme 13.

International drug control

Paragraph 13.1
In the first sentence, delete , both of which have proliferated in the
wake of the globalization of trade, travel and communications
Programme 15.

Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific

Paragraph 15.4
At the end of the paragraph, add:
It will emphasize South-South cooperation, including the triangular
modality of collaboration, to guide specific activities in achieving the
objectives of the various subprogrammes.
Paragraph 15.6
In the second sentence, for with support read with appropriate support
In the same sentence, after developed countries insert as well as from
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
In the same sentence, delete , that is, tripartite cooperation
Paragraph 15.11
Replace the second sentence with the following:
The goal is to strengthen national capacities in achieving
environmentally sound and sustainable development, focusing on the
regional strategies and action programmes that have emerged from recent
global conferences such as the World Summit for Social Development, held
at Copenhagen in March 1995, and the United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements (Habitat II), held at Istanbul in June 1996.
Add a new subparagraph (c) (bis) reading:
To work with Governments and regional and international
associations of local authorities, non-governmental organizations, the
private sector, academic institutions and other regional or subregional
groupings to develop regional human settlement plans of action,
addressing priority issues specific to the Asia and Pacific region.
Add a new subparagraph (f) (bis) reading:
To promote opportunities that will enable developing countries to
acquire environmentally friendly or sound technology to contribute to
the strengthening of national capacities in achieving sustainable
development.

/...

A/RES/51/219
Page 14

Programme 19.

Human rights

Paragraph 19.1
Replace the last sentence with the following:
The programme is based on the principles and recommendations of the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action.
Paragraph 19.2
The beginning of the paragraph should read:
The programme is under the responsibility of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, who performs his functions under the
direction and authority of the Secretary-General in accordance with
resolution 48/141, and its objectives are to provide the leading role on
human rights issues...
In the eighth line, delete potential
Paragraph 19.3
The General Assembly approves the proposals contained in paragraphs
199 (e) and (f) of the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination.
Replace subparagraph (h) with the following:
(h)
The adoption of more efficient methods within the United
Nations to promote and protect human rights, including by preventing
human rights violations throughout the world and removing obstacles to
the full realization of human rights;
Delete subparagraph (j).
In subparagraph (m), for participation read contribution
At the end of subparagraph (m), insert according to the legislative
mandates in effect regarding these issues
Paragraph 19.4
Delete the paragraph.
Paragraph 19.5
The beginning of the paragraph should read:
The primary objectives of this subprogramme will include promotion
and protection of the right to development. In this regard, the
objectives will be...
The General Assembly approves the proposals contained in paragraph
199 (h) of the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination, with
the following amendments:
In the fourth line, after Right to Development insert and subsequent
mandates
In the seventh line, after right to development insert as an integral
part of fundamental human rights
/...

A/RES/51/219
Page 15

Paragraph 19.7
Delete the first sentence.
Paragraph 19.8
Delete the first sentence.
Programme 23.

Public information

Add a new paragraph 23.6 (bis) reading:
Some long-standing world problems persist and an informed
understanding among the peoples of the world is still needed and remains
one of the objectives of the Department. This is especially true in the
areas of peace, security and disarmament; the question of Palestine;
self-determination and decolonization; human rights, including racial
discrimination; and development.
Paragraph 23.7
For major read first
Programme 24.

Administrative services

Paragraph 24.12 (a)
At the end of paragraph 231 (h) of the report of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination, insert under relevant regulations established by
the General Assembly
