UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL
TWENTY-NINTH

RECORDS
YEAR
MAY 5 2 1983

1793rd
MEETING:

UN/W
15 AUGUST 1974

Q~LbXYIW

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1793/Rev. 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus: ..
(a) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Secretary-General
to the President
of the Security Council (S/l 1334);
(6) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11335);
(c) Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Greece to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11348);
(d) Letter dated 28 July 1974 from the Acting Permanent Representative
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/11389);
(e) Letter dated 13 August 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/ 11444);
.v) Letter dated 13 August 1974 from the Permanent Representative of
Greece to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1445) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1793

:

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
‘7 “. 5-i‘c 1 *
Doc&&it~kf
thk d&$ity
Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements, of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the docuinent ilidicateg ihe supplement in which it appears or in which information abotit it is given.
jT’$< .kesolutioks daf th$+$&ity
Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new systkm, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

SEVENTEEN

President:

HUNDRED

AND NINETY-THIRD

Held in New York on Thursday,

15 August 1974, at 2.30 p.m.

Mr. Yakov

(b) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent

A. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Representative
of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11335);
(c) Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative
of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11348);
(4 Letter dated 28 July 1974 from the Acting Permanent
Representative
of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/11389);
(e) Letter dated 13 August 1974 from the Permanent
Representative
of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1444);
Letter
dated 13 August 1974 from the Permanent
#I
Representative
of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11445)

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia,
Austria,
Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republ,ic, China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia,
Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania,
Peru, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Cameroon
and United States of America.
Provisional

Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/l793/Rev.l)

of the agenda

The situation in Cyprus:
(a) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1334);
(6) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative
of Cyprus to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/11335);
(c) Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative
of Greece to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1348);
(d) Letter dated 28 July 1974 from the Acting
Permanent Representative
of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1389);
(e) Letter dated 13 August 1974 from the
Permament Representative
of Cyprus to the
United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/ 11444);
v) Letter dated 13 August 1974 from the
Permanent Representative
of Greece to the
United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/ 11445)
The meeting

1. The PRESIDENT
(translation
from Russian):
In accordance with decisions taken by the Security
Council
at its previous
meetings [1779th-178fst
meetings], I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite the representatives
of Cyprus, Turkey,
Greece, Yugoslavia, Romania, India and Mauritius
to participate,
without the right to vote, in the
Council’s discussion of the question of the situation
in Cyprus.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rossides
(Cyprus), Mr. Olcay (Turkey) and Mr. Carayannis
(Greece) took places at the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT
(translation from Russian):
The representatives of Yugoslavia, Romania, India
and Mauritius are also invited to take the places
reserved for them in the Couricil chamber, on the
understanding
that they will be invited to take a
place at the Council table when they are called upon
to make a statement.

was called to order at 5.15 p.m.
Adoption

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Job
(Yugoslavia), Mr. Gheorghe (Romania) and Mr. Jaipal
(India) took the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
(a) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1334);

3. The PRESIDENT
(translation from Russian):
Before proceeding to the substance of the question,
it is with great regret that I wish to inform the
1

/

MEETING

members of the Council that, since the resumption
of military operations in Cyprus, ‘losses have also
been sustained by the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP).
k’esterday, according
to the Secretary-General’s
report on developments in
Cyprus [S/11353/A&.25],
three members of the
Austrian contingent of UNFICYP
were killed and a
number of members of the Finnish, British and
Canadian contingents were wounded.
4. Allow me on behalf of all the members of the
Council to express deep concern at the losses sustained
by UNFICYP,
and to assure the representative of
Austria that his colleagues in the Council share his
grief over the tragic loss of his three compatriots.
I request the representative of Austria to transmit
our condolences to the Government of Austria and
to the bereaved families.
‘5. In paragraph 4 of resolution 357 (1974), which
was adopted early yesterday morning, the Council
decided to remain seized of the situation and on
instant call to meet as necessary to consider what
more effective measures may be required if the
cease-fire is not respected.
6. Unfortunately,
reports received from Cyprus on
the situation afford no grounds for tranquillity
or
optimism.
For that reason, the convening of this
meeting of the Council, which was requested by
Mr. Rossides, representative of Cyprus, to consider
the latest situation in Cyprus, appears to be fully
justified.
7. Two draft resolutions have been submitted to
the Council for its consideration.
The first is in
document S/11448 and the second, sponsore,d by
Australia, Austria, France and Peru, is in document
S/11449. During the consultations held this afternoon
among the members of the Council,
a mutual
understanding or general agreement was reached that
we should begin by voting on the first draft-I
shall refer to the second separately-and,
after the
vote, the members of the Council and the representatives of those States not members of the Council
that have been invited to participate in the discussion
of the item on the situation in Cyprus will be given
the opportunity
to speak on the substance of the
problem under discussion.
8. In view of the request by the Secretary-General,
to be given the opportunity
to make a statement
before the vote, I propose, with the agreement of
the members of the Council, to call on the SecretaryGeneral. We shall then proceed to vote. Are there
any objections? I give the floor to the SecretaryGeneral.
9. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have kept the
Council informed through regular reports on the
developments of the situation in Cyprus, especially
in the past 48 hours. I deeply deplore the resumption

of fighting .in Cyprus and the breakdown of the
negotiations
for a peaceful settlement.
It is clear
from the information that continues to come in from
Cyprus that violent fighting continues and that the
demand in Council resolution 357 (1974)-that
the
parties to the present fighting cease all firing and
military action forthwith-has
so far gone unheeded.
10. I need hardly say that ‘in ‘this situation it has
been impossible for UNFICYP
to continue with the
,tasks which devolved upon it as a result of resolution
353 (1974), although, as I have reported to the Council,
the implementation
of these tasks had begun at the
time when the present round of heavy fighting broke
out.
11. As will be clear from my reports to the Council,
UNFICYP
has continued to do its utmost where
possible to assist the population,
to arrange local
cease-fires and to de-escalate the fighting, to prevent
the recurrence of intercommunal
strife and to protect
the civilian population who are in danger from such
strife. As I have told the Council before, the successful
discharge of the UNFICYP
mandate depends upon
the full co-operation of all the parties concerned. This
especially applies to the implementation
of the ceasefire called for by the Council. It is obvious that
under its present mandate and at its present strength
UNFICYP
could not interpose itself between two
armies engaged in full-scale hostilities.
12. In the tragic situation which has prevailed in
Cyprus in the last 48 hours, all the personnel of the
Force have made the maximum effort to limit the
consequences of the hostilities and to be of whatever
assistance they could to the civilian population.
13. I have informed
the Council
in previous
statements of the situation concerning the continued
presence of UNFICYP
in the Turkish area of control.
As members of the Council will observe from my
recent reports, there have been f&her ddeVelOpMetltS
in this connexion and UNFICYP
has in some cases
been compelled to cease its functions in the Turkish
area of control. I wish to express to the Council
once again my view ,that UNFICYP
should carry on
its tasks in all areas of Cyprus, and that it cannot
fulfil its role if it is excluded from one or other
area. This is especially true of humanitarian activities,
which, as I have reported to the Council, have been
very largely delegated to UNFICYP
by the Intemational Committee
of the Red Cross for practical
reasons. I shall continue to make all possible efforts
to ensure that UNFICYP
is present in all areas of
Cyprus.
14. It is with the deepest concern and regret that
I have learned of the casualties suffered by UNFICYP
in the past 48 hours. The President of the Council
referred to those casualties just a few moments ago.
I know that the members’of
the Council share my
concern. I and the Force Commander have strongly

protested the. incident.s which have led to these
casualties ‘arid have asked all of the parties to take
urgent measures to, prevent any recurrence of such
incidents and to make adequate arrangements
to
ensure the safety and security of all UNFICYP
personnel in the discharge of their duties.
.lS; In ‘this connexion, I have received a message
from the P&me Minister of Turkey expressing the
-profound regrets of hisGovernment
and its assurances
that the Turkish forces will exercise the utmost
attention and care for the full security of UNFICYP
troops in Cyprus.
16. I wish to express to the Governments
whose
contingents in Cyprus have suffered casualties my
heartfelt sympathy and condolences. I also wish %o
take this opportunity to pay a tribute to my Special
Representative in Cyprus, to the Force Commander
‘and, to all the personnel of UNFICYP-military,
police and civilian-for
their steadfast and courageous
conduct during the current fighting.
17, Before concluding, I feel obliged in this critical
situation to make a comment on two questions of
principle.
18. The first relates to United Nations peace-keeping
operations in general and to UNFICYP
in particular.
The essential basis for these operations is their
acceptance by the parties concerned and the assumption that the parties will co-operate with them in
carrying out their duties under the mandate decided
upon by the Security Council. If that acceptance and
co-operation
are in practice withheld,
a United
Nations peace-keeping
operation
cannot function
effectively, since it is in no sense an enforcement
operation under Chapter VII of the Charter. On ‘the
other hand, if the parties co-operate, experience has
shown that peace-keeping operations can be very
effective not only in avoiding conflict but also in
averting wider threats to international
peace and
security.
19. I therefore appeal to the parties concerned to
renew in a clear and unequivocal
manner their
commitment
to the’ unimpeded
functioning
of
UNFICYP
in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council.
20. The second question relates to the position and
credibility of the United Nations itself and the respect
of its Members for the decisions of its main organs,
especially the Security Council. In the present case
the Council, with no dissenting voice, haas called
three times for a cease-fire in Cyprus. As we all know,
to this moment heavy fighting in Cyprus continues.
This situation, which clearly represents a threat to
international peace and security, calls in question the
very essence of the Charter and the raison d’etre
of the Organization. I believe it is vital that the Council,
which has the primary responsibility
for the mainte-

nance of international peace and security, should give
the most immediate and searching attention to the
implications of this situation both for the immediate
problem of Cyprus and for the future effectiveness
of the United Nations.
21. The PRESIDENT
(translation
from Russian):
I thank the Secretary-General
for his useful and very
comprehensive
statement and for the information
that he hzis supplied to the members of the Council.
22. Before we proceed to vote on the first draft
resolution, I wish to make a few announcements.
23. First, I should like ‘to inform members of the
,Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Algeria containing a request that his
delegation be invited to participate, without the right
to vote, in the discussion of the item.
24. In accordance with established practice and with
.the’provisional
rules of procedure, I propose to invite
the representative of Algeria to participate, without
the right to vote, in the Council’s consideration of
the item on the ‘situation in ,Cyprus.
25. There being no objection, I invite the representative of Algeria to take the place reserved for
him in the Council chamber, on the understanding
that he will be invited to take a place at the Council
table when he is called upon to speak.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Ta&bBendiab (Algeria) took the place reserved for him at
the side of the Council chamber.

26. The PRESIDENT
(translation from Russian):
The second announcement is this: the representative
of Austria has requested that, before the Council
proceeds to the vote on the second draft resolution,
he should be allowed. to speak in order to make
certain additional clarifications. If there is no objection,
I shall call upon him after we have voted on the
first draft resolution.
27. I now put to the vote the draft resolution
,contained in document S/l 1448.
A

vote was taken by show of hands.

The draft resolution

was adopted unanimously;

i

28. The PRESIDENT
(translation
from Russian):
In accordance with our understanding,
I now .call
upon the representative of Austria.
29. Mr: WOLTE (Austria): Mr. President, may I first
and foremost thank you for your words of condolence
at the death of three soldiers of the Austrian contingent
serving with the United Nations Forces in Cyprus.
’ See resolution

358 (1974).

‘

I shall not fail to’ transmit this expression of sympathy
to the Austrian Government and to the families of the
dead.

357 (1974):For the same reason, before the recess we
voted in favour of the ‘draft resolution contained in
document Slll448.
:
L

30. May I also express my delegation’s gratitude. to
the Secretary-General
for his warm expression of
sympathy, which I shall also forward to Vienna.

37. We are deeply concerned about the, development
of the situation in Cyprus. We express.our profound
sympathy for the sufferings of tile two communities
of Cypriot people. The Chinese delegation. has always 1
held different views ,on the question of. the dispatch
of United Nations forces. That was why the Chinese
delegation
did not participate
in the voting-’ on
resolution
355. (1974). Since’ the draft resolution
contained in document S/l1449/Rev. 1 deals entirely
.
with the question .of the United Nations Force, the e
Chinese delegation, based on its principled position
on this question, decided not to participate
in the
*.
voting on that draft either.
..

31. In view of most important and,urgent information
which has just been conveyed to me by my Government, may I request, under rule 33 of the provisional
rules of procedure, a suspension of this meeting for
one hour. I would be grateful if during this suspension
we could enter into consultations on the subject of
the communication
from my Government, which I shall
put before the members of the Council.
,
32. The PRESIDENT
(frunsfation
from Russian):
We have heard the request made by the representative of Austria. If there is no objection from the
members of the Council, I shall suspend the meeting
for one hour. We shall therefore resume the meeting
punctually at 6.40 p.m.
The meeting Aas suspended
resumed at Il.25 p.m.

at 5.40 p.m.

38. Mr. JANKOWITSCH
(Austria): ,Let me first of
all express the gratitude of ,my delegation to the
members of the Council for taking rapid action on
the draft resolution that has just been adopted, which
was submitted jointly by the delegations of Australia,
Austria, France, Peru and the United Republic of
Cameroon. There is ‘no doubt in our mind that the
recent turn of events in Cyprus has made a. clear
and unequivocal
statement by the Council on the
role of UNFICYP
and the, safety of its members an
,_urgent necessity.

and

33. The PRESIDENT
(trunsiafion
from Russian):
I should like to inform the members of the Council
that the draft resolution submitted earlier by Australia,
Austria, France and. Peru [S/11449] has now been
revised. Furthermore,
an additional delegation-the
United Republic of Cameroon-has
been included in
the list of sponsors. The revised text, which has been
circulated as document S/ 11449/Rev. 1, contains, a
new operative paragraph-paragraph
3-which,
so
.I understand, has now been formulated in a manner
acceptable to the members of the Council.

39, In the early hours .of yesterday morning the
Council was convened in an emergency meeting to
deal with the rapidly deteriorating situation in Cyprus.
The speedy and unanimous adoption of resolution 357
(1974) represented at that stage an urgent and indeed
indispensable response to a new and highly disturbing
development.
Yet ‘instead of improving
since the
adoption of the resolution, the situation. has in fact
become even more explosive. To put it bluntly, the
appeal of the Council has gone unheeded. For this
reason, the Council this afternoon adopted another
resolution, again reaffirming its will.

34. I shall now. put to the vote the revised draft
resolution in document S/ 11449jRev. 1.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft
none.2

resolution

One member
voting.

(China)

was adopted

did not participate

35. The PRESIDENT
(translation
from
I shall now call upon those representatives
to explain their votes.
36.

40. -My Government and people were and are deeply
disturbed by this tragic sequence of events. When
the Council met on 1 August and adopted resolution 355
(1974) giving the Secretary-General
the necessary
mandate to continue carrying out the heavy responsibilities entrusted to UNFICYP,
all of us were
relieved to know that the first round of talks had
been concluded with some measure of success and
that on 30 July the Foreign Ministers of Greece,
Turkey, and the United Kingdom were able to sign
a Declaratian [see S/11398] which, we felt at the time,
provided the platform for a subsequent process of
negotiation and reconciliation.

by 14 vofes to
in the
Russian):

who wish

Mr.

HUANG
Hua (China) (translation
from
In the recent Security Council discussions
on the situation in Cyprus, the Chinese’ delegation
has. made clear its principled position on a number
of occasions. Based on this position, we voted in
favour of resolutions .’ 353 (l974), 354 (1974) and
Chinese):

41. In a number of interventions before the Council
my delegation has put forward its understanding of
the necessary steps leading to a peaceful settlement.
Without being repetitive, ,I -should like to say once
again that among ‘those we understood
and we

* See resolution 359 (1874).
4

understand to be the strictest’observance
of the ceasetire, an end to ail fighting, hostilities and acts of
violence, implementation
of resolution
353 (1974)
in all its parts and a reaffirmation of the central role
of the United Nations in all efforts’ to protect and
maintain the independence, the sovereignty and the
territorial
integrity of a fellow Member State,. the
Republic of Cyprus.
,
42: Certainly it would have been unrealistic to expect
quick solutions from’ the renewed negotiations
in
Geneva. Yet there was at least a hope that determined
efforts on all sides would be made to reach,a resonable
compromise. While the talks in.‘Geneva were going
on the cease-fire on the island was at least generally
observed, despite continuous attempts.to expand areas
of control and influence by’ one side to the conflict.
The latest break-down of the Geneva talks would ,in
itself have been a matter’ of deep preoccupation
and concern. However, the fact that a few. hours
‘after the break-down of the negotiations an almost
immediate resumption of large-scale military action
took .place confirmed the most pessimistic forecasts..
Instead of being permitted to fulfil their peace-keeping
role, Members of UNFICYP
were again subjected to,
direct military attacks. We were particularly shocked
by the news of numerous casualties which UNFICYP’
suffered as a result of action by Turkish armed forces.
It is a matter of deep regret, Mr. President-and
we are profoundly grateful for your sympathy-that
now three niembers of the Austrian contingent
have met’ their deaths in the service of peace in ‘,
Cyprus. The three soldiers, Lieutenant Johann Izay,
Sergeant’Paul
Decombe, and Corporal August‘Isak,
were victims of a deliberate attack by Turkish armed
forces, the fuI1 facts of which have beenfpresented
in the latest reports of the Secretary-General.
These
reports indicate-a deliberate attack by a Turkish fighter
aircraft on a vehicle clearly marked with the United
Nations emblem.
43.. ;My Government
has supported resolution 353
(1974) .from the on&set, as did all other delegations,
and has made every effort to support the implementa,
tion of that resolution. It was in this spirit ‘that my
Government, responding to the appeal of the SecretaryGeneral, reinforced its peace-keeping contingent in
Cyprus. My ‘Government
has thus shown its deep
desire to contribute with all the means at its disposal
to a peaceful settlement of this most dangerous
crisis. The Council will understand, therefore, the
sense of shock’ and grief that has overcome my
country at this tragic ineident. It is heightened by
the repeatedly expressed conviction of my country
that all military action in Cyprus should cease, that
all military action and all acts of violence, regardless
of the circumstances in which they occur, should be
discontinued.

this. irresponsible act af Turkish armed forces. We
profoundly deplore the fact that a ‘State Member of
the United Nations has directed its arms against
United Nations forces in Cyprus and that, besides the
numerous casualties suffered by the contingents in
the numerous woundings of soldiers, this has now
resulted also in the deaths of United Nations soldiers.
.We would express the’ profound’ hope that the
Government,
of Turkey
will take all necessary
measures to ensure that the safety of United Nations
personnel stationed on the island will be strictly
guaranteed in the future. The Turkish Government
has expressed its condolences concerning these tragic
incidents,
and my Government
appreciates
this
expression of the sentiments of the Government of
Turkey.
45. It will be understood, however, that further action
was needed in order to avoid any repetition of ‘such
acts of violence against me’mbers of UNFICYP.
What
appears to be of the utmost importance now-and I
have stressed this already-is
that all measures be
taken forthwith to ensure that a recurrence of such
events will be prevented once and for all.
46. It may be useful to recall at this stage a few.
basic facts. Under the mandate given to the Force
by then Security. Council in resolution
186 (1964),
UNFICYP
has ‘been charged with a task which is
essentially in the interests of peace and security, in the
interests of the safety and protection of the people
of Cyprus, of members of both communities.
In the
performance of this task the United Nations forces are
impartial. Their only object is the preservation of
peace. Each ,and every report of the SecretaryGeneral brings out the determined efforts of all the
members of the Force to live up to this task under
the most trying circumstances. The people of Cyprus,
who have suffered so greatly and, I am afraid, continue
to suffer in the continuing military operation, deserve
our full sympathy and support and all our efforts to
limit the suffering to the greatest extent possible.
The mandate
of UNFICYP
has been clearly
established, as I have said, by resolution 186 (1964),
subsequently by resolutions 353 (1974) and 355 (1974),
and &gain by the resolution just adopted. If the Security
Council holds, as I think it does, that UNFICYP
has
an essential role to play in the implementation
of
the cease-fire and all related tasks and in the fulfilment
of humanitarian functions for the civilian population,
then it is incumbent on it to see to it that the Force
is being given the opportunity to carry out its functions
in safety. Otherwise the question may arise whether
peace-keeping missions of the United Nations can be
continued in a situation in which military attacks are
putting the very essence of such missions in jeopardy,
47. Consequently,
we feel that the SecretaryGeneral should urgently communicate with the three
parties concerned to renew in a clear and unequivocal
manner their commitment
to the unimpeded function
of UNFICYP
in a most urgent and important way.

44. As a consequence of this new act of violence,
my Government has protested in the strongest possible
terms against this violation of international law and
3

48. I hone that the sacrifice that has now been made
by three young Austrian soldiers and so many of their
fellow members of UNFICYP
on Cyprus has not been’
in vain. They have given their lives for peace, as so
many ‘, others have given their health, their well:
being and some of the best years of their lives.
,

responsibility
for the maintenance and restoratian of
law and order” -to take any measures necessary ta
stop violence and bloodshed, the resolution; in its
paragraph 5,
.’
“Recommends
that the function of the Force
should be, in the interest of preserving international.
peace and security”-not
merely internal peace
and security- “to use its best efforts’to prevent
a recurrence of .fighting and, as necessary, to
contribute
to the maintenance
,and restoration
-of law and order and a return to normal conditions.”

49. In speaking in memory of these members of
UNFICYP,
be they of Austrian
or any other
nationality, I hope that the Council will be stfengthened’
in its determination
to help UNFICYP
and peacekeeping forces of the ’ United Nations everywhere
to perform their tasks for peace.

53. Of course, at the time of the adoption of this
resolution,
there were internal matters, between
Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots, but I must
also remind the Council that the Council had become.
seized of the matter because- of-Land the resolution
of 4 March 1964 was consequent upon-the
threat
of invasion of Cyprus by Turkey on 27 December
1963. That was the beginning of the involvement
of the United Nations and the Security Council in
Cyprus, and ever since then whenever the Council
has met to renew the mandate of the United Nations
Force in Cyprus the item has been inscribed on the.
agenda in exactly the same way as at that first
meeting on 27 December 1963 [1085th meefingl,
which concerned a matter between Turkey andcyprus.
Therefore, to be brief, the mandate of the United
Nations Force in Cyprus includes its- duties of
deployment
and interposition
in the. threatening
. ~
situation between the forces of Turkey and the forces
of Cyprus at the present juncture.

JO. .The. PRESIDEN?
(tr&zsfurion from Russian):
I give the floor to the representative of Cyprus.
51. Mr., ROSSIDES
(Cyprus): I should like first to
refer to the United Nations Force in Cyprus and to
express my deep condolences on the loss of the lives
of some of its members. This is very regrettable,
especially because the United Nations Force in
Cyprus has functioned for the last ten years without
any of its members having lost their lives or even
been wounded. The co-operation of the Government
and people of Cyprus with UNFICYP
has been really
exemplary, and, indeed, the operation in Cyprus was
thought to be successful. These regrettable losses have
happened only sin’ce the lamentable
invasion of
Cyprus.
1
52. I should now like to say a few words with regard
to the. mandate of the Force. The role of the Force
is set forth in its mandate, which is contained in
Security Council resolution 186 (1964). That mandate,
it should be pointed out, clearly implies the use of the
Force in situations .arising not. only from internal
but also from international
events, and the threat or
use of force in *mtemational
relations comes within
that mandate. In that respect I would refer to the
preamble of the resolution.
The first preambular
paragrtiph states:

54. I now turn to the main item before,us, on which
the Security Council has this evening adopted a
resolution.
(
55. Having violated three cease-fire resolutions of the
Council, resolutions it has accepted; and another
cease-fire agreement solemnly signed by it in Geneva,
and after having insisted on negotiations
being
conducted at gunpoint in Geneva in a manner
reminiscent
of Hitler’s
tactics, Turkey
is now
proceeding through the violation of those resolutions
and of its pledges to occupy more and more territory
of Cyprus through blood and iron. It is using the
overwhelming weaponry in its possession as a member
of the’ NATO alliance in an aggressive attack contra.ry
to the purposes of that alliance against a small
non-aligned country.. With its 30,000 to 40,000 troops
in the island, and its more than 300 modem tanks,
as against the small force of the National Guard.,
which has only nine tanks-and
they are of the old
type-Turkey,.
unchallenged in its command of the
air space over and the sea surrounding Cyprus, is
constantly pounding the island with overwhelming
force, by bombings,
by shellings, by continuous
firing against the open cities, indulging in an indiscrim;
inate orgy of killing and destruction.

“horing that the present situation with regard to
Cyprus is likely to threaten international
peace
and security and may further deteriorate” and so on.
Then, in the third preambular
paragraph, the
resolution speaks directly of Article 2, paragraph 4,
of the Charter; indeed it quotes that paragraph.
The words “international
relations”
therein mean
relations between one State and another State.
Immediately
after that, in paragraph 1, the resolution
“Calls upon all Member States, in conformity
with their obhgations under the Charter of the
United Nations, to refrain from any action or
threat of . . . [use of force] likely to worsen the
situation in . . . Cyprus”.
Further,
-which,

after asking the Government
of Cyprus
in the words of the resolution, “has the
6

/

56. I should like here to quote some parts of the
statement
issued by the President
of Cyprus,
Archbishop Makarios, yesterday in London:

Council-has
remained
impressively
passive and
ineffectual in its resolutions. Its blatant ineffectiveness
has apparently been caused by considerations
of
short-term interest in conflict with the gravity of the
situation
and the interest
of the international
community in peace; for if the United Nations does
not meaningfully
act to stop effectively and immediately the aggression and its effects, it will have
failed as never before in the main purpose of its
existence. It will set a dangerous precedent-that
of tolerating passively, for two weeks on end, a naked
aggression by a strong Power against a small country
in full view of a numbed United Nations.

“The Turkish
aggression against Cyprus is
unprecedented
in recent history. Turkey, having
torpedoed the Geneva conference which it attended,
not for the purpose of negotiating
but for the
purpose of dictating.. . terms, has unleashed in the
early hours of today an all-out attack’ and .has
dready occupied a substantial part of the territory
of Cyprus. The Security Council this morning
adopted a resolution demanding once again a ceasefire. But Turkey refuses to respect this new call of
the Council as it did with the previous ones. From
a position of military supremacy the Turks continue
with their brutal attacks, causing great loss of life,
human suffering, and destruction. What the Turks
failed to achieve at the Geneva conference by
blackmail
and gunboat diplomacy
they are now
attempting to get by brutal force.

58. This is not said merely by way of prodding
the Security Council to necessary action to save
Cyprus. It is equally our concern, as a Member of
the United Nations, where the international community
and the United Nations is heading if this everworsening trend continues. Our concern in strengthening the United Nations under the Charter as an
effective instrument of peace and freedom in the world
is not new. It has been consistently demonstrated
in all our interventions in the United Nations over
a period of 14 years now.

“What is at present going on in Cyprus is a
real tragedy. Turkish planes are attacking in a most
barbarous
way,
killing
defenceless
civilian
population,
while Turkish troops are trying to
occupy more and more territory of the island.

59. At this stage Cyprus and its problem is in a
way transcended by the major problem of the effective
functioning of the Security Council involved in this
issue. The United Nations and its meaningfulness
in vital matters of international
security and peace
stands on trial. The treatment of Cyprus on .this
item is a sign of the times and an ominous signal of
breakdown in the existing international
order and
security, now sadly falling apart.

“Cyprus is now at the mercy of the Turkish
,troops: The events in Turkey prove that small
countries cannot rely on those Powers which profess
to be peacemakers and guardians of international
peace.. I am disappointed by the attitude of the great
,Powers who are watching the dramatic developments in Cyprus and remain inactive. This is the
time for those great Powers, collectively
or
individually;
and for peace-loving
countries to
intervene and come to the rescue of Cyprus and
save it from the barbarous Turks’ aggression.
I appeal to all to do their utmost as a matter of
grave urgency to put an end to this aggression.
No one can remain indifferent or inactive at this
hour when so .much is at stake in relation to
peace. This is a time not for words but for urgent
action.

60. Independently
of how important Cyprus is or is
not, the ripples from this treatment cannot but have
far-reaching repercussions. The tragic sequence of
events these days in their unfolding brings irresistibly
to mind more and more every day the events that
preceded the Second World War. What actually
happens in Cyprus these days is now definitely a
repetition of those events, but a graver one because
of the existence today of the United Nations and
its Charter, which did not exist then. Obviously, the
lessons of that war that brought into being the United
Nations are, in the present generation, unlearned or
forgotten. The great Spanish author and philosopher
Santayana said, “Those who do not learn from the
mistakes of the past are condemned by history to
repeat them”. Their repetition in the nuclear age,
however, is far more devastating in its consequences
and in its effects for peace and the survival of mankind.

“If the conquest of Cyprus territory is allowed
to be tolerated as a fait accompli, this will destroy
the very concept upon which the United Nations is
based and it will be an ominous precedent for the
independenceand security of other small countries.”
57. Cyprus, after an unbroken history of 3,000 years
as an integral unit, is now facing a premeditated
armed attack aimed at tearing it asunder in a sinister
war of aggression. For over two weeks now the world
has witnessed the stranguiation of Cyprus and the
trampling of its independence and territorial integrity.
The concern and indignation
manifested by world
public opinion has found expression in the international
press, but the body that is responsible under the
Charter of the United Nations for action-the
Security

61. Another aspect that has to be mentioned is that
the present case abundantly demonstrates that the
Security Council, in functioning in accordance with
Chapter VI of the Charter, cannot function effectively
unless Chapter VII, which was intended to be applied,
becomes operative. It is true that since the establishment of the United Nations Chapter VII has hardly
7

ever, if at all, been used. But it cannot be conceived
that the Council
should issue resolution
after
resolution for 15 days, that each resolution should
be ignored and violated, and that the aggressor should
continue his aggression, each, time with greater
tenacity, with greater force, almost encouraged by
each violation and, as if conquering the world by
those violations, boisterously celebrate them. Is this
a situation in which the world can be thought to be
headed in the right direction? Can that be said of a
Security Council that is not concerned about the
application of its resolutions, that it is quite content
with a perfunctory repetition of them, irrespective of
what happens? “Requests” becomes “Calls”, ‘Calls”
becomes “Demands”,
and “Demands”
becomes
“Insists”;
but the resolution remains in each case
inoperative, in a manner that should be of deep concern
to the whole membership of the United Nations, but
of concern more importantly ‘and more directly to the
members of the Security Council, whose resolutions
are so flouted while a small country is being strangled
with loss of life and destruction every day while
resolutions come perfunctorily and remain the same.

primary
responsibility
for the maintenance
of
international
peace and security, should give the
most immediate
and searching attention to the
implications of this situation, both for the immediate
problem of Cyprus and for the future effectiveness
of the United Nations.” [Ibid.]
64. It is the present case that in its unfolding has
revealed and spotlighted
the weaknesses of the
Security Council in its functions. Never before have
they been so shown up. Never before has the conduct
of the international
community been so crude in its
implications.
In all cases, at the last moment, before
the failure of the United Nations something happened
and the United Nations was saved. But in this case
the United Nations has not been saved so far. It has
not been saved with its four ineffective resolutions
without any other effort. It therefore is necessary that
the United Nations turn its attention to a reappraisal
of the functioning of the Council, to a reappraisal
of the absolute discarding of Chapter VII of the Charter
in the functioning of the Council. If the Council could
really function without Chapter VII, the founding
fathers of the United Nations would not have taken
the trouble to put it there.

62. Now, therefore, this example is unique. There is
no parallel in the United Nations of exactly such a
situation.
In all other cases of war there was
comparable force from one side and the other. The
fighting in the air was with military aeroplanes from
both sides, wherever you looked, whether in the
Middle East or in Viet-Nam, or in any other part of
the world. But here we have such murderous
aggression tolerated in such a way and for so long,
with satisfaction taken in the passing of resolutions
timidly, just to overcome the annoyance of a Security
Council meeting-which
would have been much better
avoided, they feel. That is the situation, no matter
how one would like to cover it up or smooth it
out. This is the stark reality, and the concern of the
Secretary-General
has been definitely shown in his
statement, which I should like to quote and to comment
upon.
63. The Secretary-General,
situation, says that it

in commenting

65. We know the crippling reasons. There are no
justifications
for not having the Security Council
functioning
properly. Always by some makeshift
arrangements some things were done-patching
up.
But this patching up has not worked in this case,
and therefore let us see that this case begins a new
era in the United Nations with a proper functioning
of the Security Council, because we are moving in
world that is more and more dangerous, in a nuclear
age and in a space age. With a United Nations so
crippled, so lame, a Security Council that ‘was no
Security Council at all, no one would have any faith
in it after this case. No small country would have
any faith for its own security in the United Nations.
It would be a prey at the mercy of any aggressor.
66. And therefore if this problem of Cyprus, as a
result of the untold scourge of war, suffering and
destruction in Cyprus, brings a reappraisal and a
correction of the Security council, all the suffering
of Cyprus will not have been in vain. And therefore,
I say again, the problem now transcends Cyprus; it is
the problem of the United Nations, and .particularly
of this Security Council, intended for the maintenance
of international
peace and security, which has been
completely forgotten all these 15 days as a duty or
as a responsibility,
or as necessitating
effective
action.
L
67. Perhaps no single one is to blame: but all are,
to blame for having a Security CounciIL-inherently
ineffective
and lame by the very fact of .the
Charter-which
is incomplete in its functioning.

on the,

“relates to the . . . credibility of the United Nations
itself and the respect of its Members for the decisions
of its main organs, especially the Security Council.
In the present case the Council, with no dissenting
voice, has called three times for a cease-fire in
Cyprus. As we all know, to this moment heavy
fighting in Cyprus continues. This situation, which
clearly represents a threat to international
peace
and security, calls in question the very essence of
the Charter and the raison d’etre of,the Organization.” [Sup-u, pm-u 20.1
It is exactly what we feel and what I have just said.
“I believe” -the Secretary-General
continues“that it is vital that the Council, which has the

68. I do not want to take the time of the members
of this Council any Ionger. There may be other matters
8

more interesting, more important
peace and security of Cyprus.

for it when the diplomatic
processes have not even
been exhausted. May 1 reiterate,.if it needs reiteration,
that my Government
remains ready to resume
negotiations at very short notice!.May
I appeal again,
if further appeal is likely to have any greater effect,
to the Government of Turkey to respect the ceasefire demanded by resolution 357 (1974). May I appeal
again to that Government to indicate its willingness
to resume negotiations.

for them than the

69. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): It is
with a sense of deep appreciation to those who seek
to ‘keep the peace on. behalf of the United Nations
that we have voted tonight for this resolution which
was sponsored by five member countries. It is also
with a sense of grief, however, because of the tragic
news that three Austrian members of UNFICYP
have
been killed while carrying out their duties on Cyprus.
75. The .British Foreign Secretary said when he left
Our Government
extends ,its profound condolences. ; Geneva that there could be no military solution to
to the Austrian Government
and. to the families of
the problems of Cyprus. He said:
these brave men who have sacrificed their lives
for the peace which is the goal of us all.
.
“These will only be solved by the two communities
themselves and,’ if I may ‘put it in two sentences:
70. We further note with a feeling of deepest sorrow
Today the Republic of Cyprus is the prisoner of
that an’additional
number of UNFICYP
troops have
the Turkish army. Tomorrow the Turkish army will
been wounded in the fighting-27
by the latest count
find that it will become the prisoner of the
of the Secretariat.
These men are international
Republic of Cyprus.”
heroes. They deserve’ not only our gratitude but’our
support so that their work can be facilitated,
not
76. A settlement
can come only by agreement
hampered, as they carry out their tasks far from
between. the parties, and no one Government
will
home, like.other United Nations peacekeepers in the
be able to achieve it by military means. Eventually
Middle East and in other areas.
people will have to go back to the conference table.
They should go back now. We have waited long enough
71. We, the representatives
of our Governments,
for these negotiations to restart.
who sit here in the safety of this chamber, must,,
77. My .delegation applauds the efforts being made
remember them because, regardless of nationality,
they are our sons. We must make sure that they and
by UNFICYP
and by the representatives
of the
their successors patrolling distant battlefields have the
International
Committee of the Red Cross to help the
capacity and the mandate to carry out their dangerous
people suffering in Cyprus. We appeal to all parties
assignments without their being required, to give up
to co-operate with those two agencies.
their lives.
78. It is .essential, surely, that the attacks that have
72. Mr: RICHARD
(United Kingdom):
I do .not
been mounted on heavily populated areas should
think this is a time for very lengthy speeches. It is
cease. In that connexion we understand that a ceaseperhaps a time torevlew the events of the last 24 hours
fire as far as Nicosia is doncemed has been arranged.
and to look forward from this point on. I spoke at
I hope that it will hold. 1 hope that it will be respected
some ‘length following the unanimous adoption of
by both sides. For the consequences of indiscriminate
resolution 357 (1974) ati- I think, 6 a.m. the <day
fighting in such an area must surely be appalling.
before yesterday;and I therefore do not wish to detain
the Council long tonight. But there are one or two
79. May I join too with the other members of the
paints that I ‘should like to make, to try and clarify
Council who have expressed their sympathy to the
my Govemment’s.position.
Austrian delegation over the tragic deaths of three
members of the Austrian contingent of UNFICYP.
73. We deplore and.we condemn the flagrant and the
Yesterday three members of the British contingent
continuing
breaches of the cease-fire which have
were .injured. I am informed that they were in an
occurred in Cyprus since the early hours of yesterday,
armoured car troop, in white-painted vehicles, with
and those who instigated those breaches bear a very
United Nations insignia very prominently
displayed;
heavy responsibility
indeed-let
there be no mistake
nevertheless they were attacked by Turkish aircraft.
about that. We are’not here just discussing an academic
They were in an open position and there were no
issue. We are discussing a situation in which people
National Guard, and no military target was in the
-innocent
people-are
being killed. It is clear that
vicinity. I am informed also that there have been two
the cost in human life. and the cost in human suffering
other casualties amongst the British contingent.
is heavy. Whatever the wrongs or the rights of the
Perhaps we have been more fortunate than some other
past may be-and I would not deny that there have
national contingents. We have certainly not suffered
been many wrongs-such action cannot, in the view of
as grievously as the Austrian contingent. Nor has the
my .delegation; be justified.
British contingent been ,as hard hit as the Finnish
national contingent, and my delegation would like to
74. As I made .clear when I spoke last in this
extend its sympathy also to Finland and to Canada
chamber, ‘there can be no justification
whatsoever
for the casualties suffered by their contingents.
9

80. Attacks on UNFICYP,
let alane ones which
would appear on the evidence we have seen to be
deliberate attacks, are-and the Security Council must
declare them to be-totally
unacceptable.
We are
pleased indeed ‘that the Turkish Government
has
given orders that there should be no. repetition of
such incidents.
81. May I deal with just one further point, since
it has been raised from time to ‘time both in this
chamber and in the press. I refer to the accusation
that somehow or other the United Kingdom
has
ceased to be impartial in this dispute and is showing
partiality in favour of one side as against the other.
82. When Mr. Callaghan left Geneva he gave a press
conference. In the course of it he said this:
“We must keep this in perspective, because the”
Turks have got a case. Despite what has been done ’
by Turkey today, there is no doubt that the Turkish
Cypriots have suffered as a result of the failure to
observe the Constitution of Cyprus.”
83. We find ourselves today in the uncomfortable
but probably correct position of being accused by both
sides of partiaIity. In Cyprus we hear that the United
Kingdom was supposed to be guilty of complicity in
the initial Turkish invasion. In Turkey we are accused
of, among other things, rigging the Geneva conference
so that Turkey h.ad t.o walk out of it. Even the,
Dardanelles campaign of 1915 is being brought into
the Turkish press. This means that we are almost
certainly right, because everybody attacks the referee.
All I would say to both Turkey and Greece in this
particular dispute is that the services of the British
Government are at their disposal now as they have
been throughout this dispute, in accordance with the
provisions of the l%O Treaty of Guarantee, so that,
as we hope, negotiations may be restarted.
84. This is a difficult and a sombre occasion for ah
of us, I think, and for no one can it be more difficult
than for the representative of Cyprus. May I .express
a personal note of sympathy to him. He has in the
last four weeks seen his country invaded. He has
seen his country tom to pieces by troops not of his
own country. I think that those of us who have.seen
him in the last month must express our persbnal
admiration to him for the way in which he has borne
the heavy responsibilities
which have been placed
upon him.
:
85. Having saimthat, I would say only one final word
to him. I hope that he recognizes, as well as the rest
of us, that the onIy way to settle this dispute is by
negotiation and that the only way to get negotiation
is to be prepared to make concessions, and that
concessions have to be made politically on both sides
of this dispute if we are at the end to emerge with
what I think all of us round this table at least want
to see: a Cyprus which remains independent, which

remains an independent Member of the United Nations
and which, if it so wishes, remains non-aligned.
86. ‘The PRESIDENT.
(translation from Russian):
Since no other member of the CounciI wishes to
speak, I shall now make a statement as the representative of the UNION
OF SOVIET
SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS.
87. Distinguished members of the Security Council,
the Council has once again had to meet in order
to consider the very complex and tense situatio.n that
has .arisen in Cyprus as a result of the continuing
and expanding foreign military intervention
against
a sovereign State Member of the United Nations.
Only yesterday, the Council unanimously
adopted
resolution
357 (1974), in which it reaffirmed its
resolution 353 (1974) and ail the other resolutions on the
subject, in all their provisions, and called for the
immediate implementation
of those provisions, which
constitute the basis for a just and lasting pohtical
settlement of the Cyprus~crisis.
88. In that resolution the, Council demanded that the
parties to the fighting cease ail firing..and military
action forthwith. We must note with regret that that
resolution, too, like the three preceding resolutions
on. Cyprus, is not being implemented,
but is b.eing
grossly violated. Alarming ne,ws is reaching us from
Cyprus. The military operations on the island have
not only not ceased, but are, on the contrary, expanding
and taking on a more dangerous character. Peaceful
inhabitants of the Republic of Cyprus are losing their
lives, innocent people are being killed, and increased
suffering is being inflicted on the Cypriot people, who
have fallen victim to the secret plans and designs, of
certain NATO circles which, in order to strengthen,
their military and ,strategic positiDns i.n- the eastern
Mediterranean,
are intent on sacrificing the independance, sovereignty
and te.rritarial integrity - of
the. Republic of Cyprus and on dismembering
the
island.
.. ,
89. The United Nations’ troops are. also suffering,
casualties. In this connexion, the. Soviet delegation
expresses its sincere condolences to the Government
of Austria and to the bereaved, families over the
death of three soldiers of the Austrian’ contingent, of
UNFICYP.
We also offer our sympathy to the
Governments
of Finland, the United Kingdom and
Canada, whose ‘soldiers have been wounded.
90. The events of the last few days and hours cdnfirm
very convincingly the correctness ‘of the evaluation
made in the statement by the So.viet Government
that what is at stake is the fate of Cyprus as an
independent sovereign State, a Member of the United
Nations and an active member of the non-alignedd
movement. Even to those inexperienced..in
political
matters, it is clear that, in Full view.of us all+ unlawful
acts that have been condemned and proscribed by
numerous decisions of the United Nations:are being

committed against international
peace, security and
justice and that there is foreign intervention and an
attempt
forcibly
to dismember
an independent
sovereign State..

rebels from power in the island. That would also
promote the immediate cessation ~ofniilitafy intervention in Cyprus and the withdrawal from the island
of ail foreign military personnel and foreign troops.

91.. In these circumstances, no State that cherishes
peace and security on the basis of the noble principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and of international law can remain aloof from this tragedy of the
Cypriot people.

97. As far as the ‘internal State structure of the
Republic of Cyprus is concerned,
the question
should be settled by the Cypriots themselves. The
strict observance by all of the principles of noninterference in the internal affairs of another State
would be a real guarantee of the independence and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus as a
sovereign Member State of the United Nations. It
is important to protect the Republic of Cyprus from
outside interference and to create conditions under
which the Cypriot people-both
Greek and Turkish
Cypriots-would
be able to settle their own internal
problems in an atmosphere of peace and tranquillity.
The Soviet delegation has frequently stressed that the
withdrawal of foreign troops from Cyprus is the key
question and the basic condition for ensuring a just
and lasting political settlement of the Cyprus crisis.
The withdrawal of troops would create the necessary
pre-conditions for the solution of the internal political
problems of Cyprus by the Cypriot people themselves,
without any forcible interference from outside. The
Soviet Union continues to take the view that the fate
of the Cypriot people must be determined by the
Cypriot people themselves, without any kind of foreign
interference or pressure.

92. The Soviet delegation wishes to stress‘. once
again that the Security Council must place full
responsibility for this violence, committed in full view
of the United Nations and the whole world against
an independent State, upon certain NATO circles
which, behind the backs of the Cypriot people, are
deciding their destiny and that of the statehood and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus. They
are also flouting the principles and rules of the Charter.
93. The Geneva Declaration,
which was adopted
without the participation
of the representatives of
Cyprus, was designed to delay a political settlement
that would be in the interests of the Cypriot people.
It was designed to ensure a continuation
of the
occupation of Cyprus by NATO troops-a
situation
which in fact creates conditions that reinforce the
division of the island. Those NATO circles are doing
their utmost to reduce an important decision of the
Security Council on Cyprus to a mere scrap of
Pap.

98. It is the duty of the Council to ensure those
very conditions for the people of Cyprus, for the
solution of their internal problem. The Council cannot
and must not be indifferent to the situation in the
eastern Mediterranean,
which represents such a
threat to peace. It has a grave responsibility
under
the Charter and has an obligation to take effective
and urgent measures to preserve the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus. In
accordance with the Charter, the Council must
put an end to foreign military intervention,
protect
the lawful rights of the people of Cyprus and ensure
peace and security in that important region.

94. In these circumstances, the time has come for
the Security Council,
in implementation
of its
resolution 357 (1974), to consider the question of
adopting more effective measures to ensure the
implementation
of its decisions on Cyprus, first and
foremost its basic resolution, namely, resolution 353
(1974), which requested the withdrawal of troops.
That is what the Council undertook to do in resolution 357 (1974), in which it decided to remain seized
of the situation and on instant,cail to meet as necessary
to consider what more effective measures may be
required if the cease-fire is not respected.

99. The Soviet delegation wishes to state quite
openly that developments in and around Cyprus in
recent days have not convinced us that the resumption
of the Geneva talks within the narrow, -closed circle
of NATO can ensure a just and lasting settlement of
the Cyprus crisis in accordance with the noble purposes
and principles of the Charter. The attempts made at
the Geneva talks to settle this problem within the
narrow circle of States members of NATO without
taking account of the will of the Cypriot people
and to the detriment of their basic and vital interests,
have met with failure. The so-called guarantee
system-based
on the Zurich and London agreements-which
was imposed on Cyprus in 1959 and
which the Soviet Union has never supported, has
ceased to be viable and has failed. The proposal
by the USSR to replace this bankrupt guarantee

95. The Soviet Union is in favour of protecting the
independence of the Cypriot State, which wishes to
pursue a policy of non-alignment;
it is in favour of
maintaining
the sovereignty,
independence
and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus, and
opposes the partition or annexation of the island on
any pretext. The Soviet Government
insists on the
immediate cessation of foreign military intervention
in CyPrus, the withdrawal of all foreign troops from
the island and the restoration of the constitutional
Government
of the Republic of Cyprus and of all
the institutions of that Government.
96. The most important condition for the normalization of the situation in Cyprus and for the restoration
of the lawful Government
is the removal of the
11

system by a more effective and reliable system of
international
guarantees that would strictly ensure
the preservation of the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus was
rejected by those who continue to cling to old,
obsolete theories.

resolution 353 (1974). The full report should also deal
fully with the key issue in the Cyprus crisis, namely,
the withdrawal of foreign troops. All these deficiencies
should be eliminated in the full report, which should
also contain detailed information on the activities of
UNFICYP.

,100. It is the deep conviction of the Soviet delegation
that only decisive action by the Security Council and
the United Nations can avert the dismemberment
of
the Republic of Cyprus and ensure its independence,
sovereignty
and territorial
integrity.
The Soviet
delegation remains firmly convinced that the Council
should, as a matter of urgency, send a special mission
to Cyprus composed of members of the Council to
be appointed by the President of the Council after
consultations with the members of the Council and
the Secretary-General,
in order to ascertain on the
spot the progress made in implementing
the Council’s
decisions, and to submit a report to the Council.
The sending of such a mission is particularly important
now when events in Cyprus have taken a new,
dangerous turn. The purpose of sending a special
mission of the Security Council to Cyprus should be
to enhance the role of the United Nations and its
principal organ for the maintenance of peace and
international
security, to restore peace and ensure
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Cyprus. The mission could carry
out a detailed study of the situation on the spot and
submit to the Council its recommendations
concerning
measures to ensure the implementation
of resolution
353 (1974) and the restoration of peace, constitutional
order and the lawful government of the Republic of
Cyprus headed by President Makarios.

102. I should like to stress once again that full and
reliable information on the situation in Cyprus must be
made available to the Council now, at this critical
time, so that the Council, in full knowledge of the
facts, may take effective measures to settle the Cyprus
crisis and ensure the immediate implementation
of the
key provisions of resolution 353 (1974).
103. For that very reason, we consider it absolutely
essential that a special mission of the Council be sent
urgently to Cyprus, so that it may submit a full and
thorough report on the situation on the spot and thus
assist the Council in discharging its international duty
to safeguard the independence,,
sovereignty
and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus.
~
104. We do not understand who could be disturbed by
such a mission. Those who .. sincerely support an
independent, sovereign Cyprus would not only not
be disturbed or harmed by such a mission, but would
be assisted.
105. We should like to express our gratitude to thk
Secretary-General for the detailed information on the
situation in Cyprus and on the activities and tasks
of the United Nations troops on the island which he
gave to the Council in his statement earlier in this
meeting. This information will be useful to the Council
in its constant, practical direction of the activities of
the United Nations troops in Cyprus. It would be
extremely useful if the Secretary-General
reported to
the Council periodically on a regular basis with regard
to the activities of the United Nations Force in Cyprus.
This Force, despite its composition,
should not be
used to implement
NATO plans aimed at depriving
the Republic of Cyprus of its independence
and
partitioning
the country to the .detriment
of the
interests of the Cypriot people. The activities of the
United Nations troops should be directed towards
ensuring a cease-fire, the immediate
cessation of
foreign military
intervention
and the immediate
withdrawal from the Republic of Cyprus of the foreign
military personnel stationed there.

101. Such a measure-the
sending of such a
mission-has
now become urgent, in view of the failure
of the Geneva talks and the continuing foreign military
intervention
against the Republic of Cyprus. The
mission would be able to collect and submit to the
Council detailed factual material
concerning
the
situation in Cyprus, together with its conclusions,
observations and proposals. The Soviet delegation has
become firmly convinced that the Council does not
yet have at its disposal objective and complete
information
about the real situation in Cyprus. In
that connexion, I should like to mention the reports
by the Secretariat on the situation
in Cyprus,
particularly
those issued during the SecretaryGeneral’s absence from New York. They do not
contain a full picture of the true situation in Cyprus
and they show a tendency to embellish the situation.
There has been no assessment of the general political
and military situation on the island. The introductory
paragraphs of thereports, to the effect that the situation
on the island as a whole remains calm, do not
correspond to the facts set forth in those reports
concerning military operations, violations of the ceasefire and acts of violence. The Council needs a full
report on the situation in Cyprus with an analysis of
the changes in the situation since the adoption of

106. With regard to the resolutions adopted by the
Council at this meeting, I should like to state the
following: the Soviet delegation voted in favour of
draft resolution S/l 1448. However, we must point out
that we would have preferred, the adoption of a more
strongly worded resolution on this question, as we
stated when resolution 357 (1974) was adopted.
107. As the Soviet delegation
has frequently
emphasized, the Council must take effective measures.
for the immediate
implementation
of the basic
12

’

resolution, resolution 353 (1974), in all its provisions.
We therefore consider the resolution adopted at this
meeting to be merely a further step in that direction,
sin.ce it insists on the full implementation
of previous
Council resolutions, including resolution 353 (1974).
In that sense, we consider this resolution to be useful
and necessary, in view of the urgency of the matter,
although in substance the wording is insufficiently
strong.

an aircraft belonging to a NATO country from a base
which was used by a NATO Power to the capital
of a country which is a member of NATO. Indeed, the
Archbishop expressed his deep gratitude at that fact
in this very chamber as well as in London.
113. It is a very strange sort of plot, if I may say so,
in which the principal plotters, far from taking steps
to get rid of the person they are plotting against, if the
.Soviet attitude is correct, seem, indeed, to have taken
all necessary measures in order to extract him from a
position of danger.

108. As to draft resolution S/11449/Rev.l
submitted
by Austria and four other delegations, the Soviet
delegation voted in favour of it, since we understood
and took into account the humanitarian
reasons why
it had been submitted urgently, and agreed on the
need to adopt such a resolution. At the same time,
the Soviet delegation would like to point out, in
connexion with the reference in that resolution to
resolution 355 (1974), that it abstained in the vote on
that resolution and at that time gave an appropriate
explanation of its vote. That explanation still remains
valid at the present time. We consider it necessary to
point this out and to reaffirm the position of the USSR
delegation with regard to resolution 355 (1974).

114. When it comes to the Geneva conference, I do
not think anyone who reads what happened in Geneva
fairly and with a degree of objectivity,
which
nnfortunately we have not heard this evening, could
conclude anything other than that the British position
on Cyprus was that we wished to produce a settlement
that was basically acceptable to all, including the
representatives of the Cypriot people, both of whom
were present at that conference.
115. A wise man in England once said that to a
bishop nothing was pure, and that to a general nothing
was safe. I think we can add a third to that: to the
Soviet Union nothing a Western country does can
conceivably
be innocent,
however altruistic
and
however sensible and however moderate it may be.

109. The Soviet delegation stresses once again that
time does not wait. Decisive and effective action by
the Security Council is essential in order to restore
peace in Cyprus and put an end to foreign military
intervention against that sovereign State. The Soviet
delegation is ready to co-operate constructively with
all the other members of the Council to that end.

116. It is perhaps time that in relation to Cyprus the
Soviet Union stopped turning its gaze on NATO and
started looking at the realities of the situation, at what
is happening on the ground; and, indeed, instead of
trying to hinder a settlement, it might be better if the
Soviet Union devoted its great energies to trying to
achieve one.

110. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): Mr. President, it is, unfortunately,
an indication
of how
unrealistic and irrelevant is the attitude of the Soviet
Union on this matter that in the course of your
speech-lasting,
I think, some 25 minutes-not
once
did you see fit to mention the word “Turkey”,
not
once did you see fit to mention the present advance
of the Turkish army in Cyprus, not once did you see
tit to mention the proposals that were put forward
by the Government of Turkey and by the Government
of Greece in Geneva. Once again, not for the first
time, you have treated us to a diatribe against NATO.
If I may say so, with respect, the Soviet Union seems
to be obsessed by NATO:

117. The PRESIDENT
(translation
from Russian):
The reaction of the United Kingdom representative
merely confirms the correctness of the position stated
by the Soviet delegation.
118.

I call upon the representative

of Greece.

119. Mr. CARAYANNIS
(Greece): I deeply regret
the loss of three young Austrian soldiers of the United
Nations Force in Cyprus, who were killed by the
Turkish army. I offer the deepest sympathy of my
Government and of myself to the representative of
Austria, to his Government,
and to the SecretaryGeneral.

111. Originally
we were .told that NATO circles
were on the side of the Greeks because they had
engineered the expulsion of Makarios. Now we are
told that NATO circles are on the side of the Turks.
Is it one NATO circle we are complaining about, or
is it perhaps two? Or, indeed, are there more?
Everywhere there seems to be the hand of NATO in
something, if one is to take at face value what the
representative of the Soviet Union insists upon telling
us so often.

120. At this stage and at this moment, I should like
to refer only to the first resolution unanimously
adopted earlier this evening, contained in document
S/11448. Allow me to say that I find it completely
inadequate in the present circumstances.

112. May I remind you, Mr. President, that when the
coup started in Cyprus Archbishop Makarios, the
President of Cyprus, was flown out of that island by

121. The Security Council is faced with a very
serious problem.
A State Member of the United
Nations has had one third of its territory forcibly
13

I
occupied by another State Member, and that has
happened in a span of two weeks, during which all the
Council’s resolutions have been continuously
and
flagrantly violated by Turkey.
s

our military campaign in the island and had ordered
all the military authorities to exercise the greatest
possible care in taking necessary measures. to this
end. In fact, certain of our requests regarding the
UNFICYP
movements arose from this sensitivity.
Despite all this, the occurrence of these incidents
only indicates how difftcult it may become to control
and thereby to. prevent this kindof incident during
a military campaign.

122. If, after all that, all the Council can do is recall
its previous resolutions and insist upon their implementation, that is not flattering to the Council. Nor,
I should like to say, is it consistent with its previous
actions.

“I hasten to convey to you my sincere feeeiings
of sorrow at these unfortunate iosses of brave men
who were there for the purpose of peace, and would
be extremely grateful to. you if you would kindIy
use your good offices to express our profound
condolences to their aggrieved families.*‘3

123. As all members of the Council will remember,
on the night of the breakdown
of the Geneva
conference and the resumption of hostilities by Turkey,
the Council adopted resolution 357 (1974), paragraph 4
of which states that the Council

127. With regard to the operative paragraphs of the
resolution adopted in connexion with this incident, I
have this to say. My Government
has given its
strongest assurances that the Turkish forces have been
once again ordered. to exercise the utmost attention
and care for the full safety and security of the
UNFICYP
troops. However, members of the Council
are aware that the tasks and status of UNFICYP
in the
future will naturally be decided with the consent of the
parties concerned.

“Decides to remain seized of the situation and on
instant call to meet as necessary to consider what
more effective measures may be required if the
cease-fire is not respected”.

Since then, one third of the island has been occupied
by the Turkish army, and the only thing we probably
still do not know is how many are dead and wounded.
In the Council’s
own words, “more
effective
measures*’ should be taken in such an event. That
is certainly not what has happened this evening.

128. With regard to the basic issue of Cyprus that is
the object of this meeting of the Council and has
been the object of its recent meetings, I have this to
say. Ail members, past and presenf, of this Council
who have followed the deliberations
concerning the
Cyprus problem are aware of the fact that over the
years the Turkish point of view has always been
that the ideal solution for the island would be a
constitutional arrangement that would provide for the
equal participation
of the two communities
in the
destinies of Cyprus. I remember having said time and
time again that neither of the two communities should
dominate the other. Turkey has always believed
and continues to believe that international
disputes
can and must be solved through negotiation. Everyone
must also be aware of the restraint and patience
exercised by Turkey for the past 1 I years. It was only
when the independence of the island and the very
life of the Turkish
Cypriot community,
already
rendered hardly tolerable for a decade, were directly
threatened that Turkey, upon the failure of consultations among the guarantor Powers; had to intervene.
Turkey is still convinced, however, of the necessity of
an agreed settlement through negotiations among all
interested parties.

124. As for the word “cease-fire”,
which is again
used in this resolution-and
I do not remember
how many times it has been repeated in the various
resolutions and around this table-I
am sorry to say
it is hardly needed any longer. It was needed yesterday
and during the days prior to yesterday. Today it is
too late.
125. The PRESIDENT
(translafion
from
I call upon the representative of Turkey.
126.

Russian):

Mr.

OKAY
(Turkey) (interpretation
from
I can understand the degree of emotion
attached to the problems referred to in the resolution
just adopted by the Council, which I should like to
call the Austrian resolution. Therefore, on behalf of
my delegation and Government,
I shall simply once
again express to the Austrian delegation our very deep
feelings of regret at the deplorable incident in which
three courageous members of the Austrian contingent
have been killed and tell it how much sadness that
incident has caused in my country. It was expressed
much more eloquently than I am capable of in the
message addressed to the Secretary-General
by
Mr. Ecevit, Prime Minister of my country, which
I shall read in the original language.
French):

,129. I therefore would find it easy to respond to
certain appeals but most difficult to agree with ihe
tone in which they were made, not being used to
being pressured. The Turkish delegation finds..!essons
on human behaviour, especially regarding the use of
armed forces, less welcome from the representatives.

“I am grieved to learn today that three UNFICYP
soldiers lost their lives, and several others were
injured, during the military campaign in Cyprus.
The Turkish Government
has been acting with
utmost sensitivity to avoid any possibility of such
an event happening since the very beginning of

J Quoted in English by the speaker.

14

of certain
countries--considering
their colonial
records-than.
from the representatives
of other
countries. Suffice it for me to say, that the role of
judge does not become those who have been for so
long, and perhaps could even today still easily be,
considered as parties. Nevertheless, despite the fact
that I consider that my country has no lessons in
behaviour to ieam from anyone in this Counci1, and
certainly least of all from the representative of the
United Kingdom, and despite the fact that I do not
know what are the British political interests that this
appeal is ultimately aimed at serving, I will respond to
the appeal of the representative of the United Kingdom
in all candour.

sover&nty
and tli’&terriIoriaf
integrity and security
of the Cypriot people, a peopIe which up to that
time had remained within the framework of a
constitutional
regime guaranteed by international
agreements engaging the direct responsibility
of
three Powers. That balance which up to that time
,had been expressed in the option for non-alignment,
made of the pblicy of Cyprus an element of
stability within the country and security within that
region of the Mediterranean.
Obviously,
the
jeopardy in which these fundamental facts have been
placed imperils the balance between the communities
and sets in motion a process of deterioration
in
: the Mediterranean
that could lead not only to a
: civil war with unforeseeable consequences, but to
a grave international crisis as well.”

130. If a constitutional arrangement is accepted under
which, in the independent State of Cyprus, the Turkish
community
would maintain
its own autonomous
administration
in one part of the island and the Greek
community its own in another, Turkey is willing to
begin negotiations as soon as possible to determine
immediately,
the detailed arrangements for such a
constitutional order.
13 1. This wiIl be my last intervention

136. This situation has been of constant concern to
the entire international
community,
and the Security
Council has spared, no effort in its attempts to put
‘an end to the tragedy afllicting the Cypriot people.
137. On 6 August, in the face of the threat of
further deterioration
in the situation, the Group of
.Non-Aligned Countries once again met and at a plenary
.meeting adopted a declaration
[3/11424]. In that
declaration,
the representatives
of the non-aligned
countries,

at this meeting.

132. The PRESIDENT
(translation from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative
of Algeria.
I invite him to take the place reserved for him at
the Council table.

“Stressing their increasing and urgent conem
over the deepening crisis caused by the continuing
foreign military and other interventions in Cyprus,
which threatens its independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity as well as its non-alignment,
,..
demand the immediate and full implementation
of
the objectives of Security Council resolution 353
(1974).

133. Mr. TALEB-BENDIAB
(Algeria) (interpretation fvom French): The Co-ordinating
Bureau of the
non-aligned countries, meeting on 15 August has
charged me, as the current Chairman of the Group
of Non-Aligned
Countries at the United Nations,
with making a statement in connexion with the
situation prevailing in Cyprus. Allow me, Mr. President, to thank you and the members of the Council
for having permitted me to inform you of the opinion
of the non-aligned Group on this question.

‘I\
. . .

“They assert the inalienable right of the people and
legitimate Government of the Republic of Cyprus
to full and free participation in all decisions le,ading
to return to normalcy and to maintenance of the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
* of Cyprus.”

134: Everyone is aware of the grave situation in
Cyprus. That situation has deteriorated,
a fact that
most gravely concerns the Group of Non-Aligned
Countries.
135. Since the beginning of the crisis, the non-aligned
States have expressed their apprehensions and fears
about the threat to international
peace and security
that has resulted from the aggression of which the
Republic of Cyprus, a founding member of the nonaligned movement, has been a victim. In a message
dated 20 July 1974, President Houari Boumedibne,
acting in his capacity of Chairman of the Fourth
Conference of &ads of State or Government
of
Non-Aiigned
Countries, stated, among other things,
in connexion with the situation in Cyprus:

138. In the face of the extremely serious development
and evolution of the situation in Cyprus, the Group
of’ Non-Aligned
Countries has deemed it necessary
and appropriate to speak today in the Security Council
so that the Council may adopt immediate and effective
measures to ensure that the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus may
be fully respected.
139. We express the hope that the Council, as the
principal body of the United Nations entrusted with the
maintenance of international
peace and security, will
assume its responsibilities
in this situation
that
threatens peace in the worId.

“The aggression of which. the Republic of Cyprus
has been the victim constitutes a flagrant and
deliberate
atta-ck upon the independence,
the
15

140. Mr. JANKGWITSCH
(Austria): I should just
like, briefly, to take this opportunity
to say how
profoundly grateful my delegation is for the many
tokens of sympathy it has received from other
delegations in the face of the grievous loss suffered
by the Austrian contingent of UNFICYP
through
a deliberate armed attack against soldiers on peacekeeping duty. In expressing these thanks we wish to
associate ourselves with all those who have expressed
sympathy to the delegations of other Member States
which have suffered losses and casualties, in particular
Finiand, Canada and the United Kingdom.
141. To the representative of Turkey I should like to
say that the Austrian people nourishes no hostility
towards the people of Turkey. It was for this reason
that such a deep sense of shock and grief befell the
Austrian people at the news of the wanton killing
of Austrian members of UNFICYP.
This sense of
shock and grief was first expressed by the most
authoritative
voice of my country shortly after
receiving the terrible news, the voice of Federal
Chancellor Bruno Kreisky.
142. It would be inappropriate
in the face ‘of death
not to speak firmly, clearly and without the protective

ambiguities which diplomatic usage allows. We hope
and believe that this firmness and clarity will. help to
redress the situation,
and help the Government
concerned, without possible misunderstandings,
to
take such measures as not only will allow for respect
for the United Nations peace-keeping missions in the
region but will restore the mutual trust and friendship
which in the past have always characterized relations
‘between Austria and Turkey.
143. The word “heroism”
has been pronouncedhere, and indeed service for peace demands a heroism
that is much greater than th,e so-called heroism of
war. It is heroism that ‘for the most part goes
unrewarded. It is heroism that for the most part
demands only heavy sacrifice.
144. There is very little that we can do’ tonight to
console three bereaved families in their grief. We
hope, however, that the expressions of sympathy
they have received tonight from so many delegations
and from so many members of the Council. will
show them that in this hour of distress they wil1 not
be alone’and forgotten.
The meeting

rose on Friday,

16 August, ai 1.30 a.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
throughout
Section,

Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
New York
or Geneva.

COMMJDW

SE PROCURER

may
your

PUBLICATIONS
be

obtained
bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

or

from
bookstores
write
to: United

and
distributors
Nations,
Sales

DES

UNIES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
U&s
sent
en vente
dans
les librairies
dbpositaires
du monde
entier.
Informez-vous
aupr&s
de votre
libraire
A : Nations
Unies.
Section
des ventes,
New York ou Genbve.
KAIC

IIOAYPKTb

H3AAHKfi

Hsaaxxx
sxxax
name=
Hauxft,

Opraxxsauxx
06zenxxexxbrx
HauxR
YOJKWO ~ynx~b
x arexTers&x
xo xcex
pafioxax
uxpa.
HamanTe
cnpaaxx
xxxxcxc~~
Yarasxxe
x31x nxmxfe
no anpecy
: Opraxn3auxx
Cexqxx
no npoaaaae
xs8axxR.
Hero-Hopx
HJIH XCexesa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONRS

Las publicaciones
de las
buidoras
eh todas
partes
Unidas,
Seccidn
de Ventas,

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

OPX-AHW

3A4KH

DE LAS

Naciones
Unidas
estin
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Gmebra.

00400

et les agences
ou adressez-vous

OE’bEAHHEHHFdX

NACIONES

HAUWi
x xxxncxbr~
mara06 HsAaxxRX
x
W’benxaexxam

UMDAS

en venta
en librerias
a su librero
o dirfjase

y casas distria: Naciones

74.82001-Aprill983-2,200
