22

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

8. Endorses the proposal that a meeting be held between
representatives of organizations of the United Nations sys­
tem and representatives of the General Secretariat of the
League of Arab States and its specialized organizations;
9. Welcomes the invitation by the League of Arab States
that the Meeting be held at the present headquarters of the
League at Tunis and requests the Secretary-General to pro­
vide whatever assistance will be necessary to ensure the
successful organization of the Meeting;
10. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the League of Arab States, to ensure that the Meeting
referred to in paragraph 9 above is held not later than
30 June 1983;
11. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its thiriy-eignth session on the state
of co-operation between the United Nations and the League
of Arab States;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "Co-operation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States''.
70th plenary meeting
16 November 1982

37/18. Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nu­
clear installations and its grave consequences for
the established international system concerning
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non­
proliferation of nuclear weapons and interna­
tional peace and security

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled ' 'Armed Israeli

aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its grave
consequences for the established international system con­
cerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non­
proliferation of nuclear weapons and international peace
and security",
Recalling the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 28
Taking note also of the relevant resolution of the Inter­
national Atomic Energy Agency and the Commission on
Human Rights,
Viewing with deep concern Israel's refusal to comply with
those resolutions, particularly Security Council resolution
487 (1981) of 19 June 1981,
Gravely alarmed by the dangerous escalation of Israel's
acts of aggression in the region,
Gravely concerned that Israel continues to maintain its
threats to repeat such attacks against nuclear installations,
Reiterating its alarm over the information and evidence
regarding the acquisition and development of nuclear weap­
ons by Israel,
Recalling the Declaration and the Programme of Action
on the Establishment of a New International Economic Or­
der,29 the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States30
and the Declaration on the Use of Scientific and Techno­
logical Progress in the Interests of Peace and for the Benefit
of Mankind, 3 t
28

A/37/365 and Add.l-S/15320 and Add.l. For the printed text, see

Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-seventh Year, Supplement
for July, August and September 1982, documents S/15320 and Add. I.
29 Resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-Vn.
30 Resolution 3281 (XXIX).
31 Resolution 3384 (XXX).

Affirming the need to ensure against the repetition of such
an attack on nuclear facilities by Israel or any other State,
1. Condemns Israel's refusal to implement resolution
487 (1981), unanimously adopted by the Security Council;
2. Strongly condemns Israel for the escalation of its acts
of aggression in the region;
3. Condemns Israel's threats to repeat such attacks, which
would gravely endanger international peace and security;
4. Demands that Israel withdraw forthwith its officially
declared threat to repeat its armed attack against nuclear
facilities;
5. Considers the Israeli act of aggression to be a vio­
lation and a denial of the inalienable sovereign right of States
to scientific and technological progress for achieving social
and economic development and raising the standards of
peoples and the dignity of the human person, as well as a
violation and a denial of inalienable human rights and the
sovereign right of States to scientific and technological
development;
6. Requests the Security Council to consider the nec­
essary measures to deter Israel from repeating such an attack
on nuclear facilities;
7. Calls for the continuation of the consideration, at the
international level, of legal measures to prohibit armed
attacks against nuclear facilities, and threats thereof as a
contribution to promoting and ensuring the safe develop­
ment of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, with the
assistance of a group of experts, 32 a comprehensive study
on the consequences of the Israeli armed attack against the
Iraqi nuclear installations devoted to peaceful purposes, and
to submit that study to the General Assembly at its thirty­
eighth session;
9. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled ''Armed Israeli
aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its grave
consequences for the established international system con­
cerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non­
proliferation of nuclear weapons and international peace
and security" .
70th plenary meeting
16 November 1982

37/19. Report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency
The General Assembly.
Having received the report of the International Atomic

Energy Agency to the General Assembly for the year 1981, 33
Taking note of the statement by the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency of 18 November
1982,34 which provides additional information on devel­
opments in the Agency's activities during 1982,
Recognizing the importance of the work of and the rel­
evance for the International Atomic Energy Agency to pro­
mote further the application of nuclear energy for peaceful
32 Subsequently named Group of Experts on the Consequences of the
Israeli Armed Attack against the Iraqi Nuclear Installations.
33 International Atomic Energy Agency, The Annual Report for 1981
(Austria, July 1982); transmitted to the members of the General Assembly
by a note of the Secretary-General (A/37/382 and Corr. I).
34 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session,
Plenary Meetings. 71st meeting, paras. 2-44.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

purposes, as envisaged in its statute, and to improve further
Its technical assistance and.promotional programmes for the
benefit of developing countries,
Conscious of the importance of the work of the Inter­
national Atomic Energy Agency in the implementation of
the relevant provisions of the Treaty on the Non-Prolifer­
ation of Nuclear Weapons35 and other international treaties,
conventions and agreements designed to achieve similar
objectives, as well as in ensuring, so far as it is able, that
the assistance provided by the Agency or at its request or
under its supervision or control is not used in such a way
as to further any military purpose, as stated in article II of
its statute,
Taking note of the decision of the General Conference of
the International Atomic Energy Agency of 20 September
1982 to grant membership of the Agency to Namibia, rep­
resented by the United Nations Council for Namibia, in
conformity with the request contained in General Assembly
resolution 36/ l 2 l D of 10 December 198 I .
Conscious of the useful outcome of the Conference on
Nuclear Power Experience, held at Vienna from 13 to 17
September 1982 by the International Atomic Energy Agency,
Aware that on 29 July 1982 twenty-five years had elapsed
since the International Atomic Energy Agency came into
being,
l. Takes note of the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency;
2. Urges all States to strive for effective and harmonious
international co-operation in carrying out the work of the
International Atomic Energy Agency and to implement
strictly the mandate of its statute, in promoting the use of
nuclear energy and the application of nuclear science and
technology for peaceful purposes; in strengthening technical
assistance and co-operation for developing countries; and
in ensuring the effectiveness of the Agency's safeguards
system;
3. Considers that Israel's threat to repeat its armed at­
tack against nuclear facilities as well as any other armed
attack against such facilities constitute, inter alia, a serious
threat to the role and activities of the International Atomic
Energy Agency in the development and further promotion
of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes;
4. Affirms its confidence in the role of the International
Atomic Energy Agency in the application of nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
the records of the thirty-seventh session of the General
Assembly relating to the Agency's activities.
73rd plenary meeting
19 November 1982
37/35.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples36

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Dec­
laration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Coun­
tries and Peoples, 37
"Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.
),; See also sect. I, footnote 7, and sect. X.8.6, decisions 37/41 I to

23

Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 2621 (XXV) of 12 Oc­
tober 1970, containing the programme of action for the full
implementation of the Declaration, and 35/118 of 11 De­
cember 1980, the annex to which contains the Plan of Action
for the Full Implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling all its previous resolutions concerning the
implementation of the Declaration, in particular resolution
36/68 of l December 1981, as well as the relevant reso­
lutions of the Security Council,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Special Decla­
ration on Namibia, 38 adopted by the International Confer­
ence on Sanctions against South Africa,
Condemning the continued colonialist and racist repres­
sion of millions of Africans, particularly in Namibia, by the
Government of South Africa through its persistent, illegal
occupation of the international Territory and its intransigent
attitude towards all efforts being made to bring about an
internationally acceptable solution to the situation obtaining
in the Territory,
Deeply conscious of the urgent need to take all necessary
measures to eliminate forthwith the remaining vestiges of
colonialism, particularly in respect of Namibia where des­
perate attempts by South Africa to perpetuate its illegal
occupation have brought untold suffering and bloodshed to
the people,
Strongly condemning the policies of those States which,
in defiance of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
have continued to collaborate with the Government of South
Africa in its domination of the people of Namibia,
Conscious that the success of the national liberation strug­
gle and the resultant international situation have provided
the international community with a unique opportunity to
make a decisive contribution towards the total elimination
of colonialism in all its forms and manifestations in Africa,
Noting with satisfaction the work accomplished by the
Special Committee with a view to securing the effective and
complete implementation of the Declaration and the other
relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
Noting also with satisfaction the co-operation and active
participation of the administering Powers concerned in the
relevant work of the Special Committee, as well as the
continued readiness of the Governments concerned to re­
ceive United Nations visiting missions in the Territories
under their administration,
Reiterating its conviction that the total eradication of ra­
cial discrimination, apartheid and violations of the basic
human rights of the peoples of colonial Territories will be
achieved most expeditiously by the faithful and complete
implementation of the Declaration, particularly in Namibia,
and by the speediest possible complete elimination of the
presence of the illegal occupying regimes therefrom,
I. Reaffirms its resolutions 1514 (XV), 2621 (XXV)
and 36/68 and all other resolutions on decolonization and
calls upon the administering Powers, in accordance with
those resolutions, to take all necessary steps to enable the
dependent peoples of the Territories concerned to exercise
fully and without further delay their inalienable right to self­
determination and independence;
2. Affirms once again that the continuation of colo­
nialism in all its forms and manifestations-including rac­
ism, apartheid, the exploitation by foreign and other inter­
ests of economic and human resources and the waging

37/419.

17
Official Records of the General Assemblv.
Session.
• Thirtv·seventh
•
Supplement No. 23 (A/37/23/Rev. l).

'"Report of the International Conference on Sanctions a!(ai,ut S·,rllh
Africa. Paris, 20-27 Mav !9R/ (A/C'ONF 107/8). sect. X.R.
