S/PV.9388

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9388th meeting

Thursday, 27 July 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kariuki. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Sánchez Izquierdo
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Ms. Barnor
Mr. Hamamoto
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Letter dated 18 May 2023 from the Panel of Experts on the Central African
Republic extended pursuant to resolution 2648 (2022) addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2023/360)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-22184 (E)
*2322184*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9388

The situation in the Central African Republic

The President: The draft resolution received 13
votes in favour, none against and 2 abstentions. The draft
resolution has been adopted as resolution 2693 (2023).

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Letter dated 18 May 2023 from the Panel
of Experts on the Central African Republic
extended pursuant to resolution 2648
(2022) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2023/360)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Central African Republic to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Sylvie Valérie Baipo Temon, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Francophonie and Central Africans Abroad of
the Central African Republic.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2023/555, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/360, which contains the text of a
letter dated 18 May 2023 from the Panel of Experts
on the Central African Republic extended pursuant to
resolution 2648 (2022) addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, Ecuador, France, Gabon, Ghana,
Japan, Malta, Mozambique, Switzerland, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
China, Russian Federation
2/7

27/07/2023

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation abstained in the
voting on the draft resolution prepared by France to
extend the sanctions regime in respect of the Central
African Republic. During work on this document,
we clearly outlined our position that the Security
Council must, at long last, respond to the repeated and
absolutely justified requests of the Government of the
Central African Republic to lift the arms embargo. This
requirement is also broadly supported by society in the
Central African Republic.
The arms embargo is hindering the efforts of
Bangui to combat illegal armed formations. At the
same time, it has no added value from the point of view
of preventing the supply of arms to fighters, who have
been acquiring these arms for the 10 years during which
the sanctions regime has been in place, and maintaining
those restrictions will have no impact on the problem.
On the basis of this objective fact, we proposed
approaching this problem in a sober and rational way,
calling for including in the draft resolution possible
modalities for assistance that the international
community could provide to the Central African
Republic in its work to ensure the security of its borders
and curb the smuggling of arms to fighters. We were
guided by the idea that the Security Council should not
only review its stand on the Central African Republic,
in which the situation has significantly improved since
2013, when the sanctions regime through the United
Nations was introduced, but also take the necessary
decision to correct elements of this regime that are no
longer effective, namely, first and foremost, the arms
embargo measures. We are convinced that given the
current state of affairs in the Central African Republic,
the Security Council should have taken a decision to
remove any form of sanctions on the efforts of a sovereign
State to stabilize and ensure its national security.
We regret that our proposals to that effect
were not incorporated into the document. Our
fundamentally important amendments to the text’s
humanitarian elements — these amendments were
based on agreed language — were also ignored. It is
clear that the informal penholders in the negotiating
23-22184

27/07/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

process — and a number of other members of the
Security Council — were cynically guided above all
by their own narrow mercantile interests in the Central
African Republic and in Africa in general, ignoring
the sovereign opinions of African States that are under
United Nations sanctions.
It is no secret to anyone that sanctions regimes
are used by some States as a lever to exert political
pressure — they do that under the international
umbrella of the United Nations. We do not believe that
this approach is constructive, including when it comes
to ensuring the effectiveness of the sanctions regimes
themselves. Nevertheless, when adopting a final
decision on the vote, we felt it was necessary to take
into account the positions of the African members of
the Security Council.
For our part, we will continue to support the Central
African Republic bilaterally, including by improving the
combat readiness of its armed forces, training service
personnel and staff of the law-enforcement agencies,
and providing humanitarian assistance. All of this is
entirely in accordance with the applicable international
legal norms and upon the request of Bangui.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I would
like to thank the members of the Council for their
engagement on this resolution and France for its
leadership as penholder, especially through the
extensive consultations.
The United States was pleased to vote in favour of
the extension of the mandate of the Panel of Experts
on the Central African Republic and the renewal
of elements of the arms embargo, travel ban and
asset freeze.
We voted in favour of resolution 2693 (2023)
because its measures are crucial to promoting peace and
stability in the Central African Republic and broader
region. Most importantly, this resolution will help keep
dangerous weapons and resources from reaching armed
groups. Today’s renewal also ensures that the Panel
of Experts will continue its oversight and reporting
responsibilities, which inform the Council and the
Sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013), concerning the Central African Republic.
The United States acknowledges the call by the
Central African Government to fully lift the arms
embargo, but we remain concerned about the security
situation in the country and the disregard that some

S/PV.9388

Council members and the Central African Republic
authorities have for the sanctions regime’s notification
requirements, as noted in the final report of the Panel
of Experts (see S/2023/360). Notably, nothing in this or
in previous sanctions regimes has kept Central African
security forces from receiving any weapons or training
they requested.
The United States is committed to lifting
sanctions when conditions permit, but that is not yet
the case in the Central African Republic. Although
the Government has made progress in achieving the
key benchmarks on security sector reform, further
efforts are needed to strengthen stockpile management
and address cross-border arms and natural-resource
smuggling. For those reasons, we are disappointed that
the Council did not include in this resolution an annex
of weapons that would have required notification to
the Sanctions Committee. We are increasingly alarmed
by reports that man-portable air defence systems have
been transported through the Central African Republic
into the Sudan by the Wagner Group. Oversight of
those weapons remains important for monitoring the
security situation in the Central African Republic and
the broader region.
We are also very concerned about the threat that
those weapons could pose to the safety and security
of peacekeepers serving in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic. I would like to highlight
that, under the terms of today’s resolution, Russia
remains obligated to notify the Committee of all transfers
of weapons and resources to its Wagner mercenaries
in the Central African Republic. Any failure to do so
would violate the terms of the sanctions regime.
Ms. Barnor (Ghana): Let me begin by welcoming
the presence of Her Excellency Ms. Sylvie Baipo Temon,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Francophonie and Central
Africans Abroad of the Central African Republic.
Ghana commends the delegation of France for its
tireless efforts in achieving a broad consensus on the just
adopted sanctions resolution 2693 (2023), concerning
the Central African Republic. We also acknowledge
the positive of our African colleagues on the Security
Council — Gabon and Mozambique — in support of
our common African cause during negotiations on
the resolution.
Despite our aspiration for a full lifting of the arms
embargo throughout the entire territory of the Central

23-221843/7

S/PV.9388

The situation in the Central African Republic

African Republic, we voted in favour of the resolution
because we believe that it represents a significant step
towards satisfying the Central African Republic’s longstanding request for the complete removal of sanctions
throughout its territory.
Today, the arms embargo no longer applies to the
Government of the Central African Republic, and this
resolution represents an encouraging response to ensure
that the authorities of the Central African Republic are
better equipped to curb the scourge of armed violence
and destabilizing activities being carried out by armed
groups, which undermine the stability of the country.
We also believe that the removal of restrictions on the
Forces armées centrafricaines and State civilian law
enforcement institutions would permit the partners of
the Central African Republic engaged in legitimate
activities towards the restoration of peace and security
in the country to do so without hindrance.
We encourage regional and other States to support
the Central African Republic in that regard. Ghana’s
affirmative vote was in accordance with our longheld belief that sanctions on the Governments of
sovereign countries should not exist in perpetuity,
especially when the Government in question has
continually demonstrated its commitment to meet the
conditions for the lifting of sanctions in the face of
considerable constraints.
The African Union and subregional organizations
have also consistently called for lifting the arms
embargo imposed on the Central African Republic so
as to enable its armed forces to defend the country and
protect its citizens. Those calls have been only partially
heeded. Today we have met them in an important way.
Let me conclude by reiterating Ghana’s strong
support for the Central African Republic as it continues
to implement its joint border management programmes,
as well as security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. We also encourage
the country to continue developing its capacity for
enhanced weapon- and ammunition-management
practices that prevent arms from slipping into the
hands of unauthorized armed groups. We express our
strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of the Central African
Republic and recall the importance of the principles
of non-interference, good neighbourliness and
regional cooperation.
4/7

27/07/2023

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): First, I
would like to welcome the presence of Her Excellency
Ms. Sylvie Valérie Baipo Temon, Foreign Minister of
the Central African Republic, to today’s meeting.
Just now, the Council adopted resolution 2693
(2023), deciding that the Council’s arms embargo
and reporting requirements no longer apply to the
Central African Republic’s security forces, and on the
basis of resolution 2648 (2022), adopted last July, the
Council has further lifted the arms embargo on the
country. That is of great practical significance to the
Central African Republic for strengthening its security,
capacity-building and maintaining peace and stability.
China commends the work of all parties, especially
France, as the penholder.
At the same time, today’s resolution fails to fully
meet the wish of the Central African Republic and
the countries of the region for a complete lifting of
sanctions, and the amendments proposed by China to
that effect are not fully reflected in the text.
Accordingly, China had to abstain in the voting.
The Council’s arms embargo on the Central African
Republic has already been in place for 10 years.
With progress made on the security sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes, the arms embargo no longer meets the
country’s needs, given its situation, and impedes its
efforts to enhance its security capacity and to maintain
its national security and stability. The Government
of the Central African Republic has repeatedly and
forcefully called for the complete lifting of the arms
embargo, which has received the active support of the
African Union, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and the countries of the region.
We hope that the Council will continue to respect
the concerns of the Central African Republic and take
further actions in that regard. We also hope that all
relevant countries will, through bilateral channels,
help the Central African Republic boost its security
capacity. In recent years, African countries have been
eager to see the lifting of the Council’s sanctions and
arms embargoes, as they believe that such measures
have had a negative impact on the enhancement of
Africa’s security capacity.
In August 2022, during its presidency of the
Council, China pushed for the issuance of a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2022/6), requesting the Council
23-22184

27/07/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

to pay attention to Africa’s concerns and to review,
adjust and lift the sanctions regime in a timely manner
in the light of the developments on the ground. The
Council should implement the relevant requirements
of the presidential statement and make timely
adjustments to the unnecessary sanctions until they are
completely lifted.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I welcome Her
Excellency, Ms. Sylvie Baipo Temon, Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Francophonie and Central Africans
Abroad of the Central African Republic.
Brazil voted in favour of resolution 2693 (2023),
renewing the sanctions regime on the Central African
Republic. We believe that its gradual approach to lifting
the arms embargo for the country’s security forces
strikes a good balance and respects the differing views
initially presented during the negotiations.
We extend our sincere thanks to France, the
penholder, for its hard work and leadership in driving
the negotiation process forward. We also extend our
gratitude to all Council members, in particular our
dear African friends, the three African members of the
Security Council, for their constructive engagement in
achieving this outcome.
We note the progress made by the Central African
Republic in adopting benchmarks of governance
and good practices that could be key to overcoming
the country’s challenges. We encourage the Central
African Republic to continue its efforts to stabilize
and improve its security situation. Brazil reaffirms its
commitment to peace, stability and development in the
Central African Republic and assures all stakeholders
of our full support in the Council and beyond.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
Let me begin by joining others to thank France for
their leadership on this resolution and the consultations
they conducted to bring us this far. While the United
Kingdom voted in favour of this text, we continue to see
merit in the notification requirement as an important
tool for monitoring the flow of weapons to armed groups
in the Central African Republic. We remain concerned
by the worsening political, humanitarian and security
situation in the Central African Republic, including
atrocities committed by the Wagner Group. Advancing
peace and security remains the core objective of the
Council. Progress on the peace agreement will remain

S/PV.9388

an important factor in future conversations on arms
controls and their role in promoting peaceful resolutions
to long-term violence.
The United Kingdom maintains that notification
processes do not inhibit Governments from building
the capabilities needed to provide security. However,
we take note of the request from the Government of the
Central African Republic and the calls from the region
in that regard. The United Kingdom encourages the
Government of the Central African Republic to redouble
its efforts to implement the benchmarks agreed by the
Council related to the reform of the security sector,
the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation process, and the management of weapons
and ammunition. The people of the Central African
Republic deserve no less.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Francophonie and Central Africans Abroad of the
Central African Republic.
Ms. Baipo Temon (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): I would like to sincerely congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July.
As it has done since 2013, the Central African
Republic has come before the Council to avoid any
surprises in finding out what fate the Council members
have chosen for it concerning the arms embargo
inflicted upon the country since 2013, following the
violent attacks by the Séléka rebels. Today, 27 July
2023, after heated discussions and negotiations, the
Security Council has rendered its verdict. The result
of today’s vote is unequivocal. By a vote of 13 in
favour, with two abstentions, Council members have
decided to adopt this resolution in order to maintain,
or more specifically, to renew the arms embargo on
the Central African Republic, while mentioning — in
a brief line buried deep within the meticulously crafted
paragraphs — that the text does not apply to government
forces and requesting the good services of the Panel of
Experts. I wish to thank in particular the two Council
members that abstained in the voting, out of respect
for the suffering of the people of the Central African
Republic. The people of the Central African Republic
regard those abstentions as a “no” to the prospect of
leaving an entire people at the mercy of armed groups.

23-221845/7

S/PV.9388

The situation in the Central African Republic

Allow me to speak on behalf of the Government
of the Central African Republic, to thank all Council
members for the time they have devoted to the Central
African Republic file. A special acknowledgement
goes to the three African members of the Security
Council — Gabon, Ghana and Mozambique — for their
efforts throughout the negotiation process, and, once
again, to the Russian Federation and China.
We are baffled by the confusing and vague text,
which attempts to explain to lowly mortals that the
embargo against government forces has been lifted,
along with the notification requirement adopted in
July 2022, while also attempting to justify maintaining
the text imposing the embargo by stating that the
text is being renewed so that it remains applicable to
armed groups.
Allow me to reformulate the Council’s words
and to render, in language that mere mortals are able
to understand — for the benefit of the national and
international public — what the Council has just
decided following intense negotiations. I am speaking
directly to the people of the Central African people in
particular, many of whom are listening to me today. We
must understand that today, the Security Council has
just said that there is no longer an arms embargo on
government forces, which will henceforth have access
to the equipment they need without having to notify
the Council in advance, but the text itself, as renewed,
is entitled “Arms embargo on the Central African
Republic”, thereby classifying the Central African
Republic as an armed group.
The Government of the Central African Republic
cannot accept this morally bankrupt and arbitrary
verdict. I am not looking to reopen the debate, as
the debate is finished. The die is cast. However, it is
important for the Central African Republic to state,
before the national and international public, and, in
particular, to address the Council members and the
people of the Central African Republic — who, as I
said, are following the proceedings closely — that, to
oversimplify the matter, the text reflects an ignorance
of the country’s reality. Or, if we want to understand it
more objectively, in an informed manner, and reading
between the lines, what we find here is a murky game
on an international scale, in which the Central African
Republic constitutes a crucial stake. I would appreciate
it if the Council would allow the truth to be spoken
plainly, as the resolution that has just been adopted
constitutes a genuine affront to the Central African
6/7

27/07/2023

Republic. The Central African Republic cannot be
equated with armed groups.
The text should instead be entitled “embargo on
armed groups that operate within the Central African
Republic”, and not “embargo on the Central African
Republic”. I repeat, the Central African Republic is not
the same as the armed groups. Its Government is not
armed groups. It is unacceptable and intolerable that the
confusion due to the stability of the languages of Molière
and Shakespeare be used to confuse a legitimate and
sovereign State with armed groups that the Council is
simply seeking to legitimize. If the Council’s intention
is to in no way legitimize illegality, how can it explain
to the people of the Central African Republic that, after
working on the question of the Central African Republic
for 10 years, it is still struggling to come up with a text
that punishes the murderous designs of armed groups?
Why, after recognizing the efforts made by the Central
African Republic, including with regard to its efforts
on the benchmarks and terms of reference, is the
resolution adopted today still entitled “arms embargo
on the Central African Republic”? Once again, why is it
not instead entitled “arms embargo on armed groups”?
The subtlety of the text, which would have us believe
that the embargo no longer applies to government
forces but rather to the Central African Republic,
constitutes a setback in our efforts to date. It should
be noted that the matter is one of dignity. By equating
the Government of the Central African Republic with
armed groups, the resolution undermines the dignity of
the Central African Republic. It is therefore, as I said,
unacceptable.
We gave the Council our trust, thinking that
we would be afforded a modicum of respect for our
fundamental, sovereign rights and dignity. Were we
wrong to do so? That is the question I am posing today
on behalf of the Government and people of the Central
African Republic. Why is it that the Central African
Republic’s cry for help in distress when faced with the
onslaught of foreign rebels did not receive the same
response as Ukraine’s outcry? Why, with regard to the
Charter of the United Nations and human rights, has
the response been different — unjust, discriminatory
and defamatory? Why are some States willing to
deliver weapons and ammunition, even in violation of
instruments such as the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction and the
23-22184

27/07/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

Convention on Cluster Munitions, while others must
be sacrificed?
On the basis of what I have just said, the socalled lifting of the embargo on government forces
while maintaining the embargo on the Central African
Republic is not something that satisfies the Central
African Republic. That sanction should serve as a
wake-up call to the people of the Central African
Republic and enable them to grasp the teaching of
the late Nelson Mandela, who said that a country’s
strongest army is its people. The verdict should enable
the world — Africa in particular, and specifically the
Central African Republic — to understand that the
body responsible for world peace no longer represents
the values of peace it once upheld.

S/PV.9388

The incoherence of the text adopted today and
the flagrant double standards that are characteristic
of the two power blocs comprising the Council make
it clear that the time has come for us to conceive of a
new organization that is far more credible, in which our
rights and the rights of all will be safeguarded equitably.
In response to this provocation, this arbitrary text, allow
me to conclude by stating quite simply that the Central
African Republic called on the Council for help in a
moment of urgent distress. We hope for the principle of
humanity, which is often evoked, to be practiced, not
just preached, and for the collective conscience to learn
from this injustice, which, rather than fostering peace,
is fostering insecurity and disorder in the Central
African Republic and indeed throughout the world.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

23-221847/7
