Re90Jution11 adopted on the reports oí the Fourth Committee

5. Considers that any attempt to partition the Territory or to take any unilateral action, directly or indirectly, preparatory thereto constitutes a violation of
the Mandate and of resolution 1514 (XV);
6. Considers further that any attempt to annex a
part or the whole of the Territory of South West
Africa constitutes an act of aggression;
7. Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
remove immediately ali bases and other military installations located in the Territory of South West Africa
and to refrain from utilizing the Territory in any way
whatsoever as a military base for interna! or externa!
purposes;
8. Condemns the policies of financia! interests operating in South W est Africa, which mercilessly exploit
human and material resources and impede the progress
Qf the Territory an<l the right of the people to freedom
and independence;
9. Condemns the policy of the Government of South
Africa to circumvent the political and economic rights
of the indigenous people of the Territory through a
large-scale settlernent of foreign immigrants in the
Territory;
10. Condemns the Government of Sonth Africa for
its refusal to ro-operate with the United Nations in
implernenting the Declaration on the Granting of Tnclepen<lence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
11. Requests all States to take immediate action to
carry out paragraph 7 of General Assembly resolution
1899 (XVIII);
12. Appeals to ali States to give the indigenous
people of South W est A frica ali necessary moral ancl
material support in their legitimate struggle for freedom
and independence;
13. Requests the Security Council to keep watch
over the critica! situation prevailing in South West
Africa in the light of the ninth preambular paragraph
of the present resolution.
1400th plenary meeting,
17 December 1965.
2075

(XX). Petitions concerning South West
Africa

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the special responsibilities of the
United Nations with regard to South \Vest Africa,
N oting that the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples has received and ex;:imined 142 petitions
roncerning South W est Africa, in accordance with
paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 1805
(XVII) of 14 December 1962 and paragraph 8 (a)
of Assembly resolution rnqg (XVIII) of 13 N ovember
1963,
N oting further that these petitions relate, inter afia,
to the general situation in and recent develdpments
concerning South \Vest 1\ frica, the recommendations
of the Odendaal Comniiss:lm,31 the activities of rnining
:rnd other international cornpanies having interests in
the Territory, the arrests of political Jeaders and restrictions on political activity in the Territory, South West
African refogees in Rechnanaland, the ejection of Afri31 Commission of Enquiry into South \\'est Africa Affairs.
established in 1962 by the Repuhlic of So11th Africa under tlw
rhairmanship of M r. F. 1T. O<lendaal.

61

cans from urban areas, and the non-implernentation
of Ccner;:il Assemhly rcsolutions concerning South West
A frica,
1. Notrs that the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Jmplementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples has taken these petitions into account in
it s ronsideration of the situation in South W est Africa;
2. nraws the attention of the petitioners concerned
to the reports submitted by the Special Coi:nmittee concerning the Territory 32 and to the resolutions adopted
bv the General Assembly at its twentieth session on
the qnrstion of South West Africa, as well as the reports
.
.
SS
of the Serretary-General relatmg
to t he T erntory.
1400th plenary merting,
17 fll'fnnber 1965.
2076

(XX). Special e(lncational ami training
programmes for South W est Africa

The General Assembly,
Rcral!inr¡ its resolution 1705 (XVI) of 19 Decemher
1% 1. by ~hich it establishe<l a Unite<l N ations Special
Training Prograrnme for Sonth \Vest Africans,
!! m•ing ronsidered the reports of the Secretary( ~enrral submitted in accor<l:mce with paragraph 5 of
Cenera] Assemblv resolntion 1901 (XVIII) of 13 No,·ernher 1963. 31 ·
N oting that few applicants for training u~der the
~pecial Training Programme possess qualificat10ns that
woulcl enable them to enter colleges or nniversities,
Considerinc¡ the need to widen the scope of educat ional opportimities to include secondary, technical ami
teacher training and to make it available to the largest
possible numher of South \Vest Africans,
Takinr¡ note of the difficulties encountered hy per~ons residing inside the Territory in taking advantage
()f the benefits available under the programmes, particuhrly in securing the necessary travel <locuments,
1. Expresses its appreciation to those M ember Sta tes
which have rnade scholarships and travel grants avail;1 ble for the use of South W est A frica ns ;
2. Invites those Member States offering scholarships
and those which might subsequently do so to consider
including in their offers scholarships for secondary
t>ducation an<l for vocationa 1 and technical training;
3. Further invites Member States to give sympathetic consideration to requests by the Secretary-General
for the placement in their secondary, vocational or technical schools of candidates who have been awarded
scholarships under the Special Training Programme
for South W est Afric:ins:
4. Once again rcquests all Member States, and in
particular Sonth Africa. to facilitate in every possible
way the travel of South West Africans seeking to avail
themselves of educational opport11nities provi<led tmder
the Programme;

ª2 Official

Rf'cords of tlze (;cneral Assembly, Nineteenth
A11nexes, annex No. 8 (part T) (A/5800/Rev.1).
c;,apttcr IV: i/Jid., annex No. 15, dornment A/5840; ibid ..
Twentieth Session, Anncxrs, arlden<lnm to agenda item 23
1 A/6000/Rev.l), chapter IV.
33 [bid .. Ninctcentlt Session, Annexcs, annex No. 15, docurnents A/5690 and Add.1-3 ami A/5781: ibid., Twentietlt
Scssion, Annexes, agenda items 69 and 70, documents A/5782
ami _;\,l<l.1, A/60.15 and Adcl.1-4 and A/6080 and A<ld.1 and 2.
34 l/Jid., Twrntieth Session. Annr.-rcs. agenda items 69 and
iO. <lorunwnts A 1~7fl_? :rnd A,l<l. 1 : ihirl , dornmrnts A/6O80
and Add.l anrl 2,
S1°ssia11.

62

General Assembly-Twentieth Session

5. Calls upan the Government of South A.frica to
co-operate with the Secretary-General in implementing
the present resolution;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to disseminate in
South W est Africa and elsewhere information concerning the scholarship programrnes ;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to consult
with the Special Cornmittee on the Situation with
regard to the Irnplementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples concerning the implernentation of the Prograrnme and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its twenty-first session.
1400th plenary meeting,
17 December 1965.
2107 (XX). Question of Territories under Portuguese administration

The General Assembly,
Having e:ramined the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territories nnder Portuguese administration,35
H aving hrard the statements of the petitioners,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also Security Council resolutions 163
(1961) of 9 June 1961, 180 (1963) of 31 July 1963,
183 (1963) of 11 December 1963 and 218 (1965) of
23 Novernber 1965, and General Assembly resolutions
1807 (XVH) of 14 Decernber 1962, 1819 (XVII)
of 18 December 1962 and 1913 (XVIII) of 3 December
1963, as well as the relevant resolutions of the Special
Comrnittee, adopted on 3 July 196436 and 10 June
1965, 87
N oting with deep concern that, in spite of the measures laid clown by the Security Council in the aforementioned resolutions, the Government of Portugal is
intensifying the measures of repression and military
operations against the African people of these Territories with a view to defeating their legitimate aspirations to self-determination, freedom and independence,
Further noting with dee p concern that the activities
of the foreign financia! interests in these Territories
are an impediment to the African people in the realization of their aspirations to freedom and independence.
Considering that the evidence submitted by the petitioners confirmed that the Government of Portugal
has continued to use the aid and weapons that it receives
from its military allies against the populations of
Angola, Mozambique, so-called Portuguese Guinea and
other Territories under its administration,
C onvinced that the attitude of Portugal towards the
African population of its colonies and of the neighbouring States constitutes a threat to international peace and
security,
811 [bid .. Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter V; ibid., Twentieth Session, An11exes, addendum to agenda ítem 23 (A/6000/Rev.1), chapter V.
36 [bid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex "Jo. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter V, para. 352.
37 !bid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
ítem 23 (A/6000/Rev.1), chapter V, para. 415.

l. Rcaffirms the right of the peoples of the African
Territories under Portuguese administration to freedom
and independence and recognizes the legitimacy of their
struggle to achieve the rights laid down in the Charter
of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the Declaration on the Granting of
Tndependence to Colonial Countries ancl Peoples;
2. Approves the chapters of the reports of the Spedal
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territories under Portuguese administration and
endorses the conclnsions and reco111111endations contained therein;
3. Appeals to ali States, in co-operation with the
Organization of African Unity, to render the people
of the Territories under Portugnese administration the
moral and material support necessary for the restoration
of their inalienable rights ;
4. Condemns the colonial policy of Portugal and its
persistent refusal to carry out ;he resolutions of the
General Assembly a11Cl the Sernrity Conncil ;
5. Condemns the policy of the GovC'rnment of Portugal which violates the economic ancl political rights
of the indigenous population by the establislmwnt, on
a large scale, of foreign immigrants in the Territories
and hy the exporting of workers to South A frica;
6. Requests ali States to prevent such activities on
the part of their nationals in the foreign financia! interests which are an impcdinwnt to the attainment by
the people of their legitim1tC' rights of freedom and
independence;
7. Urges Meml)('r States to 1:1ke the following measures, separately nr collectively:
(a) To break off diplomatic and consular relations
with the Government of Portugal nr rcfrnin frnm estahlishing such relations;
( b) To clase their ports to :di vessC'!s flving the
Portuguese flag nr in the serYice of Portng;i 1:
(e) To prohibit their ships from cn1ering any ports
in Portugal ami its coloni;il territories:
( d) To refose landing ami transit facilities to ali
aircraft belonging to or in the scrvice of tlw Government of Portug·al and to companies registered under
the laws of Portugal:
(e) To boycott ali tracle witl I Portugal:
8. Requests ali States, and in particular thc military
allies of Portugal within the framework of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization. to take the following
steps:
(a) To refrain forthwith from giving the Portuguese
Government any assistance which would enable it to
continue its repression of tlw African ¡wople in the
Territories tmdcr its aclministration;
(q) To take ali the necessary measures to prevent
the sale or supply of arms and military eqnipment to
the Government of Portugal :
(e) To stop the sale or shipment to the Government
of Portugal of equipment and materials for the manufacture or maintenance of arrns and arnmunition:
9. Appeals to ali the specialized agencies, in particular to the Tnternationa 1 nank for Reconstrnction an<l
Development and the Tnternational Monetary Fund.
tn refrain from granting Portugal any financia!, eco•rnmic.- or technical assistance so long as the Government
