A/RES/59/107

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
16 December 2004

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 69

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 3 December 2004
[on the report of the First Committee (A/59/463)]

59/107. Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons, Which May Be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 58/69 of 8 December 2003,
Recalling with satisfaction the adoption and the entry into force of the
Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects, 1 and the Protocol on Non-Detectable Fragments
(Protocol I),1 the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines,
Booby Traps and Other Devices (Protocol II)1 and its amended version, 2 the
Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Incendiary Weapons
(Protocol III)1 and the Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons (Protocol IV), 3
Recalling the decision by the Second Review Conference of the States Parties
to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to
Have Indiscriminate Effects to establish an open-ended group of governmental
experts with two separate coordinators on explosive remnants of war and on mines
other than anti-personnel mines, 4
Recalling also the role played by the International Committee of the Red Cross
in the elaboration of the Convention and the Protocols thereto, and welcoming the
particular efforts of various international, non-governmental and other organizations
in raising awareness of the humanitarian consequences of explosive remnants of
war,

_______________
1

See The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 5: 1980 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.81.IX.4), appendix VII.
2
CCW/CONF.I/16 (Part I), annex B.
3
Ibid., annex A.
4
See CCW/CONF.II/2 and Corr.1, part II.

04-48268

A/RES/59/107

1.
Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to take all measures to
become parties, as soon as possible, to the Convention on Prohibitions or
Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects1 and the Protocols
thereto, as amended, with a view to achieving the widest possible adherence to these
instruments at an early date, and so as to ultimately achieve their universality;
Calls upon all States parties to the Convention that have not yet done so
2.
to express their consent to be bound by the Protocols to the Convention and the
amendment extending the scope of the Convention and the Protocols thereto to
include armed conflicts of a non-international character;
Welcomes with satisfaction the adoption of the Protocol on Explosive
3.
Remnants of War (Protocol V) 5 at the Meeting of the States Parties held at Geneva
on 27 and 28 November 2003, and calls upon the States parties to express their
consent to be bound by the Protocol and to notify the depositary at an early date of
their consent;
Notes the decision of the Meeting of the States Parties that the Working
4.
Group on Explosive Remnants of War would continue its work in 2004 with the
mandate to continue to consider the implementation of existing principles of
international humanitarian law and to further study, on an open-ended basis, and
initially with particular emphasis on meetings of military and technical experts,
possible preventive measures aimed at improving the design of certain specific
types of munitions, including sub-munitions, with a view to minimizing the
humanitarian risk of these munitions becoming explosive remnants of war; 6
5.
Also notes the decision of the Meeting of the States Parties that the
Working Group on Mines Other Than Anti-Personnel Mines would continue its
work in 2004 with the mandate to consider all proposals on mines other than antipersonnel mines put forward since the establishment of the Group of Governmental
Experts; 7
6.
Further notes the decision of the Meeting of the States Parties that the
Chairman-designate should continue to undertake consultations during the
intersessional period on possible options to promote compliance with the
Convention and the Protocols thereto, taking into account proposals put forward; 8
7.
Expresses support for the work conducted by the Group of Governmental
Experts, and encourages the Chairman-designate and the Group to conduct work, in
accordance with the mandate for 2004, with the aim of elaborating appropriate
recommendations on mines other than anti-personnel mines, for submission to the
Meeting of the States Parties on 18 and 19 November 2004, and to report on the
work done on compliance, as well as on the implementation of existing principles of
international humanitarian law and on possible preventive technical measures in
relation to explosive remnants of war;
Recalls the decision of the Second Review Conference of the States
8.
Parties to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to
_______________
5

See CCW/MSP/2003/3, appendix II.
Ibid., para. 26 and appendix III.
7
Ibid., para. 27 and appendix IV.
8
Ibid., para. 28.
6

2

A/RES/59/107

Have Indiscriminate Effects to convene a further conference not later than 2006,
with preparatory meetings starting as early as 2005, if necessary,4 and requests the
Meeting of the States Parties on 18 and 19 November 2004 to consider this issue;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to render the necessary assistance and to
provide such services, including summary records, as may be required for the
Meeting of the States Parties on 18 and 19 November 2004, as well as for any
possible continuation of work after the Meeting, should the States parties deem it
appropriate;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as depositary of the
Convention and the Protocols thereto, to continue to inform the General Assembly
periodically, by electronic means, of ratifications and acceptances of and accessions
to the Convention and the Protocols thereto;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to
Have Indiscriminate Effects”.
66th plenary meeting
3 December 2004

3
