S/PV.8060

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8060th meeting

Thursday, 28 September 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alemu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ethiopia)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zambrana
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in Myanmar

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-30238 (E)
*1730238*

S/PV.8060

The situation in Myanmar

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Myanmar
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Bangladesh and Myanmar to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Thaung Tun, Special Envoy of the State Counsellor
and National Security Adviser of Myanmar.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I welcome this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the crisis
in Myanmar.
On 2 September, I wrote to the Council urging
concerted efforts to prevent further escalation of the
crisis in northern Rakhine state. I am encouraged that
the Council has discussed the situation four times in
less than a month.
The reality on the ground demands action - swift
action - to protect people, alleviate suffering, prevent
further instability, address the root causes of the
situation and forge, at long last, a durable solution. The
following briefing is based on our reporting from the
ground and is our best sense of what has happened,
what is still happening and what needs to be done.
The current crisis has steadily deteriorated
since the 25 August attacks by the Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army on the Myanmar security forces. I
repeat my condemnation of those attacks today. Since
then, the situation has spiralled into the world’s fastestdeveloping refugee emergency and a humanitarian
and human rights nightmare. I continue to call on the
Myanmar authorities to take three immediate steps:
first, to end the military operations; secondly, to allow
unfettered access for humanitarian support; and thirdly,
to ensure the safe, voluntary, dignified and sustainable
return of the refugees to their areas of origin.
Let me now review what we know about the military
operations that have taken place since 25 August.
2/24

28/09/2017

While there have been competing narratives in
a highly complex environment, certain elements are
clear. At least 500,000 civilians have fled their homes
and sought safety in Bangladesh. Although the total
number of those displaced is unknown, it is estimated
that 94 per cent of them are Rohingya. The devastating
humanitarian situation is not only a breeding ground for
radicalization, it also puts vulnerable people, including
young children, at risk of falling prey to criminal
elements, including trafficking. We have received
bone-chilling accounts from those who fled, mainly
women, children and the elderly. These testimonials
point to excessive violence and serious violations of
human rights, including the indiscriminate firing of
weapons, the presence of landmines and sexual violence.
This is unacceptable and must end immediately.
International human rights law and standards are
clear: any use of force by the authorities must respect
Myanmar’s human rights obligations under international
law and comply with well- established human rights
standards. Above all, these actions must fully respect
the human rights of those affected, regardless of
ethnicity or religion. The use of lethal force, even in
situations of emergency, must be commensurate with
the threat to the public order, and utmost care must be
taken to minimize injury and loss of life, especially for
unarmed people and communities.
The authorities have claimed that security
operations ended on 5 September, following major
displacements in northern Rakhine, where Rohingya
were the majority. However, displacement appears to
have continued, with reports of the burning of Muslim
villages, as well as looting and acts of intimidation. The
Myanmar authorities themselves have indicated that at
least 176 of 471 Muslim villages in northern Rakhine
have been totally abandoned.
In Rathedaung township, three quarters of the
Rohingya population has fled. Most villages and
all three of the former internally displaced-persons
camps have been burnt to the ground. Just five
isolated Muslim communities remain in Rathedaung.
Elsewhere too, a majority of the abandoned villages
were majority Muslim.
There seems to be a deeply disturbing pattern to
the violence and the ensuing large movements of an
ethnic group from their homes. The failure to address
that systematic violence could result in a spill-over into
central Rakhine state, where an additional 250,000
17-30238

28/09/2017

The situation in Myanmar

Muslims could potentially face displacement. They
are outnumbered by the Rakhine communities, some
of whom have engaged in violent acts of vigilantism
against their Muslim neighbours.
The violence in Rakhine — whether by the military
or by radical elements within communities — must end.
The Myanmar authorities must fulfil their fundamental
obligation to ensure the safety and security of
all communities and to uphold the rule of law
without discrimination.
Let me now turn to the question of humanitarian
access. It is imperative that United Nations agencies and
our non-governmental partners be granted immediate
and safe access to all affected communities. I am
deeply concerned by the current climate of antagonism
towards the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations. Indeed, that can lead to unacceptable
violence, such as the recent attacks against the
International Committee of the Red Cross by Rakhine
villagers in Sittwe.
The Myanmar authorities have said repeatedly
over the past few days that it is not the right time for
unhindered access to resume. Given the enormous
needs, that position is deeply regrettable. The United
Nations should be allowed to reach the affected areas
without delay.
I would also like to address the issue of the safe
return of refugees to their places of origin. I ask
members of the Security Council to join me in urging
that all those who have fled to Bangladesh be able to
exercise their right to a safe, voluntary, dignified and
sustainable return to their homes. Myanmar authorities
have committed to using the framework established in
the 1992 Joint Statement by the Foreign Ministers of
Bangladesh and Myanmar to facilitate such returns.
While that may be a useful starting point, it is not
sufficient in the present circumstances.
Notably, the framework does not refer to resolving
the root cause of displacement. Moreover, it requires
documents that the fleeing Rohingya may not be able
to provide. The United Nations is committed to a plan
for voluntary return and calls upon the international
community to support such an effort. That should include
development assistance to the villages of those who
return home, and the implementation of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State’s recommendations
regarding verification and citizenship.

S/PV. 8060

Voluntary repatriation also requires, as a critical
first step, the registration of refugees in Bangladesh,
using internationally accepted standards. The United
Nations is ready to support Myanmar and Bangladesh
in all stages of this important process. Ensuring
the safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees
to Rakhine — in line with international refugee
law — will require the restoration of mutual trust
among the communities.
Improving intercommunal relations is a critical
part of a sustainable resolution to the crisis and one
of the essential recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, led by Kofi Annan.
In this highly complex environment, the Myanmar
authorities must work to defuse tension and uphold
and protect the rights of all communities, including the
respect for property rights. Those who fled should be
able to return to their homes in peace and not have to
face yet another cycle of violence. It will be especially
important to avoid relocating those displaced yet again
to camp-like conditions.
In Bangladesh, the United Nations continues
to step up its humanitarian response. The High
Commissioner for Refugees visited just days ago. In
the next two weeks, the World Food Programme, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), the International Organization for Migration
(IOM) and UNICEF will visit the Bangladesh border
area. On 9 October, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, OCHA and IOM will
convene a donors’ conference.
In my meeting last week with Bangladeshi Prime
Minister Hasina, I expressed great appreciation for
the care being provided to refugees. I commend
the countries that are supporting Bangladesh in its
response. Let me also stress the need for strengthened
cooperation between Myanmar and Bangladesh. In
that regard, I welcome the coming high-level visit of
Myanmar officials to Bangladesh
The crisis has generated multiple implications for
neighbouring States and the larger region, including
the risk of intercommunal strife. We should not be
surprised if the decades of discrimination and double
standards in the treatment of the Rohingya create
openings for radicalization.
In moving forward, we need an effective partnership
with the Myanmar authorities, especially the military.
All involved parties should refrain from any actions

17-302383/24

S/PV.8060

The situation in Myanmar

that could exacerbate the precarious situation on
the ground. I welcome the participation here today
of National Security Adviser U Thaung Tun — as
well as the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh,
Mr. Masud Bin Momen. I appreciate the National
Security Adviser’s efforts to engage in dialogue with
various stakeholders during the high-level week of the
General Assembly.
In addition to discussions with the Secretariat
on future cooperation, the Myanmar delegation has
reached out to Bangladesh to revive dialogue. Myanmar
has also called on the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations for desperately needed humanitarian assistance.
I look forward to an effective and credible follow up to
the authorities’ stated commitment to greater access,
including for the international community, the media
and humanitarian actors. Regional cooperation with
Myanmar will also be essential, and the United Nations
fully stands behind it.
I welcome the important role played by Foreign
Minister Marsudi of Indonesia in that respect. She has
been advocating an approach that echoes the three steps
that I have been emphasizing and that is also what many
countries have been seeking.
The crisis has underlined an urgent need for a
political solution to the root causes of the violence. The
core of the problem is protracted statelessness and its
associated discrimination. The recommendations of
the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State provide a
blueprint for the longer-term future.
The Muslims of Rakhine state should be granted
nationality. The present Myanmar citizenship legislation
only allows partial citizenship. We encourage Myanmar
to revise that legislation in line with the international
standards. In the interim, an effective verification
exercise, as previously foreseen, should enable those
so entitled to be granted citizenship under the present
laws. All others must be able to obtain a legal status that
allows them to lead a normal life, including freedom
of movement and access to labour markets, education
and health services. I appeal to the leaders of Myanmar,
including military leaders, to condemn incitement to
racial hatred and violence, and to take all measures to
defuse tensions between communities.
We have taken good note of declarations by the
Myanmar authorities that no one is above the law.
There is a clear need to ensure accountability for the
4/24

28/09/2017

perpetrators of human rights violations, to curb the
current violence and to prevent future abuses.
The United Nations will remain a close partner to
Myanmar in addressing those urgent issues. We have no
agenda other than to help Myanmar advance the wellbeing of all the country’s people. We have no interest
other than to see all communities enjoying peace,
security, prosperity and mutual respect. And we are
committed to nothing less than easing the heart-breaking
suffering of so many vulnerable people — while forging
a lasting solution that affirms shared values, promotes
mutual respect and upholds human dignity. I call on
the Security Council to stand united and support our
efforts to urgently end this tragedy.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank the Secretary
General for his briefing and for all that he has done to
bring this issue before the Security Council.
As a long-standing friend of the Burmese people, the
United Kingdom has watched in horror at the violence
that has erupted over the past month. What began as
a series of attacks by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation
Army has spiralled into an acute humanitarian crisis,
one which now poses a threat to stability and security
in the region.
We have all heard the reports. We have all heard of
the extrajudicial killings and the burning of villages.
We have heard of the cruelty, the sexual violence and
the landmines laid along routes taken by refugees. Half
a million people have fled, many bearing the scars of
the violence. The vast majority are Rohingya Muslims,
although they also include Buddhists, Hindus and other
minorities, but make no mistake — this is a human
tragedy and an acute humanitarian crisis that has
exploded with almost unprecedented speed.
At the outset, I want to pay tribute to the Government
and the people of Bangladesh for providing safety
and shelter to so many until they can return safely,
voluntarily and sustainably to their homes in Burma.
I also want to acknowledge the important diplomatic
efforts undertaken by Indonesia, the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the United Nations.
17-30238

28/09/2017

The situation in Myanmar

S/PV. 8060

It is becoming increasingly clear that world
opinion, whether among countries or international
organizations, is coming together on this issue. In the
face of such opinion, it falls on Burma, in particular the
Burmese military, to respond. The Burmese military
bear the primary responsibility for resolving this crisis,
but there is a way out.

Fourthly, the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State must be implemented
swiftly and in full. We welcome the Burmese authorities’
public commitment to that and the establishment of
the ministerial Implementation Committee for the
recommendations on Rakhine State. It is essential that
we now see progress, particularly on citizenship.

First,
the
Burmese
military
under
Commander-in-Chief Min Aung Hlaing must
immediately stop the violence in Rakhine state and
ensure the protection of all civilians, including the
Rohingya. In this Chamber, I repeat my Government’s
condemnation of the attacks carried out by the Arakan
Rohingya Salvation Army last month, but military
operations in response have been excessive, and
vigilante groups have carried out sectarian violence
unchecked. That cannot continue. The hate speech and
incitement to violence must stop. The Burmese military
must act immediately and uphold the rule of law. We
are particularly concerned to ensure that the violence
does not spread to central Rakhine.

Fifthly, we urge the Burmese authorities to
cooperate with the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission
on Myanmar established by the Human Rights Council.
If the Burmese authorities have any doubt about what
is happening, that is how reports can be independently
verified and those responsible held to account.

Secondly, the Burmese authorities need to grant
United Nations agencies and their partners full and
unhindered humanitarian access to Rakhine State.
We welcome the Government’s cooperation with
humanitarian agencies, such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and we welcome the
efforts of the Red Cross to respond to the crisis. But
the humanitarian needs inside Rakhine state vastly
exceed the capacity of the Red Cross. Only United
Nations agencies and their partners can provide urgent
life-saving assistance on the scale required. We believe
that the authorities should tone down the anti-United
Nations rhetoric and stop it immediately in State
media outlets.
Thirdly, Burma should work with Bangladesh
to establish a safe, voluntary and sustainable way for
those who have fled Rakhine to return to their homes.
We welcome the civilian Government’s commitment
to the right of return, but previous arrangements have
been inadequate. A process is needed that allows those
who have fled to register as refugees. It needs to be
a process that acknowledges that many fled without
documents, or never had them in the first place, a
process that allows people to return to their homes and
places of origin safely, voluntarily and sustainably.
We welcome the willingness of the United Nations to
support this endeavour.

The Council considers many crises around the
world, but the situation in Burma strikes many of us
around this table with particular poignancy. Many of us
here today have stood by the people of Burma for long
years, have watched the inspiring steps taken towards
democracy and have welcomed the country back into
the international community with open arms.
Given our history and long-standing friendship
with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, we remain committed to
Burma and to all of its people. We want to see further
progress towards democracy, and we want Burma
to thrive within the international community. Our
commitment is the reason that we speak so frankly
today in this Chamber. This crisis now casts a deep
shadow over Burma’s international reputation, on its
leaders and on its military. The Burmese authorities
must now take the decisions that will decide their place
in history. They can choose to end the violence, protect
civilians and defend human rights They can choose to
allow humanitarian access, including by the United
Nations. They can work with Bangladesh on the return
of refugees, and they can address the long-term issues
raised by the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State.
But should they fail to do so, they will find themselves
on the wrong side of history, and the Council must then
be ready to take further action.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
For over four weeks, the world has endured images
from Burma that we should never have to see. Much
more importantly, we have seen images of acts that
no person should ever have to endure. We have seen
terrified women and children fleeing from their homes
with only the clothes on their back. We have watched
people drown trying to cross rivers to safety. We have

17-302385/24

S/PV.8060

The situation in Myanmar

seen bodies floating down rivers and villages burned to
the ground. We have heard reports of men, women and
children rounded up and detained, and some brutally
killed. We saw the haunting image of a young mother
and father cradling the body of their infant son, a baby
who died fleeing the violence in Rakhine State.
Secretary Tillerson has spoken with State
Counsellor Aung San Suu Kyi. I also met with Burma’s
National Security Advisor during the recent week
of high-level meetings at the General Assembly.
We have tried to engage the Burmese military at the
highest levels. We have supported regional efforts to
de-escalate the violence and expand humanitarian
access. And still the exodus of terrified, injured people
out of Burma continues, while the Government refuses
to acknowledge the seriousness of the situation. Now
hundreds of thousands of Rohingya refugees remain
in Bangladesh as they are in fear of returning to their
homes. Burmese leaders must come to terms with the
facts on the ground.
When we last met to consider the Burmese crisis,
I expressed our condemnation of the 25 August attacks
against security posts. I reiterate that condemnation
today. I also condemn reported violence against other
minority communities in Rakhine state. But what has
happened since then dwarfs those attacks with its
disproportionate, indiscriminate violence. We cannot
be afraid to call the actions of the Burmese authorities
what they appear to be — a brutal sustained campaign to
cleanse the country of an ethnic minority, and it should
shame senior Burmese leaders who have sacrificed so
much for an open democratic Burma.
The Burmese Government claims that it is
battling terrorists. If this is true, let it allow media and
humanitarian access to back up its claims. If terrorists
are the problem, let the military explain how killing
children and forcing families from their homes will
make Burma any safer. The Burmese military have
ignored calls to respond to such attacks by focusing on
identifying and prosecuting the perpetrators. Instead
what is taking place is a brutal assault that does not
advance justice in Burma. It puts the country further
out of reach.
The Government’s response has undermined
Burma’s security stability and its fragile democratic
transition. The Government has a responsibility to
restore the rule of law and prevent attacks by citizens
in its name. That responsibility holds regardless of what
6/24

28/09/2017

individual or group is the target of such attacks. An
already dire situation has been made even worse by some
of the rhetoric coming from official military channels
inside Burma, Worse, that language encourages ugly
views among the Burmese people. History has shown
us what happens when such views go unopposed. The
time for well-meaning diplomatic words in the Council
has passed. We must now consider action against the
Burmese security forces, who are implicated in abuse
and in stoking hatred among their fellow citizens.
The actions needed now to resolve this crisis are
very clear.
First, the Burmese military must respect human
rights and fundamental freedoms. Those who have been
accused of committing abuses should be removed from
command responsibilities immediately and prosecuted
for wrongdoing. Any country that is currently providing
weapons to the Burmese military should suspend such
activities until sufficient accountability measures are
in place.
Secondly,
the
Burmese
authorities
must
immediately allow rapid, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access for United Nations agencies
and other relief organizations. We have noted the
Government’s decision to work with the International
Red Cross to distribute aid, but the Government has not
allowed other relief organizations meaningful access to
northern Rakhine state. If the Burmese authorities are
sincere about wanting those displaced to come home,
why would they not want food and treatment to get to
those people? The Government needs to work with all
partners who can help to get assistance to all affected
communities. Otherwise, there is a significant danger
that life-saving assistance will be delayed in reaching
those who need it the most.
Thirdly and finally, the Government must commit
to welcoming all displaced persons to return to their
original homes. We were glad to see the commitment
made by the State Counsellor during her state-ofthe-union address to allow those who fled the violence
to voluntarily return to their homes when it is safe
to do so. We will all watch to see if the Government
follows through on that pledge. We call on Burmese
officials to work with the Government of Bangladesh
to develop a framework for returns as agreed to by both
Governments, an idea that enjoys international support.
In the meantime, we have seen the generosity of the
Bangladeshi Government in accepting and sheltering
17-30238

28/09/2017

The situation in Myanmar

Burmese refugees. The United States is providing
$95 million to support urgent humanitarian needs in
Burma and Bangladesh, but, given the likelihood of
more people fleeing across the border, plus the ongoing
monsoon season and the humanitarian need already
present in Bangladesh, such generosity will not be
enough. The risk that the conflict will spill over to
other countries in the region is real. Additional support
will be needed to head off a wider conflict. What is
perhaps most frustrating about the conflict is the
fact that we should have seen it coming. The various
communities in Rakhine state have had periods of
peaceful coexistence, but they have also seen periods
of extreme violence and, between such outbursts, the
Rohingya have suffered discrimination and have been
denied basic rights as citizens of Burma.
In concluding my remarks, I would like to speak
directly to the Burmese people. I would like to appeal
to the goodness and hope for the future that exists in the
hearts of the overwhelming majority of them. So many
of them have sacrificed so much for a better country.
I know they are sickened by the images of violence
coming from Burma and being seen around the world,
but the goal of an open, democratic Burma is still
possible. We urge them to hold fast to that vision, not
to give up on it and not to be satisfied with leaders who
give up on it either. Every Burmese man, woman and
child is a child of God with equal moral standing. They
should stay strong in that belief, and they will have the
future they dreamed of — the future they deserve.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation is pleased that the Security
Council finally decided to hold a public briefing on
the dangerous situation that has been developing in
Rakhine state for many months now. It is a situation
that has reached an unprecedented level since the
unacceptable attacks by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation
Army against the Myanmar security forces.
The tragedy is indeed unsustainable. Hundreds
of thousands of people, mostly children, women and
older people, are fleeing violence and abuses of all
types, which have just been described, to seek refuge
and safety where they can, especially in neighbouring
Bangladesh. We take this opportunity to commend the
generosity and courage of the people and authorities of
Bangladesh for welcoming the unfortunate Rohingya.
Senegal has already expressed its deep-seated
concern with regard to the situation of the Rohingya

S/PV. 8060

and has strongly condemned the violence that they
are being subjected to. The President of Senegal, His
Excellency Mr. Macky Sall, referred to the issue in a
joint statement with the President of Turkey, Mr. Recep
Tayyip Erdoğan. Speaking at the rostrum of the General
Assembly on 20 September, our President said,
“in Burma we are seriously concerned by the
violence against the Rohingya Muslim people.
As outrage is never a selective emotion, Senegal
strongly urges the international community to take
action to put an end to this genuine human tragedy”
(A/72/PV.10).
Several speakers launched the same appeal from the
same rostrum last week.
It is therefore fortunate that the Security Council
has heeded such an urgent call to action and has
acceded to the joint request made by Senegal, Egypt,
Sweden, Kazakhstan, the United Kingdom, France and
the United States, calling on the Council to meet in this
format and exchange views, in full transparency and
bearing full responsibility, on the growing threat to
international peace and security, with the participation
of the representatives of the two States that are most
directly affected, namely, Bangladesh and Myanmar.
I would like to congratulate Secretary-General
António Guterres, who very early undertook discreet
steps to defuse the crisis, which was breaking out, and
stop it from getting out of control. He visited the region
and met with several leaders and stakeholders. Fully
assuming the responsibility given him by the Charter of
the United Nations to become involved and to prevent
an outbreak or escalation of a conflict, the SecretaryGeneral, on 2 September, wrote to the members of
the Security Council to draw their attention to their
responsibility with regard to the situation, namely, to
send a strong message highlighting the need to provide
the necessary constructive support and cooperation
aimed at devising a political strategy to put an end to the
vicious circle in Rakhine state. He also insisted on the
importance of restraint and calm in our efforts to avert
a humanitarian catastrophe and ensure full respect for
human rights and international humanitarian law, as
well as the importance of the continued presence and
security of United Nations agencies and personnel and
other partners .
The statement of the Secretary-General this
afternoon sheds further light on the many challenges,
including humanitarian and security issues, in this

17-302387/24

S/PV.8060

The situation in Myanmar

very complex situation. Other important figures,
other States and other international bodies have been
deployed and continue to take action aimed at putting
an end to the tragedy of the Rohingyas, stopping the
violence and helping refugees and displaced persons
to return voluntarily and securely to their land and
homes. In addition to the neighbouring countries
and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) has also
been very active, including through its Contact Group
on the Rohingya Muslim Minority, and has spared no
effort in seeking a fair and lasting solution to the crisis.
On the ground with the refugees, in Geneva at the
level of the Human Rights Council, and even in New
York with the Secretary-General, the General Assembly
and the Security Council, the OIC, of which the
Senegal is a founding and active member, has brought
parties together and called for diplomatic initiatives,
along with concrete humanitarian assistance. That
was eloquently reflected in the report that sanctioned
the ministerial meeting of the Contact Group held last
week in New York on the margins of the general debate
of the General Assembly on 19 September 2017.
So what has the Security Council done, and
especially what must it do in the light of the statement
we have just heard from the Secretary-General and
the reports, as well as those we will hear from the
representatives of Myanmar and Bangladesh?
After the preliminary discussions we had on this
subject under “Any other business”, it appears to
us that the time has come to undertake substantive
discussions — in private consultations — and decide
how we are going follow up on this briefing. Thanks
to the courageous recommendations set forth in the
final report of Kofi Annan’s Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, which was requested by the Government
of Myanmar itself and which the Government has also
boldly committed itself to implementing, we now know
much more about the root causes of the conflict and the
ways and means of resolving it on a lasting basis.
Without prejudice to what we might decide to
do or not to do after today’s exchanges of views, the
Senegalese delegation would first like to reiterate
its firm condemnation of the violence that has been
unleashed in the state of Rakhine in Myanmar, from
whatever side it comes, including unacceptable attacks
on the Myanmar defence and security forces by the
Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army armed movement.
8/24

28/09/2017

Let there be no mistake: the unwavering support and
active solidarity that Senegal has rightly expressed
for and with the Rohingyas, who are considered by
the United Nations to be the most persecuted religious
minority in the world, leaves no room for acceptance of
terrorist acts.
The clarity and unity of the international
community’s appeals to the Government of Burma
reflects the urgency and seriousness of this situation,
which is also likely to fuel violent extremism. The OIC,
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the
European Union have all condemned the indiscriminate
and disproportionate repression facing the Rohingyas.
Meeting at the summit in Astana, Kazakhstan, on
10 and 11 September, the leaders of the OIC denounced
the violence and called for an independent investigation
into all cases of human rights violations committed
against the Rohingya minority. Accordingly, three
major objectives should, we believe, guide our thinking.
First, military operations should be stopped so as to
put an end to the campaign against the Rohingyas and
also to make a clear distinction between the rebels and
the civilian population. Appropriate measures should
therefore be taken to ensure that all those found guilty
of abuses are held to account.
Secondly, international humanitarian law must
be scrupulously respected in order to ensure full,
unconditional and unimpeded access for humanitarian
assistance and the dignified and voluntary return
of refugees to their provinces and villages of origin.
In that regard, we take note of the commitment and
willingness of the Government of Myanmar to work
closely with Bangladesh based on the experiences of
the 1993 working group set up by the two countries.
Thirdly, there must be a definitive resolution with
regard to the discriminatory treatment of the Rohingyas;
that resolution should focus on the root causes of the
violence, including the issue of nationality, which is
inextricably linked to ethnicity by a 1982 law that made
that minority the largest Stateless group in the world.
Senegal strongly urges Myanmar to fully
implement the recommendations contained in the
Annan Commission report. We continue to hope that
the report will serve as a framework conducive to the
creation of a society where the rejection and disapproval
of the other gives way to openness to dialogue. That
is the only way that Myanmar, all ethnic groups and
religions combined, can preserve and enrich the state
17-30238

28/09/2017

The situation in Myanmar

of Rakhine’s long and proud history and rich cultural
tradition and commit to implementing the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, one of whose essential
objectives is to establish peaceful societies where no
one is left behind. That is the wish of a country like
Senegal, whose belief in dialogue among peoples of
all ethnic groups, races, religions, languages is a longstanding and principal feature of our foreign policy that
has withstood the test of time.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my deep thanks to the
Secretary-General for being present with us at today’s
important meeting and for his comprehensive briefing.
We meet this afternoon to discuss the repercussions
of the Rohingya crisis in Myanmar, which, with all its
religious, ethnic, political and historic complications,
is a humanitarian emergency that has imposed itself
on the international community. During this crisis,
hundreds of thousands of innocent people have been
killed, persecuted and ethnically cleansed. Almost
half a million people since 25 August have been forced
to flee and become displaced from their towns and
villages out of fear for their lives. Regional security in
the crisis area has been dangerously threatened, which
has created tensions and imposed a heavy burden on the
neighbouring countries, in particular Bangladesh.
Egypt believes that the international position on the
crisis must be based on a set of principles that remain
vital in the way we view the crisis, its root causes
and the means to contain it. These principles include
the following.
First, the issue is humanitarian at heart and is
based on the principle of the acceptance of others and
on coexistence among religions without discrimination
based on race or religion. Any belief that the forced
displacement of a part of Myanmar’s population to
neighbouring countries could end the crisis is absurd.
It does not take into account any of the legal or
humanitarian principles that govern our modern world,
as reflected in the Charter of the United Nations and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
Secondly, hate speech, violence or the threat of the
use of violence cannot be accepted by any party. We
reject them totally, whether they are perpetrated by a
party or a Government institution that bears the main
responsibility for protecting individuals and ending
violence by all possible means.

S/PV. 8060

Thirdly, the message we are sending to the
Government of Myanmar today is a message from the
entire international community, urging it to shoulder its
responsibility and take immediate actions to end violence
and allow for humanitarian access. It must embark on a
dialogue with the relevant United Nations entities and
neighbouring countries so as to ensure the return of
refugees and displaced persons to their place of origin
within Myanmar in line with the recommendations of
Kofi Annan’s Advisory Committee.
Fourthly, our unconditional solidarity with the
Rohingyas as human beings who have the right to live
their lives in safety and security does not mean in any
way that we support any organization or militia that
chooses terrorism under the pretext of protecting the
residents of Rakhine state. However, at the same time,
we must ask ourselves what choice we are leaving to
those innocent people other than to take up arms to
defend themselves.
The Security Council must shoulder its responsibility
with respect to this dangerous crisis. Egypt has taken
urgent international steps in that regard. Moreover, the
Grand Imam of Al-Azhar Al-Sharif has condemned the
crimes against the Rohingyas and called for the need
to end the humanitarian tragedy as soon as possible.
Those are the principles that we must adopt in order to
address the crisis and its negative repercussions. Today,
in view of the current situation, Egypt stresses the need
to act along the following lines.
First, it is urgent for the Myanmar Government
to shoulder its moral and humanitarian responsibility
and to swiftly address the crisis by ending all military
actions by the Myanmar Army and by allowing
refugees to return to their territories within Rakhine
state, having fled the ongoing exacerbated crisis.
Secondly, through United Nations mechanisms,
especially those providing relief and refugee protection,
we must provide assistance to those affected on the
borders between Myanmar and Bangladesh. In that
regard, I would like to commend the people and the
Government of Bangladesh for their patience and
their efforts to overcome the repercussions of this
humanitarian crisis.
Thirdly, we once again call upon the Government
of Myanmar to positively interact with the international
community, to allow for a high-level United Nations
delegation to visit Rakhine state and to consider ways
to provide field humanitarian support. It must work

17-302389/24

S/PV.8060

The situation in Myanmar

to provide the Muslim Rohingyas with the right to a
nationality and the right to return to their territories
and their homes.
Fourthly, we express to the Government of Myanmar
our readiness to host any national dialogue in an official
governmental or non-governmental framework such as
the umbrella of the Muslim Council of Elders under the
leadership of the Grand Imam of Al-Azhar, which is the
forum that already hosted a dialogue among Myanmar
youth from different sects in January.
In conclusion, I stress the need for an implementable
United Nations road map and the need to speak in one
unified voice so as to make the necessary impact. The
refugee tragedy could go on for a long time, until calm
returns and a fair and final settlement is explicitly
reached that provides the right to citizenship to the
Rohingyas. Until that moment, we call upon the Council
and the international community to take swift action to
offer help and alleviate the suffering of those refugees
and to protect their souls and their humanitarian rights.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Mr. President,
and I thank the Secretary-General for his very clear
briefing and for his leadership in responding to the
situation and the crisis in Myanmar. As Minister
Margot Wallström said in the General Assembly last
week (see A/72/PV.16), the situation in Myanmar is a
haunting example of where the seeds of conflict have
gone unresolved, with tragic consequences. Once
again, we see the human cost of not investing enough
in prevention.
The crisis in Rakhine state, which has existed
for decades, has dramatically escalated. The situation
is now critical, with devastating humanitarian
consequences, and there are clear implications for
regional stability. Two thirds of the estimated Rohingya
population in Rakhine state is now in Bangladesh. The
level of displacement has led to a crisis described by
High Commissioner for Refugees Filippo Grandi as the
most urgent refugee emergency in the world today.
Those arriving in Bangladesh have given horrific
and heart-breaking accounts of unimaginable violence
and abuse. Reports of sexual and gender-based violence
are gravely worrying. In addition, large numbers of
people, including non-Muslims, have been displaced
within Rakhine. However, the total number of internally
displaced people has not been established. Their level
of need is unknown, owing to the lack of access.
10/24

28/09/2017

Let me take a moment here to pay tribute to the
Government of Bangladesh for their hospitality and
generosity to the refugees. I also thank the humanitarian
agencies for their swift response. My country has
contributed significantly to efforts to increase the
humanitarian response capacity in Bangladesh, and we
call on others to do the same. The crisis in Rakhine
state is complex and multidimensional. It requires a
comprehensive and sustained response, with support
from the international community. At the same time,
in the light of the immediate needs of those displaced
inside and outside the country, a number of issues now
need to be addressed urgently.
First, we note the statement by the Government of
Myanmar that security operations in Rakhine ceased
on 5 September. However, displacement has continued
since then. The continuing reports of violence are deeply
worrying, including reports of the burning of Rohingya
villages and of violence against civilians. We therefore
call on Myanmar to ensure the immediate suspension
of all military and security operations. All violence
must end. The Government has the responsibility to
ensure the safety and security of all communities
without discrimination.
Secondly, we urge the Government to grant
immediate, full, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access to the United Nations and its partners in all
areas, so that they can reach those in urgent need of
life-saving assistance. The humanitarian actors are
ready to respond. The assistance arrangements in
northern Rakhine organized by the Red Cross Movement
are insufficient to address the massive needs. We note
ongoing discussions with the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) regarding the humanitarian
response, and we also note and welcome the tireless
efforts of the Indonesian Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Ending the violence and ensuring access to all
populations in need of humanitarian assistance is
critical and urgent in order to save lives and prevent
human suffering. However, that alone will not end the
crisis. It is essential that the Government of Myanmar,
with the support of the international community, now
move swiftly to ensure that those who have fled the
country can return to their places of origin in a safe,
voluntary, dignified and sustainable manner. Ensuring
that refugees are registered in line with international
standards will help facilitate that. People who decide
to return must not be placed in camps or camp-like
environments, which risk becoming long-term.
17-30238

28/09/2017

The situation in Myanmar

We welcome the Government’s commitment to
implement the recommendations set out in the report of
the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State within the
shortest time possible, and we urge it to do so without
delay. Those recommendations provide a clear road
map for addressing the root causes of this long-running
crisis, most notably by addressing the situation of
citizenship for the Rohingyas. Full implementation of
the recommendations would deliver development and
benefit all communities in Rakhine. Ending incitement,
defusing intercommunal tension and rebuilding trust
between the communities in Rakhine will be important
in that regard.
Those responsible for human rights abuses and
violations, as well as other crimes, must be brought to
justice. It is important that the facts and circumstances
on the ground be fully established. The Government
must therefore engage with the fact-finding mission of
the Human Rights Council, and we urge the Government
to provide access without delay.
The international community stands ready to
support the Government and people of Myanmar in
their efforts to resolve the crisis in Rakhine state and
to provide urgent humanitarian assistance. In that
regard, we encourage the Government to cooperate
with Bangladesh as well as to continue to engage with
ASEAN. We also urge the Government to cooperate
fully with the United Nations. The Government must
work to counter narratives and rhetoric that seek to
undermine the ability of the United Nations to do its
work. Going forward, the United Nations also has the
capacity and is ready to support the Government as
it implements the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, led by Kofi Annan.
It is now urgent to put an end to violence and to
ensure immediate, full and safe humanitarian access.
Safe and dignified return must be ensured as soon as
the situation allows. At the same time, the decadeslong cycle of violence and displacement suffered by
the Rohingya people must be addressed. The report of
the Advisory Commission provides the way forward.
We urge the Government of Myanmar to take this
opportunity to bring an end to the conflict once and
for all, allowing the country to move forward with
its important development efforts and to continue its
democratic transition with all communities in peace.
It is important too that the Council remain seized and
stand united in finding and helping a peaceful resolution
to this crisis.

S/PV. 8060

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, please allow me to warmly thank the SecretaryGeneral for accepting the request put forward by France
and six other Security Council members to brief us on
the situation in Burma. On behalf of France, I would
like to welcome the Secretary-General’s personal
commitment to this priority issue.
The terrible facts are before us. As President
Macron reminded us at the General Assembly (see
A/72/PV.4), ethnic cleansing is happening today
in western Burma. Nearly 500,000 Rohingyas, the
majority of whom are children and women, have fled
Burma for Bangladesh in a month’s time. More than 200
villages have been completely destroyed, while others
have been set on fire so as to force people to flee and
deter them from returning. Let us not be mistaken: the
incitement to hatred and violence against the Rohingya
people in Burma in the form of public speeches and
other forms of stigmatization could lead to even worse
atrocities, if we do not immediately end it. Faced with
such a serious situation, the Security Council has the
enormous responsibility to unite and act to break the
negative spiral and urgently find a path leading towards
a peaceful and political way out. To that end, our
immediate efforts must be guided along two avenues.
Our first priority must be to end the violence. We
call on all parties to immediately halt violence directed
against civilians. We call on the Burma security
forces — as it is incumbent upon them — to ensure
the protection of all civilians without discrimination.
The Burma authorities must also end the actions of selfproclaimed groups that are attacking the Rohingyas.
The second priority, which is inextricably
dependent upon the first, is the restoration of safe and
unhindered access for all humanitarian actors. The
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Myanmar Red Cross Society have been mobilized.
They have delivered a significant amount of assistance,
which, however, has been largely insufficient
given the scope of what is needed. It is urgent that
access be granted to United Nations agencies, the
World Food Programme, UNICEF and other major
non-governmental organizations, such as Médecins
sans Frontières, which can provide emergency relief
in a neutral, independent and impartial manner. The
Government of Burma’s initiative to organize a visit by
diplomats and humanitarian organizations in Rakhine
state is a step in the right direction. I would also like to
acknowledge the outstanding work of the Office of the

17-3023811/24

S/PV.8060

The situation in Myanmar

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the International Organization for Migration, which
are urgently addressing the influx of almost 500,000
people to Bangladesh.
The significant effort made by Bangladesh, which
has welcomed almost 700,000 Rohingya, also deserves
to be commended and supported by the international
community. We encourage the Bangladeshi authorities
to provide necessary access to all humanitarian actors
according to the needs of the people.
I have just touched upon the most pressing
challenges. Three other priorities, which are inextricably
interlinked, also demand that we act because they are
critical to finding a lasting solution to the crisis.
First, once we succeed in ending the violence, we
will need to define precisely the modalities for the safe,
voluntary and lasting return of the refugees.
The second priority will be to launch a political
process as quickly as possible so as to address the
root causes of the violence, including the systematic
discrimination of the Rohingya people — who have
been denied citizenship in Burma for decades — and
the systematic violation of their rights. The final report
submitted by the Advisory Commission on Rakhine
State, chaired by Mr. Kofi Annan, contains important
recommendations concerning the subject. The
commitment of the Burmese Government to implement
determinedly and immediately those recommendations
is a positive first step that must be translated into action.
France reiterates its support for the civilian Government
to pursue and consolidate the democratic transition
process initiated in 2015. France also commends the
work undertaken by countries of the region in search of
a solution to the crisis.
The denial of the Rohingya’s rights for decades
has led to the radicalization of a minority among them.
Civilians must not pay for the violence committed by
an extremist group. That is why — and this is the third
challenge — we cannot ignore the massive violations
of human rights that may constitute crimes against
humanity, as was stated by the High Commissioner
for Human Rights. Those responsible for crimes
should be brought to justice. For the time being, we
call on the Burmese authorities to allow full access
to all human rights monitoring bodies, in particular
the fact-finding mission established by the Human
Rights Council last March. That mission must be
allowed to visit Myanmar and conduct an independent
12/24

28/09/2017

investigation of any violations committed, irrespective
of the perpetrators. We reiterate this appeal today to the
Burmese Government.
As France prepares to assume the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of October, rest
assured, Sir, of the full attention that it will accord to
the situation in Burma. During the very first days of our
mandate, in collaboration with the United Kingdom,
we will organize an Arria Formula meeting — an open
informal meeting of the Security Council — which
will include Kofi Annan, among other key actors. That
meeting, which will be open to everyone, will not only
give a perspective of the situation on the ground for all
participants, but will also address in more detail the
recommendations of the Commission chaired by Kofi
Annan and the means to act at our disposal. Moreover,
we are continuing our work with our partners on the
Council to show its firm and collective commitment,
which France believes is crucial and urgent.
Allow me to conclude by citing the final report
of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State: “The
status quo is not tenable”. France will therefore remain
ready to take the initiative for the Security Council to
fully assume its responsibilities concerning this issue
that, through this meeting, we wish to make a priority
and a shared priority on which to take collective action.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I join previous
speakers in thanking Secretary-General Guterres for
his comprehensive briefing on the dire situation of the
Rohingya people who have been forced to flee Rakhine
state of Myanmar to neighbouring countries.
Kazakhstan is deeply concerned about the mass
exodus from Myanmar, with almost half a million
Rohingya crossing the border into Bangladesh within
the short span of a month following the violence that
erupted on 25 August. The saddest part of the tragedy
is that children comprise approximately 60 per cent of
those refugees. Unfortunately, there have been reports
that a fresh influx of 14,000 refugees crossed the border
into Bangladesh as recently as 24 September. The lack
of measures to stop the flow of refugees calls into
question Aung San Suu Kyi’s statement that “there have
been no clearance operations since 5 September”. That
serves as an additional justification and rationale for
dispatching a United Nations fact-finding mission to
assess objectively the current situation in Rakhine state.
Kazakhstan is closely monitoring the crisis in
Rakhine state of Myanmar through its embassies in
17-30238

28/09/2017

The situation in Myanmar

the region and wishes to underscore the following
key observations.
First, we urge the Government of Myanmar
to suspend all military operations and halt acts of
persecution and discriminatory practices against
Rohingya Muslims. It is the obligation of every State
to ensure the safety and security of all communities
without discrimination and to uphold the rule of law
and public order.
Secondly, my delegation urges the Government of
Myanmar to provide unhindered access for humanitarian
assistance to the affected population. While the
launch of the Myanmar Government-led mechanism,
in cooperation with the International Committee of
the Red Cross, to deliver humanitarian assistance to
all displaced inhabitants without discrimination, is a
welcome step, we believe that their joint capacities for
emergency relief are rather limited. We therefore call
on the Government of Myanmar to allow unfettered and
safe access to United Nations funds and programmes,
including the World Food Programme, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UNICEF and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, which can provide emergency assistance
and alleviate the suffering of the victimizedpopulation.
Thirdly, we urge the Government of Myanmar to
take urgent measures so that the Rohingya refugees are
able to return to their homeland of Rakhine state. That
should be done safely, securely and in a dignified manner,
with prospects for them to enjoy decent livelihoods, as
was stated by the Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in Astana.
The question of Myanmar was discussed during the
first OIC Summit on Science and Technology, held on
10 September in Kazakhstan. My country endorses
the OIC view on the need to ensure an inclusive and
transparent citizenship verification process that leaves
no individual unregistered and does not hinder access
to education, health care and essential social services.
Fourthly, Kazakhstan is of the firm view that
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State, headed by former United Nations
Secretary-General Mr. Kofi Annan, are valuable. We
urge the Government of Myanmar to fully implement
those recommendations in a swift and timely manner so
as to promote sustainable peace, stability and prosperity
in Rakhine state.

S/PV. 8060

We have taken note that Myanmar has already
established a ministerial Implementation Committee
to implement those recommendations and has held
two ministerial-level meetings in the capital. We hope
that the Implementation Committee in Myanmar will
profoundly address the problem and make every effort
to eliminate its root causes, including the loophole in the
1982 Citizenship Act, which has led to statelessness and
deprivation of the rights of the Rohingya community.
Unless we work towards a just and sustainable solution
for the citizenship issue, there will be no durable
peace in Myanmar. That was one of the important
recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, led by Kofi Annan.
Kazakhstan is of the view that inter-ethnic
and interreligious strife, as well as the growing
problem of refugees in the neighbouring countries of
Myanmar, could serve as fertile ground for domestic
and international terrorism. That could spread beyond
Myanmar and become a source of threat to regional
and, over time, even international peace and security.
As a country that has developed a unique model of
inter-ethnic and interconfessional accord, including the
Assembly of People of Kazakhstan and the Congress
of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions,
Kazakhstan calls on the authorities of Myanmar to
take all necessary measures to restore peace and
intercommunal harmony through interfaith dialogue
and a comprehensive reconciliation process. Every
individual, including, those who have been unfairly
discriminated against for years, should have the right to
live and move without fear or persecution, irrespective
of their religion or ethnicity.
We commend the efforts of the Government of
Bangladesh in hosting almost half a million new
Rohingya refugees and providing them with shelter,
medical care, food and other forms of assistance.
The timely help of United Nations agencies and
donor countries is crucial for Rohingya refugees. We
appeal to all States to extend the necessary support to
Bangladesh in order to enable it to cope with the influx.
Nevertheless, the issue is not a matter of providing more
help. Ultimately, we will need to address the issue of
the voluntary return of refugees to Myanmar to resolve
the crisis.
Kazakhstan calls on the Myanmar authorities
to cooperate more actively with the international
community — including the United Nations system,
OIC, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and

17-3023813/24

S/PV.8060

The situation in Myanmar

other international and regional organizations — in
order to stabilize the situation as soon as possible.
Finally, Kazakhstan is ready to contribute
positively, as part of the larger multilateral action, to
resolve the crisis in Myanmar, giving all of its people
hope for a better future.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank Secretary-General
Guterres for his comprehensive briefing.
Japan strongly condemns the attacks carried out
against the Myanmar security forces and civilians
in northern areas of Rakhine state since 25 August.
We express our sincere condolences to the bereaved
families.
At the same time, Japan is deeply concerned by
the human rights and humanitarian conditions on the
ground, the allegations of the killing of civilians, and
the fact that approximately 500,000 people have been
displaced to Bangladesh since August, according
to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. We call for the restoration of
security in a manner that is consistent with the rule
of law and with full respect for human rights, while
ensuring transparency throughout their efforts. We also
stress the importance of continuous efforts to secure
humanitarian access for all affected communities.
Against that backdrop, Japan sent Mr. Iwao Horii,
Parliamentary Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs, to
Myanmar last week and conveyed our deep concerns
and position directly to the leaders of the Myanmar
Government, including the military. He also visited
Bangladesh yesterday and exchanged views on this
issue with the people and Government of Bangladesh.
Japan commends the dedicated efforts of
Bangladesh in responding to the humanitarian aspects
of the current situation. Japan has been providing
humanitarian assistance for displaced persons in
Rakhine state and Bangladesh. Furthermore, as Foreign
Minister Kono pledged last week, Japan has decided to
provide up to $4 million in emergency assistance for
those affected by recent incidents in Myanmar and the
people who have fled to Bangladesh.
Japan was encouraged by the commitment,
expressed by State Counsellor Aung San Suu Kyi on
19 September, to the early implementation of the final
recommendations by the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State to achieve lasting peace and prosperity.
Japan also welcomes her commitment to taking action
14/24

28/09/2017

against all people, regardless of their religion, race and
political position, who go against the law of the land
and violate human rights.
What is important is prompt action. We take
note of the announcement of the establishment of the
Implementation Committee on the recommendations of
the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State. Japan will
support the efforts of the Government of Myanmar to
address the human rights and humanitarian conditions
on the ground.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
briefing.
China condemns the recent violent attacks in
Myanmar’s Rakhine state and supports Myanmar’s
efforts to maintain domestic stability. We sincerely
hope that order will again prevail as soon as possible
so that no more harm will come to innocent civilians,
and that social stability, unity among ethnic groups and
economic development will be sustained.
The question of Rakhine state is rooted in a nexus
of complex historical ethnic and religious factors.
Many of the differences and antagonisms in the state
have built up over a long time; there is no quick fix.
A viable solution will be one that goes hand in hand
with the peace and reconciliation process in Myanmar.
China has taken note of a series of measures taken
by the Government of Myanmar to ease the situation
in Rakhine state and maintain its stability, which is
conducive to the search for a long-term solution to
the issue. It behoves the international community to
view the difficulties and challenges confronting the
Government of Myanmar objectively, while exercising
patience and providing support and help.
China commends Bangladesh for overcoming
its own difficulties to improve the humanitarian
situation on the ground. We welcome the Myanmar
Government’s cooperation in humanitarian operations
with the International Committee of the Red Cross
and other international bodies. The international
community should encourage and support dialogue
and communication between the two countries so that
they can duly address the mass exodus of the Muslim
population seeking refuge in Bangladesh and find a
definitive solution.
China, as a friendly neighbour of both Myanmar
and Bangladesh, has been actively engaging with those
17-30238

28/09/2017

The situation in Myanmar

countries to influence them positively and encourage
them to address the issue through dialogue and
consultation. China has provided and will continue
to provide assistance necessary for accommodating
the displaced.
As we speak, the situation on the ground is beginning
to stabilize. All parties should work constructively to
help reinforce that momentum, de-escalate the situation
and alleviate the humanitarian conditions step by step.
China stands ready to work with all parties concerned
to contribute constructively to the restoration of order
and the achievement of peace and stability in Rakhine
state.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General
for his briefing on the situation in Rakhine state in
Myanmar. We share his concern about the serious
worsening of the situation in the region, which was
provoked first and foremost by fighters of the Arakan
Rohingya Salvation Army. We resolutely condemn
their armed attempts to undermine efforts to stabilize
the situation in Rakhine state. We are concerned about
the mass exodus of Muslim, Buddhist and Hindu
refugees, as well as the ensuing humanitarian crisis.
We empathize with those who find themselves in
such a difficult situation and those whose rights have
been violated.
At the same time, the information that we are
receiving indicates that the situation in Rakhine state is
far from unequivocal. In recent days, evidence has been
received of the involvement of fighters of the Arakan
Rohingya Salvation Army in the massacre of civilians.
Moreover, caches of improvised explosive devices have
been discovered. There is evidence that the extremists
have forced members of Myanmar’s Hindu community
in border villages to leave their homes and migrate to
the territory of neighbouring Bangladesh in the same
stream as Muslims. Furthermore, there is evidence of
arson attacks on entire villages carried out by terrorists.
Photographs confiscated from detained militants were
apparently intended to contribute to reports to the
leadership of the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army
or its foreign sponsors. Those data back up statements
made earlier by the authorities of Naypyitaw that the
initiators of the outbreak of violence in Rakhine state
sought to maximize the scale of the humanitarian
catastrophe and shift all blame for it to the Government.

S/PV. 8060

We appreciate the efforts of the Myanmar
authorities to resolve the situation in Rakhine state
and support the dialogue with relevant United Nations
agencies and human rights bodies, including the work
initiated by the Naypyitaw, in cooperation with the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies, in order to organize humanitarian assistance
to the affected population. We note the readiness of the
Myanmar authorities to repatriate refugees from the
territory of Bangladesh on the basis of the procedures
provided for by the bilateral agreement with that
country of 1993, and to send the current lists of leaders
and fighters of the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army
to the Bangladesh side, INTERPOL and United Nations
specialized bodies. The authorities of Myanmar have
invited the Bangladesh side to begin negotiations
between ministers responsible for security issues and
intensify contacts through the ministries of foreign
affairs. We think that would prove useful.
We pay tribute to the efforts of the Government of
Bangladesh, which has shown solidarity and sheltered
hundreds of thousands of refugees from Myanmar.
We hope for the solid support of the international
community in resolving the humanitarian crisis. These
people should receive assistance. The leadership of
Myanmar has begun to implement the recommendations
of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, chaired
by Mr. Kofi Annan, and established an Implementation
Committee that has already held two meetings.
I wish to stress that excessive pressure on Naypyitaw
in the current situation can only aggravate the situation
in and around the country. We maintain our unchanging
position that there is no alternative to resolving the
existing problems in Rakhine state except through
political means and a dialogue between representatives
of all nationalities and faiths. We call on the parties
involved and external stakeholders to demonstrate
restraint and objectivity in their assessment of ongoing
events. We need to be very precise in using terms like
“genocide” and “ethnic cleansing”.
It is important to focus on practical assistance to
the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh in their
search for a solution to the complex and difficult problem
at hand, in the spirit of equality and mutual respect. It
is necessary to stop the violence and the incitement that
fuels it. We must prevent further radicalization in the
region, which can be used by terrorists and extremists
who are already trying to establish roots in South-East

17-3023815/24

S/PV.8060

The situation in Myanmar

Asia. We are also concerned by how the situation might
impact regional stability.
We welcome the fact that Naypyitaw is not rejecting
interaction with the United Nations. The National
Security Adviser to the President of Myanmar, who
was in New York during the past week, invited the
Secretary-General and his Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Feltman, to visit the country in order to facilitate
the process of national reconciliation. It would be
unreasonable to squander the opportunity to tap into the
mediation efforts of the United Nations. In any case, it
is necessary to seek the constructive involvement of the
Government and representatives of all nationalities and
faiths in resolving this long-standing complex crisis.
We should not forget about the urgent task of increasing
the socioeconomic development of Rakhine state.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for his
engagement in facing the alarming situation in
Rakhine state.
In the past months, the number of refugees
fleeing from the region has increased appallingly,
which has created a dangerous humanitarian crisis
with destabilizing impacts on the region. It is the
responsibility of the Council to urgently address
the situation and collectively engage in providing
assistance. The Security Council must send a strong,
unified and constructive message, in line with the
priorities identified by the Secretary-General.
The crisis in northern Rakhine state is the
result of a number of complex factors and requires a
comprehensive response.
First, we must put an end to violence immediately.
In line with requests of the European Union, we call on
the authorities of Myanmar to suspend their security
operations and ensure the full protection of its civilians.
We condemn the coordinated attacks of 25 August by the
Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army. We stress the need
for the security response to fully respect international
humanitarian and human rights law. Acts of violence
perpetrated against the Rohingya minority, including
reports of serious abuses against women, children and
the elderly, are a matter of grave concern and cannot
be tolerated. National authorities are responsible for
safeguarding the lives and protecting the fundamental
rights of all people, without discrimination. Safe and
unhindered humanitarian access must be ensured.
16/24

28/09/2017

We join High Commissioner for Refugees Mr. Filippo
Grandi in his call to immediately re-establish access for
United Nations agencies to Rakhine state. Humanitarian
agencies and donors have mobilized rapidly. The Italian
Government immediately allocated, through the High
Commissioner for Refugees, €1 million to community
projects for minorities and contributed €500,000 to the
World Food Programme’s emergency packages. Even
still, needs on the ground exceed the available resources
and access to those in need and those in the most dire
conditions faces major restrictions.
We appreciate that the authorities of Myanmar
have engaged in alleviating such suffering, but it is
urgent that they step up their efforts by ensuring full
international access and cooperation with the United
Nations, especially with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. We look forward to
the visit of a group of foreign diplomats and heads of
United Nations agencies to Rakhine state, which is set
to take place on 2 October. We also acknowledge the
steps taken by Myanmar to cooperatively address the
refugee crisis with Bangladesh, and we encourage both
countries to bolster that coordination. We would like to
commend Bangladesh for its decision to keep its border
open, as well as for its solidarity and hospitality efforts.
Secondly, the root causes of the crisis must be
addressed. In its report, the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State outlines a road map for socioeconomic
development and lasting reconciliation. We praise
Myanmar for mandating the Commission in the first
place, as well as for its commitment to following up
on its recommendations with the establishment of an
interministerial Implementation Commission that is
in charge of implementing those recommendations.
Translating the recommendations into concrete actions
is now the priority, because it will pave the way for
disrupting the vicious cycle of discrimination, poverty
and violence that is afflicting communities.
We acknowledge the scope of the challenge and
stand ready to assist, while hoping that the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, led by Kofi Annan, will
continue to be involved. The United Nations system,
by integrating humanitarian aid and development
assistance, is in the best position to shore up the process.
We encourage Myanmar to engage in a constructive
dialogue with the Organization, and we welcome its
decision to participate in today’s briefing.
17-30238

28/09/2017

The situation in Myanmar

Thirdly, the voluntary, safe and sustainable return of
refugees will be key to defusing tensions and stabilizing
the region. That entails ensuring registration, in line
with international standards, and finding a durable
solution to the problem of statelessness. Also in that
regard, the United Nations can offer its expertise and
assistance.
Finally, building trust among communities
is paramount. We ask the Government to stifle
inflammatory language and foster an interreligious
dialogue. In that respect, those who are responsible for
human rights violations must be held accountable. The
fact-finding mission established by the Human Rights
Council, in cooperation with the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on the human rights situation in Myanmar,
could complement Government efforts by exhaustively
and impartially assessing the situation and facilitating
reconciliation.
The United Nations, including the Security Council
and the Secretary-General, can play a constructive role
in helping Myanmar overcome the crisis and advance
on its path towards an inclusive democracy. Respecting
human rights is an essential prerequisite that cannot be
ignored. Italy stands ready to take into consideration
further constructive action by the Council and remains
committed to Myanmar’s democratic transition and
national reconciliation.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We thank those
delegations that initiated convening this briefing for the
Security Council to discuss, in a transparent manner,
the current situation in Rakhine state of Myanmar. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing, but most of all for his deep and personal
commitment to putting an end to this tragedy. This
discussion is particularly timely in light of the plight
of hundreds of thousands of innocent civilians who left
their homes fleeing violence.
Like others on the Council, we strongly condemn
the upsurge in violence in Rakhine state that has led to
numerous civilian causalities and enormous suffering.
Let me underscore from the very outset that any
targeting of civilian populations, infringements on their
human rights and other abuses are totally unacceptable.
The impunity of perpetrators must not be tolerated.
Steps must be taken to address the numerous reports of
attacks, especially against women and girls.
As we know, there are some recent disturbing
developments that were triggered by the deadly attacks

S/PV. 8060

committed by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army
against security forces on 25 August. As the Security
Council, we should also look into information about
the possible involvement of external terrorist factors
in inflaming violence in Rakhine. While Myanmar
security forces took steps to respond to the attacks, we
are particularly concerned about the mounting evidence
of grave human rights violations committed over the
course of the military operation in the province. We
call on the authorities to show restraint, respect the rule
of law and protect the civilian population.
Ukraine is seriously concerned by the continuously
worsening humanitarian situation of hundreds of
thousands of refugees and internally displaced persons,
and stresses the need to ensure unhindered access
of humanitarian actors to those in need. Taking this
opportunity, we express our support to the Government
of Bangladesh in its efforts to provide shelter and aid
to the Rohingya refugees. Considering the staggering
numbers of displaced persons and refugees, the least
the Government could do in the situation is to halt all
military activities in Rakhine. The cycle of violence
has to be stopped before it is too late. We understand
that the situation in Rakhine state is an extremely
complicated and sensitive issue that cannot be solved
in the short run.
We note the efforts of the Government of
Myanmar to address those challenges, including
the establishment of the Central Committee for the
Implementation of Peace, Stability and Development
in Rakhine State, chaired by the State Counsellor, as
well as the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State,
chaired by Mr. Kofi Annan. We welcome the release
of the final report of the Advisory Commission and the
readiness of the Myanmar Government to carry out its
recommendations to the full extent and within the short
time frame. We are confident that the implementation
of the report’s recommendations could help conflict
challenges in Rakhine state and achieve peace and
stability in the region.
Concrete steps are urgently needed because
what is doable and within reach today, may not be
there tomorrow. In this Chamber, we talk a lot about
prevention. Today, it is still not too late to deliver. For
the Council and wider international community, it is
imperative to be more proactive in ensuring that the
violence stops. We strongly encourage the Government
of Myanmar to seize the chance it still has and prevent
the current situation from deteriorating into a full-

17-3023817/24

S/PV.8060

The situation in Myanmar

blown regional crisis. Nobody around the table wants
to see the worse-case scenario. That means that we all
have to do our duty. The Security Council is the body
that is responsible for maintaining international peace
and security and the Government of Myanmar is the
primary entity responsible for the well-being of its own
people.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
highly appreciate the participation of the SecretaryGeneral in this meeting, and thank him for all his
work with respect to the situation in Rakhine state in
Myanmar and for his message conveyed to the Security
Council in his letter of 2 September, which he included
in his opening statement of the seventy-second session
of the General Assembly (see A/72/PV.3), as well as for
the information he provided today.
We are very pleased that the presidency of the
Security Council organized this briefing and that this
organ, which is the guarantor of international peace and
security, is addressing the situation in Rakhine state
and of the Rohingya people in an open meeting.
Respect for the rule of law, equality before the law,
the defence and promotion of human rights, dialogue
and resort to peaceful means to settle disputes are
some of the principles Uruguay actively defends and
promotes in all of the forums in which it participates.
Situations such as that which has arisen in Myanmar
cannot be ignored by the Security Council.
Uruguay is deeply concerned by the escalation of
tensions in Rakhine state. The serious crisis caused
by the wave of sectarian violence against the Muslim
Rohingya people is alarming. The exodus of people who
have had to abandon their homes and flee desperately to
Bangladesh is appalling. The humanitarian and security
conditions and human rights situation of the Rohingya
people have been very seriously affected. Violations
of human rights related to the conflict in various parts
of Myanmar, especially in Rakhine state, are not new.
Many such violations have been documented in reports
of the Secretary-General.
The resurgence of violence in the country clearly
shows that significant, pressing challenges remain.
Democratic reform and genuine change in Myanmar
can take place only if human rights are respected and
a true national reconciliation takes place. It is therefore
important for the Myanmar Government to step up its
efforts to stop the violations and adopt all the measures
18/24

28/09/2017

necessary to ensure accountability and put an end to
impunity.
All complaints of violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law
must be investigated in an exhaustive, transparent and
independent manner. In that regard, Uruguay welcomes
the adoption of Human Rights Council resolution 34/22
in March, when massive persecutions had already
begun. The resolution mandates the establishment of a
fact-finding mission and requests that the Government
of Myanmar provide all guarantees necessary to
the mission’s ability to successfully conduct its
activities. It also urges the authorities to implement
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, led by former Secretary-General Kofi
Annan. The only way to overcome the crisis is by
approaching it from a human-rights perspective.
While we acknowledge that the situation in
Rakhine state is a complex intercommunal issue with
deep historical roots, as we have said on a number of
official statements recently, we are also aware of the
military activities of the Arakan Rohingya Salvation
Army against the Myanmar security forces, which we
naturally condemn. But the responsibility for protecting
civilians always falls primarily on States. Nothing
exempts the Government of Myanmar from shouldering
its responsibility to provide the necessary security and
assistance to the Rohingya people and to allow the
United Nations and partners to offer humanitarian aid.
The authorities of Myanmar must put an end
to the military operations and allow unrestricted
humanitarian access. They must also pay due attention
to the Rohingya people, whose status has remained
unresolved for far too long. The question arises as to
whether a Government can feel proud of being home
to the largest population of stateless people in the
world. Protection of the civil population must always
be a priority, and the applicable norms of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law
must be respected.
Uruguay is committed to preventing atrocious
crimes and urgently calls for the Government of
Myanmar to stop the violence, suspend military
operations, allow the return of those who have had
to flee, and facilitate safe and unfettered access to
humanitarian aid. Two hypotheses arise ftrom this
tragic crisis if we focus, as we should, on prevention.
17-30238

28/09/2017

The situation in Myanmar

First, the excessive and disproportionate repression
of the Rohingya minority under the pretext of
combating a terrorist group will have the least-desired
effect. It will sow the seeds of despair, hatred and
extremism. Secondly, and perhaps worse, it will run the
risk of allowing other global terrorist groups, such as
Da’esh or Al-Qaida, to infiltrate Myanmar territory and
start operating there, destabilizing the country and in
the region.
Uruguay congratulates and thanks Bangladesh for
its generosity of recent weeks by providing hundreds
of thousands of refugees — an estimated 70 per cent
of whom are children — with security, food and
shelter. We also thank the agencies and institutions
that are working intensively to provide humanitarian
assistance, and call on the international community
and neighbouring countries to provide the support and
resources necessary to address this sensitive situation.
I conclude with a remark made several years ago by
Nobel Peace laureate Archbishop Desmond Tutu:
“A country that is not at peace with itself, that
fails to acknowledge and protect the dignity and
worth of all its people, is not a free country.”
Mr. Zambrana (Bolivia (Plurinational State
of)) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Secretary-General
António Guterres for his briefing today on Rakhine
state of Myanmar, and we applaud the measures he has
taken personally to date.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia vigorously
condemns the violence impacting Rakhine state,
especially the Rohingya Muslim ethnic group. Based on
information provided by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, and as noted by the SecretaryGeneral, between 25 August and 20 September the
events led to the escalation of violence caused some
half a million people to cross the border and seek
refuge in Bangladesh, with hundreds of thousands more
internally displaced.
We condemn all actions that aggravate
intercommunitary tension and incite violence, belicose
rhetoric, racial and religious hatred and any act of
sexual abuse or exploitation. All such acts must be duly
investigated and those responsible brought to justice
and prosecuted by the corresponding courts.
Having condemned the acts of violence,
discrimination and suffering that victimize not just the
Rohingya people but also other ethnic minority groups

S/PV. 8060

such as the Daing-net, the Mro, the Thet, the Mramagyi
and Hindus, Bolivia once again reaffirms that any
conflict within a State must be resolved first and
foremost within its borders, respecting the principles
of sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
If it cannot be so resolved, it should be supported
by regional and subregional organizations, while
upholding the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, international humanitarian law, international
law and human rights law.
We believe that it is also important to respect the
principles of non-intervention in the internal affairs
of States and the non-use or threat of use of force to
settle conflicts, in accordance with the principle of
a peaceful settlement of conflicts. In this regard, we
believe that it is important to encourage and support
Myanmar in its quest for a peaceful solution to this
humanitarian situation through efforts on a number of
levels that include dialogue, consultations, mediation,
good offices, negotiations and crisis administration.
In this context, we highlight the welcome and
ready cooperation extended to refugees from Rakhine
state by the Government and the people of Bangladesh.
We encourage them to continue working with the
various United Nations agencies and the International
Committee of the Red Cross to lessen the humanitarian
impact on the region.
We call on the Government of Myanmar to engage in
a fruitful dialogue within and outside of its borders. The
participation of its neighbours, regional organizations
and the international community will allow it to reach
agreements to stabilize the Rakhine state and to honour
its obligation to protect all its civilians, regardless of
their ethnicity or religious affiliation. In the context of
diplomacy, and with a view to the peace and stability of
the region, we call on them to work to draft an agreement
that contains a concrete plan for the repatriation and
safe, voluntary and dignified return of the refugees in
Bangladesh to Rakhine state.
We take note of the estabalishment in Myanmar
of the ministerial Implementation Committee on the
recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, headed by Kofi Annan, which provide a
clear road map for a peaceful solution to this situation,
and which we encourage them to fulfil. Similarly,
Bolivia encourages the Government of Myanmar to
allow humanitarian access so that assistance can be
provided to the victims of these tragic events.

17-3023819/24

S/PV.8060

The situation in Myanmar

In this context, we welcome the good offices of
the Secretary-General and call on the Government of
Myanmar to take his recommendations into account,
especially with regard to the urgent suspension of all
military action, an end to the violence, respect for the
rule of law, and the recognition of the right to return
of all those who had to abandon the country. This will
guarantee the provision of humanitarian assistance by
the United Nations, non-governmental organizations
and others, and the development of an effective plan
of action to address the root causes of the crisis, which
include providing nationality to the Muslims of Rakhine
state or, at least for now, a legal status that would
enable them to lead normal lives, including freedom
of movement and access to job markets, education and
health-care services.
We believe that it is inconceivable today to
deny a person the right to nationality, which carries
prerogatives that allow all human beings to fully enjoy
the benefits of a State.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ethiopia.
I would like to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for being here with us this afternoon and for
his important briefing on the security and humanitarian
situation in Myanmar, which is indeed deeply worrying.
We appreciate the initiative he has taken to draw the
attention of the Council to the latest developments in
Myanmar, which no doubt could easily have serious
implications for regional peace and security if not
handled both quickly and carefully.
We also look forward to listening to the views of
Bangladesh and Myanmar, the two countries that are
directly concerned with the discussion we are having
today. We certainly recognize, as the representatives
of Sweden and Italy said earlier, the complex nature of
the challenges in Rakhine State, which we believe can
be addressed only through a comprehensive approach
that combines political, development, security and
humanitarian concerns. In this regard, we encourage the
Government of Myanmar to address the root causes of
the violence. We wish to underline the need to address
all forms of hate speech that incite and fuel violence,
and stress the need to take the measures necessary to
defuse intercommunal tensions and protect the rights of
all communities. Of course, any acts of extreme violence
are unjustifiable, regardless of their motivation. That is
why we see the initial attack by the Arakan Rohingya
20/24

28/09/2017

Salvation Army as very unfortunate and senseless. The
Secretary-General is right in condemning it. We believe
that has only worsened the humanitarian tragedy, not
helped to ease it. The way this tragedy is approached
from the outset will determine how soon those affected
will get sustainable relief through addressing the
root causes or how much the situation will be further
complicated, with the humanitarian situation getting
ever worse, with no end in sight to the human suffering.
Already the Government of Bangladesh is telling
us that the situation has become grave, with farreaching implications for regional peace and security.
We welcome and support the proposal by the SecretaryGeneral to address the tragic situation as a matter of
high priority. There is indeed an urgent need to end the
military operation. The cooperation of the Myanmar
Government in allowing unhindered humanitarian
access is critical to reach those in need of urgent
assistance.
The efforts made by the Bangladesh Government
and the United Nations agencies to cope with the influx
of refugees is to be commended. Here we wish to stress
one very critical matter: the need to do what we must
to ensure an acceptable level of mutual trust between
the Myanmar Government, the United Nations and the
international community at large. The role of diplomacy
should never be overlooked, including an even greater
role by the Secretary-General. We believe that the
implementation of the recommendations made by the
Advisory Commission will contribute to tackling the
long-standing obstacles to peace and development in
Rakhine state.
In this regard, we commend the initial step taken by
the Government of Myanmar to establish a ministerial
committee to ensure the effective implementation of
the Commission’s recommendations. It is absolutely
necessary, we stress, to work closely with the Myanmar
Government in addressing the root causes of the conflict
in Rakhine state. Cooperation with Bangladesh and
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
is also vital in addressing the issue of refugees and its
broader implications for regional peace and stability.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tun.
Mr. Tun: I thank you for this opportunity to
address the Security Council with regard to the violence
17-30238

28/09/2017

The situation in Myanmar

and turmoil that have recently engulfed Myanmar’s
Rakhine state and the ensuing humanitarian situation.
I have listened carefully to the statements made by the
Secretary-General and the representatives of the States
members of the Council.
The common thread that runs through the
commentaries is that “something is rotten in the state
of Rakhine”. Assertions in the media that a campaign
of terror has been unleashed in northern Rakhine and
that unspeakable crimes have been committed against
innocent people have only served to heighten the
concern of the international community. While such
assertions might appear reasonable at first glance to a
lay observer, expert observers with knowledge of the
history of Rakhine and of Myanmar and exposure to the
propaganda tactics of terrorists will see such comments
for what they really are: subjective and emotionally
charged accounts. Nevertheless, we understand the
concern of the international community and take
serious note of it.
I would like to take this opportunity to apprise the
Council of the situation obtaining on the ground and
of our efforts to end the violence, assist all innocent
civilians affected by the turmoil and plans to find a
lasting solution to the daunting challenges we face.
First, we recognize that there is a serious situation
that needs to be addressed. But we also need to recognize
that the recent round of violence was triggered by the
attacks launched by the so-called Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army (ARSA) terrorists.
We feel deeply the suffering and plight of all
affected communities — Rakhine, Muslim, Daing-net,
Mro, Thet, Mramagyi and Hindu. They are all victims
of violence and terrorism.
Terrorism constitutes one of the most serious threats
to international peace and security. It has no place in
our civilized world. I am sure that members will agree
with me when I say that we cannot condone terrorism
in any form or manifestation. The Government of
Myanmar has strongly condemned the acts of terror
committed by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army
in northern Rakhine. The highest Islamic organization
in Myanmar, the All Myanmar Islamic Religious
Organization, as well as the Interfaith Dialogue Group
of Myanmar, have expressed their solidarity with the
Government and issued statements condemning the
acts of terror committed by ARSA. They stressed that
no religion can condone violence that results in the

S/PV. 8060

loss of life or property. They expressed their support
for the Government’s efforts to address the situation
in Rakhine and its endeavours to promote national
reconciliation and peace in the entire country.
In this regard, we welcome the statement by the
Secretary-General and many other representatives
around this table condemning the acts of terrorism. The
Government will work to ensure that the fight against
terrorism does not distract us from our commitment to
bringing peace, harmony and development to Rakhine
state. It is striving to restore normalcy. There have
been no armed clashes or clearance operations since
5 September.
Secondly, I wish to stress the fact that there is
no ethnic cleansing or genocide in Myanmar. Ethnic
cleansing and genocide are serious charges that should
not be made lightly. It would be a sad commentary on
our times if we allowed emotions to cloud our view and
asserted that what is happening in Rakhine was ethnic
cleansing without first undertaking a legal review
and making a judicial determination. I can assure the
Council that the leaders of Myanmar, who have been
struggling so long for freedom and human rights, will
never espouse a policy of genocide or ethnic cleansing
and that the Government will do everything it can to
prevent it.
As clearly stated by the State Counsellor, Aung
San Suu Kyi, in her address to the diplomatic corps in
Naypyitaw on 19 September, we condemn all human
rights violations and violence. We are committed to
the restoration of peace, stability and the rule of law
throughout the country. The security forces have been
instructed to adhere strictly to the code of conduct in
carrying out security operations, to exercise all due
restraint and to take full measures to avoid collateral
damage and the harming of innocent civilians.
Myanmar is one of the most ethnically diverse
countries in the world. It is home to 135 officially
recognized ethnic groups, each with its own distinctive
culture and adherence to a variety of religions, including
Buddhism, Islam, Christianity and Hinduism. Religious
groups have been living in harmony throughout our
history. The situation that we face today is due to
terrorism and is not based on religion. It should be noted
that Muslims are not a minority in northern Rakhine.
They constitute 95 per cent of the total population
there. What is little known is that the vast majority of
Muslims did not abandon their hearth and home. While

17-3023821/24

S/PV.8060

The situation in Myanmar

there has been an exodus, more than 50 per cent of the
Muslim villages in northern Rakhine remain intact and
are living in peace with their neighbours, whether they
be Hindus or Buddhists.
Representatives of the diplomatic corps in Yangon,
accompanied by the media, will visit northern Rakhine
on Monday. They will have the opportunity to witness
first-hand the situation on the ground. I am happy to
note that the Government of Myanmar has extended
an invitation to the Secretary-General and the UnderSecretary-General to visit Myanmar. We hope to
welcome them in the near future to enhance cooperation
between Myanmar and the United Nations.
Thirdly, the Government of Myanmar is fully
aware of its primary responsibility to address the
humanitarian situation. We have been providing
assistance to all displaced persons without
discrimination. We are collaborating with the The
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement
and donor countries, all represented in this room, to
provide assistance expeditiously in accordance with
humanitarian principles. The Association of Southeast
Asian Nations Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian
Assistance on Disaster Management has agreed to
work with us to deliver humanitarian assistance to all
displaced persons.
Fourthly, we are concerned by reports that
thousands of people have crossed into Bangladesh.
We would like to understand the real reasons for the
exodus. We will talk to those who have fled, as well
as to those who have opted to remain in their villages.
The vast majority of those who fled did so out of fear.
Fear was instilled in their hearts by the terrorists. Some
hundreds of Muslim villagers recently left their homes
and headed towards the border, notwithstanding the
efforts of the regional authorities to persuade them
to return to their villages. The villagers voiced their
concerns regarding the availability of humanitarian
assistance in a sustained manner, as well as fears that
they are becoming a minority in their own area.
We have learned that the villagers have been
threatened over the telephone and that they have
been persuaded by their fellow men who are already
in Bangladesh to join them. Moreover, the villagers
remain fearful of retaliation by the ARSA, following
the revelation that a large number of Hindu villagers
have been massacred and buried in mass graves. The
authorities have reassured the villagers that they would
22/24

28/09/2017

be provided assistance and security. However, some
have chosen to cross over to Bangladesh.
There has been a growing clamour for the
repatriation of refugees who have fled from Myanmar
to Bangladesh. I would like to stress here that Myanmar
is prepared to start the verification process at any time.
Bangladesh and Myanmar are neighbours, and our two
neighbours already went through a repatriation process
in 1993.
We are working to enhance relations with
Bangladesh. I have met with the Foreign Minister
of Bangladesh here in New York last week, and the
Minister of the Office of the State Counsellor will visit
Dhaka this weekend to further discuss matters of mutual
concern and to find ways and means to move ahead
with regard to the situation on our border. We have also
invited the Minister of Home Affairs of Bangladesh.
We will welcome him any time that he is able to come
to Myanmar and hope to take forward our cooperation
on border security matters. Our stated willingness to
discuss the issue of repatriation discredits the assertion
that there is a policy of ethnic cleansing on our part.
The new Government in Myanmar inherited a
challenging situation in Rakhine state and has had
to deal with the consequences of actions by other
actors. The current crisis is due to the acts of terrorism
perpetrated by ARSA. To address the situation, the
Government launched a number of initiatives including
the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, chaired
by Mr. Kofi Annan The recommendations of the
Commission represent a viable road map forward, and
we have embraced them. An Implementation Committee
for the recommendations has already been formed and
work is in progress. Two meetings have already been
held. We must give this Committee time and space to
go forward.
At this critical juncture in the life of our young
democracy, it is imperative that the international
community join hands with us to ensure that democracy
takes firm root and that we will succeed in carrying
out our responsibility to establish peace, stability, and
development in Rakhine and in the whole of Myanmar.
That is the only way that we can solve the conundrum
in Rakhine. The Security Council must refrain from
taking measures that exacerbate rather than alleviate
the situation there. It can and must do no less.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
17-30238

28/09/2017

The situation in Myanmar

Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting and giving us
the opportunity to speak. We commend the SecretaryGeneral for his unremitting attention to the issue.
According to the United Nations, since 25 August
nearly half a million people have entered Bangladesh,
fleeing violence in northern Rakhine state. Despite
serious constrains, Bangladesh has given shelter to
these distressed Rohingyas, a majority of whom are
women and children. Our Prime Minister, Sheikh
Hasina, has personally stood by the side of this most
persecuted minority in the world.

S/PV. 8060

In the present circumstances, it is of utmost
importance that the remaining Rohingya civilians in
northern Rakhine State be guaranteed unconditional
protection by creating United Nations-administered
safe zones inside Myanmar. We must ensure that the
humanitarian assistance provided reaches all affected
communities, in particular the Rohingyas. Myanmar
must ensure full and unfettered humanitarian access to
the United Nations and other humanitarian agencies.

We are providing these forcibly displaced Myanmar
nationals with basic and emergency humanitarian
assistance. The international community has come
forward in the spirit of responsibility sharing, although
the United Nations and other relevant partners are
stretched beyond their capacity. Our authorities are
also conducting biometric registrations of all those
who arrived in the past month. With this fresh influx,
Bangladesh is currently hosting over 900,000 forcibly
displaced Rohingyas from Myanmar. This is an
untenable situation, to say the least.

In line with our zero-tolerance policy towards
terrorism and violent extremism, we have unequivocally
condemned the alleged attacks on the Myanmar
security forces by extremist elements and offered to
help Myanmar to combat terrorism through coordinated
patrols, joint inspections and even joint operations.
Regrettably, against the backdrop of our overtures, we
have heard senior Myanmar leaders and officials of state
entities referring to the alleged extremists as “Bengali
terrorists”. There is perhaps no taker for the baseless
and malicious propaganda that projects the Rohingyas
as illegal immigrants from Bangladesh. This is not only
a blatant denial of the ethnic identity of the Rohingyas,
but also an affront to Bengalis all over the world. It has
to stop.

Despite claims to the contrary, violence has not
ceased in northern Rakhine state, nor has the exodus
of Rohingyas to Bangladesh. Last night alone, an
additional 20,000 entered Bangladesh. Any individual
among the new arrivals would make it known why this
exodus is continuing. They all speak of the use of rape
as a weapon to scare families to leave. Available reports
suggest that village upon village have been burnt,
homes have been looted and people have been abused
in Rakhine state. Those atrocities attest to the fact that
the Myanmar Government is using arson to depopulate
northern Rakhine and take ownership of the land.

Myanmar claims that half of the Muslim villages
are vacant, despite the presence of about 30,000
military and other forces. Myanmar’s official narrative
also claims that a particular terrorist group has gathered
such strength and capacity that it has been able it to
enlist most male members of the Rohingya community
in northern Rakhine state and use civilians and
children as combatants and human shields. This state
of volatility constitutes a larger threat to regional peace
and security and, as such, should be a major security
concern for the international community, including
the Council.

The indiscriminate killing and torture by the
Myanmar security forces, aided by vigilante groups
acting on the basis of religious and ethnic affiliation,
have already been cited as a textbook example of ethnic
cleansing by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. That was also emphasized by our Prime
Minister in her statement before the General Assembly
(see A/72/PV.14). The Security Council perhaps has a
responsibility to examine whether military operations
and consequent developments in northern Rakhine
state point to any threat to peace or breach of the peace,
and what can be done to restore peace.

Likewise, the new narratives of Muslims killing
Muslims or Muslims killing Hindus should be perceived
as the State’s failure or abnegation of its primary
responsibility to protect its civilians. Allegations and
counter-allegations of various forms of atrocities,
which amount to crimes against humanity, must be
fully investigated by a Security Council-mandated factfinding mission.
The Council should also take into account that
Myanmar has reportedly deployed more than two
divisions of armed forces in areas near our border since
the first week of August. Troops have been spotted

17-3023823/24

S/PV.8060

The situation in Myanmar

within 200 metres of the zero line, and heavy armaments
and artillery are reportedly placed in close proximity
to our border. There have been 19 reported incidents
of Bangladesh’s air space being violated by Myanmar
helicopters and drones, including the latest one the day
before yesterday. Anti-personnel mines have reportedly
been laid along one stretch of the border to prevent the
return of Rohingyas to Myanmar. Incidents of firing on
Bangladeshi fishermen have resulted in the death one
earlier this week.
Bangladesh continues to exercise utmost restraint
in the face of such repeated, unwarranted and wilful
provocations. As a responsible and responsive State,
we shall forge ahead in seeking a peaceful and lasting
solution to this protracted situation through diplomacy,
dialogue and cooperation. Accordingly, our Prime
Minister made a five-point proposal last week before
the General Assembly that has been largely echoed
by the Secretary-General and Council members this
afternoon. Pursuant to those points, the immediate
priorities should be to cease all forms of violence and
ensure protection and humanitarian assistance for those
affected or vulnerable in Rakhine state.
At the same time, Bangladesh looks forward
to immediately start working with Myanmar and
the international community to help implement the
recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State and ensure the safe, voluntary and
sustainable return of all those displaced from Myanmar
into our territory over the years, including the
recent arrivals.
In this regard, previous precedents, including
the 1992 arrangement, can be used by adapting them
to current realities, challenges and priorities. In that
regard, Bangladesh prefers joint verification in the
presence of international observers. The forcibly
displaced Myanmar nationals should return to their
places of original abode in safety, security and
dignity. As our Prime Minister stated in the General
Assembly, “The crisis has its root in Myanmar and its

24/24

28/09/2017

solution has to be found in Myanmar” (A/72/PV.14).
Bangladesh, however, remains committed to engaging
with Myanmar and the international community for a
resolution of this outstanding critical issue.
Our experience from the past three decades makes
it obvious that the bilateral track loses its momentum
as soon as the international community shifts its
attention elsewhere. We therefore urge the Council
to keep this issue at the forefront of its agenda and
make sure that we manage to arrive to the point of its
logical conclusion. We also invite Council members to
conduct a field mission to Bangladesh, and possibly to
Myanmar, to gather first-hand accounts of the unfolding
humanitarian crisis.
Before concluding, I must, on behalf of the
Government and the people of Bangladesh, express our
deepest appreciation for the show of support extended
to us by each member of the Council this afternoon.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
As this is the last scheduled meeting of the Council
for the month of September, I would like to express
the sincere appreciation of the delegation of Ethiopia
to Council members, especially my colleagues the
Permanent Representatives and their respective staff,
and to the secretariat of the Council for all the support
they have given to us.
Indeed, it has been a busy month, in which we
have rallied to a consensus on several important
issues within our purview. We could not have done it
alone or without the hard work, support and positive
contribution of every delegation, the representatives
of the secretariat and all relevant conference service
officers, interpreters and translators.
As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf
of the Council in wishing the delegation of France good
luck in the month of October.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

17-30238
