S/PV.7522

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7522nd meeting

Tuesday, 15 September 2015, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Safronkov/Mr. Churkin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Bertoux
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Adejola
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-28026 (E)
*1528026*

S/PV.7522

Non-proliferation

The meeting was called to order at 4 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006)
The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi,
Permanent Representative of Spain, in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to present the report of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006), in accordance with paragraph
18 of that resolution. The present report covers the
period from 23 June to 14 September, during which
time the Committee held an informal meeting on
1 September and carried out additional activities, using
the no-objection procedure provided for in paragraph
15 of the guidelines for conducting its work.
I should like to start by welcoming the conclusion
by Iran, the P5+1 and the European Union on 14 July of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and to commend
the negotiating parties for their joint efforts to find a
comprehensive, long-term and adequate solution to the
Iranian nuclear issue. I would further like to welcome
the adoption on 20 July of resolution 2231 (2015), by
which the Council endorsed the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, whose conclusion, as affirmed by the
Council in its resolution, marks a fundamental shift in
its consideration of this issue.
I should like to stress the fact that, during the current
transitional period, up until the Security Council’s
receipt of the report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) in which the IAEA confirms that
Iran has taken a set of nuclear-energy-related actions
in accordance with the provisions of resolution 2231
(2015), on the day known as Implementation Day, the
2/11

15/09/2015

measures imposed by the Security Council through
resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and
1929 (2010) remain in full effect, and Member States
remain under the obligation to apply them strictly and
fully, with due respect for exemptions provided for in
resolution 2231 (2015).
The Committee remains fully committed to the
implementation of all relevant resolutions and stands
ready to provide guidance to those Member States that
request assistance.
In relation to past incidents investigated by the
Panel of Experts, I would recall that the Committee
reached out to the Islamic Republic of Iran for comment
on several occasions. The Islamic Republic of Iran has
not yet provided a response; the Committee continues
to call on it to do so.
The Committee continues to provide States
and international organizations with assistance in
implementing the relevant Security Council measures.
In this regard, the Committee received additional
information in relation to the proposal that an
international organization provide technical assistance
to the Islamic Republic of Iran. The Committee is
continuing its consideration of the proposal and
welcomes such collaboration on issues related to of
implementation and compliance, and it encourages
parties to continue to seek guidance from the Committee
on the application of the Council’s measures.
In accordance with paragraph 5 of resolution 1737
(2006), the Committee was notified by one Member
State about the delivery of equipment to be used in
a light-water reactor at the Bushehr nuclear plant.
Similarly, in accordance with paragraph 15 of resolution
1737 (2006) and paragraph 4 of resolution 1747 (2007),
the Committee was notified by one Member State that
it had allowed for payments owed by a designated
entity, under a contract that entered into force prior to
its designation, to be made from that entity’s frozen
funds. In addition, one Member State submitted two
reports in accordance with paragraph 17 of resolution
1929 (2010).
With respect to the adoption of resolution 2231
(2015), the Committee is continuing its constructive
dialogue on the steps to be taken in the foreseeable
future. In that connection, the Committee was notified
by one Member State, in accordance with paragraph
22 of resolution 2231 (2015), that it had initiated
preparatory steps in relation to establishing a stable

15-28026

15/09/2015

Non-proliferation

isotope production centre at the Fordow facility and to
removing stockpiles of Iranian low-and rich uranium in
return for natural uranium.
In view of the actions taken by Member States to
implement the relevant Security Council measures,
the Committee encourages Sstates that have not yet
submitted reports to do so as soon as possible, in
recognition of the fact that national implementation
reports are an important means of promoting the
implementation of sanctions measures.
In connection with the Panel of Experts, I am
pleased to report that, following the Security Council’s
decision, contained in resolution 2224 (2015), of 9 June
2015, to extend the Panel’s mandate until 9 July 2016,
the Secretary-General appointed on 30 June 2015 seven
experts to serve on the Panel.
On 28 August 2015, the Panel submitted its
programme of work for the new mandate in accordance
with paragraph 3 of resolution 2224 (2015). On behalf
of the Committee, I would like to recognize the
continued efforts of the Panel in assisting the work of
the Committee. We look forward to close and fruitful
collaboration with the Panel under its new mandate. As
to the activities undertaken by the Panel over the past
three months, I note that the Panel has participated in
a number of events that are listed in the annex to the
present report.
Finally, while recalling that the primary
responsibility for implementing the provisions of
resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and
1929 (2010) rests with Member States, the Committee
stands ready to facilitate implementation of these
measures.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I wish
to thank Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for his
briefing and for his leadership. The Security Council’s
consideration of the Iranian nuclear issue is entering an
important period of transition. Two months ago, Council
colleagues roundly welcomed the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, a landmark understanding reached
among the P5+1, the European Union and the Islamic
Republic of Iran. If fully implemented, the Plan of
Action will prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear

S/PV.7522

weapon. Because of our combined diplomatic efforts,
the international community will be able to verify that
Iran’s nuclear programme is exclusively peaceful going
forward, and we will have taken an important step in
preventing the spread of nuclear weapons in the Middle
East.
The Security Council’s unanimous endorsement
of the deal in resolution 2231 (2015) has helped lay
a foundation for the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action’s successful implementation. Over the long
term, the Security Council must play an active role in
supporting the deal and ensuring that resolution 2231
(2015) is fully enforced. As of today, we are still in an
initial phase of the Plan of Action. Its commitments
will not actually go into effect until 90 days after
the resolution’s adoption. At that point, all the Plan
of Action participants are to make the necessary
arrangements and preparations for implementing their
commitments. For Iran that will mean taking a series
of initial nuclear-related steps, such as eliminating
98 per cent of its enriched uranium stockpile, removing
thousands of centrifuges, repurposing the facility at
Fordow, removing a key component of the Arak reactor
and filling it with concrete, and making arrangements
with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
for new transparency measures.
During this interim period, however, the current
United Nations sanctions remain in full effect and all
States must continue to implement them fully. Similarly,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1367
(2006) and the Panel of Experts should continue to carry
out their mandates just as before, including answering
inquiries about the sanctions, analysing information
about compliance and investigating reported sanctions
violations. Countries that detect violations should bring
the information to the Committee for its review and
action. As soon as the IAEA reports to the Security
Council that Iran has completed all of its initial nuclear
steps, resolution 2231 (2015) provides for a significant
change in the United Nations sanctions architecture.
When the report is received, the provisions of the
previous Security Council resolutions will terminate
and the Iran Sanctions Committee and its Panel of
Experts will be dissolved. At the same time, however,
resolution 2231 (2015) puts in place binding Chapter VII
restrictions related to Iran’s nuclear, ballistic-missile
and arms-related transfers, as well as ongoing sanctions
on designated Iranian individuals and entities. Those
measures will be in place for years to come.

15-280263/11

S/PV.7522

Non-proliferation

As long as these binding restrictions are in force,
the Security Council has a vital role to play in ensuring
their implementation. Going forward, the Council must
be prepared to respond swiftly to any reports of illicit
arms smuggling, prohibited ballistic-missile-related
transfers, violations of the assets freeze and travel ban,
or any other activity in violation of the resolution. As
part of that effort, the United States will continue to
work closely with its partners to stop and seize shipments
that are in violation of resolution 2231 (2015), such as
prohibited transfers of weapons and sensitive nuclearand ballistic-missile-related technology.
The Security Council should be proud of the role
it played in helping to bring about the negotiations
that led to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
Over a period of years, the Council’s decisive action,
combined with a sustained focus on the issue, supported
diplomacy and defused tensions. We call on the Council
to continue with the same determination to support the
implementation of the Plan of Action and resolution
2231 (2015).
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to start by thanking Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi
for his briefing and by expressing my appreciation for
his efforts and those of his team to promote the work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006).
China has always believed that sanctions are not the
goal of resolutions, nor a measure of progress in the work
of the Committee. Under the current circumstances,
the Committee should conduct its work in a balanced
and objective manner. It should tackle such sensitive
issues as individual violations of Council resolutions,
both in terms of ensuring the implementation of those
resolutions and in supporting and facilitating the
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action so as to prevent the possibility of any measures
adding to the complications of implementation. In that
spirit, China will take part in the Committee’s various
efforts in a responsible manner, while encouraging it to
play its due role.
In July, the Council adopted resolution 2231
(2015), which endorses the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action agreed on between the P5+1 and Iran on
the Iranian nuclear issue. It is a good plan of action
in that it is conducive to maintaining the international
non-proliferation regime and promoting peace and
stability in the Middle East, thus having a positive
impact on the settlement of other international and
4/11

15/09/2015

regional issues. It is to be hoped that all parties will
work in concert to implement it.
Agreement on the Plan of Action, however, is
only the first step towards a proper settlement of the
Iranian nuclear issue. What is more important is the
follow-up. The Iranian nuclear issue itself is extremely
complicated, with many problems that have to be
addressed in the Plan of Action’s implementation, and
no precedent to draw on. It should be anticipated that
in a decade-long period of implementation, various
questions, difficulties and challenges will arise. It is
China’s hope that all the parties will continue to try
to meet one another halfway while understanding and
accommodating one another. It is essential to stick to
the principles of synchronization and reciprocity in
accommodating everyone’s concerns. The pursuit of
one goal should not come at the expense of another,
lest balance and equity be lost. China is pleased with
the sound cooperative momentum being maintained
between the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) and Iran. We encourage Iran to further
strengthen its communication and cooperation with
the Agency and, in line with the road map signed with
the IAEA, solve all the outstanding issues as soon as
possible.
China has continued to play a constructive
mediating role during the entire negotiation process. In
the future, China will also communicate closely with
all the other parties, while contributing to promoting
the smooth implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action and playing a constructive role in
securing a final and comprehensive settlement of the
Iran nuclear issue.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by thanking the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1367 (2006) and the Panel of Experts
for their continued work in supporting the Council’s
resolutions on Iran. I particularly want to thank
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi for his continued leadership as
Chair of the Committee.
Like others, I welcome the successful conclusion
to the negotiations on Iran’s nuclear programme. The
agreement on 14 July on the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action and the adoption on 20 July of resolution
2231 (2015) constitute significant achievements for
international diplomacy. I pay tribute to the work of
the Council and my E3+3 partners in delivering those
important agreements. I hope we can draw on that unity
in the coming months when tackling other issues that
15-28026

15/09/2015

Non-proliferation

threaten international peace and security, starting with
Syria.
At heart, those important agreements represent a
historic shift in our approach to Iran. We now have an
opportunity to reset our relationship with that country
at a time of great regional instability. I hope all sides
can seize it. Our focus must now be on the swift and
full implementation of the Plan of Action. We hope that
Iran will complete the agreed-on measures promptly,
and give the international community confidence
that Iran’s nuclear programme is, and will remain,
exclusively peaceful.
As the briefing reminds us, during the current
transitional period, the bulk of sanctions will remain
in place and must continue to be enforced in full. That
includes all United Nations sanctions and all obligations
on United Nations States Members arising from
resolutions on the issue. In the implementation period
that follows, we must remember that many binding
restrictions, such as those on conventional weapons and
ballistic missiles, will remain in place during periods
outlined in the Plan of Action. The phased lifting of
sanctions should act as an incentive for Iran to meet
all obligations under the comprehensive agreement.
A Council mechanism will be needed to monitor the
implementation of the restrictions in resolution 2231
(2015), and we look forward to working together in the
Council to set up that mechanism.
We welcome the notifications from Member States
about the delivery of equipment for use at the light
water reactor at the Bushehr nuclear reactor power
plant. We also welcome notifications received by the
Committee about the use of designated funds to pay
contracts entered into before designations came into
force. This report reminds Member States that we must
continue to report any suspected violations of Council
provisions, in accordance with the requirements set out
in the relevant resolutions.
Turning to the work of the Committee, I am grateful
for the continued crucial role it plays in supporting the
enforcement of the relevant Council sanctions measures
on Iran. I also welcome the ongoing work of the Panel
of Experts and the appointment of seven experts to
serve on the Panel. I look forward to working closely
with all members of the Council on the next steps on
this issue. I am grateful for the assistance provided by
the Committee and by the Panel of Experts to Member
States and international organizations, and for their
participation in international meetings and conferences.

S/PV.7522

But we remain disappointed at Iran’s continued failure
to respond to past requests for information on various
incidents of concern. Once again, we urge Iran to
respond to the Committee’s requests.
The United Kingdom remains committed to a
peaceful and lasting solution to the Iran nuclear issue.
As the British Foreign Secretary made clear during his
historic visit to Tehran last month, the comprehensive
nuclear agreement with Iran is in all our interests.
For the international community it is the best way
of ensuring Iran does not develop a nuclear-weapon
capability. For Iran it can reset relationships with the
international community and enable it to trade freely
with the world to the benefit of all Iranians. And
for both Iran and the international community this
agreement is a chance to end years of enmity and to
begin a new era of cooperation on combating the spread
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, on ensuring
regional stability and on issues like counter-narcotics
and migration. Therefore, the United Kingdom will
continue to make every effort to implement the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action to help start this process.
We look to all parties involved to do the same.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to the Spanish Ambassador for his briefing
on the quarterly activities of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).
The Vienna agreement of 14 July between Iran and
the E3+3, and the adoption a week later of resolution
2231 (2015) by the Council were historic steps in
re-establishing confidence with regard to the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme. For
12 years, this question has occupied and worried the
international community. The alarming expansion
of Iran’s nuclear programme for over a decade led
us to establish a significant sanctions regime, while
keeping the door open to dialogue for starting serious
negotiations.
We support the Vienna agreement, as it attained all
the objectives that my country had set for itself during the
negotiations, namely, a 98 per cent reduction in Iranian
uranium stocks, a two-thirds reduction in the number of
centrifuges, a limit to the rate of uranium enrichment
and a ban on enrichment activities in the underground
site of Fordow. All of those things have significantly
lengthened the time necessary for Iran’s swift access
to nuclear weapons. By obliging Iran to modify the
Arak reactor, we blocked access to a plutonium-based

15-280265/11

S/PV.7522

Non-proliferation

nuclear bomb. Finally, by guaranteeing International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) oversight not only over
Iranian nuclear facilities and over the integrity of the
fuel cycle, but also, where appropriate, to non-declared
sites, we are ensuring that the agreement will be strictly
verified in the field.
This agreement is based on a thorough verification
on the ground of the commitments made by Iran. We
have also taken requisite steps to restore sanctions
should it be necessary if there are significant violations.
Everything has been done to deter any violation of the
agreement by the Iranian side.
We shall judge based on evidence: the success of
the agreement depends in large part on Iran, which
will have to implement all measures provided for.
In exchange, the nuclear-related sanctions will be
progressively eased as Iran concretely honours its
commitments and the IAEA is able to verify it.
The Security Council, having endorsed it, is
today the guarantor of the implementation of the
Vienna agreement. We will take part in this exercise
in good faith, of course, but also with necessary
vigilance — and for the entire duration of the agreement.
We will particularly ensure that the timetable set forth
by the Vienna agreement and the resolution will be
scrupulously upheld.
In that respect, I think it would probably be useful to
recall that just until implementation day — that is, until
the IAEA confirms to us that Iran has implemented all
the initial measures of the agreement — all existing
measures of Security Council resolutions remain fully
in force. The Vienna agreement and resolution 2231
(2015) explicitly state this. That means that the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006) and the Panel of Experts supporting it
must continue their activities, including as pertains to
incidents already reported as well as those that may be
reported by Member States.
Furthermore, I hope, as indicated by the
Ambassador of Spain, that the Committee, with the
Panel’s support, can provide Member States with all the
necessary support for the implementation of Security
Council resolutions on Iran.
The Vienna agreement is the best demonstration
of what diplomacy is capable of today. While there
was an accumulation of uncertainties, the agreement
today provides a lasting foundation for a resolution of
the Iranian nuclear issue. It is along those lines that we
6/11

15/09/2015

hope that all the national procedures needed for the
full implementation of the agreement will be swiftly
concluded.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like first to extend my thanks to the Permanent
Representative of Spain for his valuable briefing and
for his leadership in the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). I would also like to thank the Panel of Experts
for their efforts and the preparation of relevant reports.
Jordan welcomed the agreement signed on the
Iranian nuclear file and the diplomatic and political
efforts deployed by all parties to reach that agreement.
Jordan has always supported a diplomatic settlement
of the Iranian nuclear issue, and any steps that could
contribute to establishing regional security, peace and
stability. In that context, we call upon the Committee
to continue to perform its mandated tasks and follow
up the application of the relevant resolutions during
the transitional period until the agreement is applied
and the Security Council receives the International
Atomic Energy Agency report indicating that Iran
has implemented all measures regarding its nuclear
programme, pursuant to resolution 2231 (2015).
We would also like to encourage States that have
not submitted reports on steps taken for the application
of the relevant Security Council resolutions to do so as
soon as possible and to cooperate in a positive manner
with the Panel of Experts, as the success of the work of
the Committee depends upon the submission of those
reports.
In conclusion, we value the role of the Committee
in assisting States and international institutions to
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We also thank the
Permanent Representative of Spain for his briefing and
for his leadership of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). New
Zealand welcomes the mandate of the Committee and
now more than ever urges the Committee and its Panel
of Experts to continue their good work.
New Zealand joins others in acknowledging the
critical juncture we are at with regard to the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action and Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) and in addressing the Iranian
nuclear issue. During this time it is essential for the
credibility of the Council and the Plan of Action that the
integrity of the sanctions regime against Iran remain
15-28026

15/09/2015

Non-proliferation

intact. We acknowledge the fact that the Committee
and the Panel of Experts are in an unusual position, but
the Council position should be clear. We also urge the
Panel of Experts to continue with its programme work,
which is based on the premise that they are conducting
business as usual until such time as Iranian obligations
are met.
We note that, with adoption day approaching, the 1737
Committee, along with a joint commission established
under the Plan of Action, will have a significant role
to play in authorizing exemptions to current sanctions
to facilitate Iran meeting its commitments. However,
we also note that only transactions formally exempted
through the appropriate process will be considered
legitimate.
Member States have a responsibility to adhere to all
sanctions regimes, and Council members in particular
have a responsibility to demonstrate leadership
in that regard. We urge all parties to approach the
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action and of resolution 1737 (2006) with the same
positive intent and good faith that led to the agreement
being reached.
New Zealand is acutely aware of the challenges
faced by Member States in implementing complex
sanctions regimes such as the one designated in
resolution 1737 (2006). Council members and Member
States will all require guidance to manage expectations
and clarify obligations under resolution 2231 (2015) and
the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action. We invite the 1737 Committee to consider how
best to provide such guidance.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join other Security
Council members in expressing appreciation to the
Permanent Representative of Spain as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) for his briefing on the
Committee’s work during the reporting period.
The agreement reached on the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action last July augurs well for international
diplomatic efforts to enhance nuclear security. In the
longer term, its implementation could be among the
possible catalysts needed for sustained peace, security
and stability in the Middle East region. At this juncture,
I reaffirm Malaysia’s full and continuing support of
resolution 2231 (2015). We look forward to the full and
speedy implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action by all the relevant parties.

S/PV.7522

Along with establishing a framework for monitoring
and verification of Iran’s nuclear programme by the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the
Plan of Action sets in motion a change of events and
activities that will, over time, provide the necessary
assurances concerning the peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme. In that regard, we look forward to
the upcoming commencement of the IAEA’s compliance
verification activities with a view to declaring
the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme, thereby paving the way for the full lifting
of all United Nations sanctions against the country. The
prospect of Iran’s rejoining the community of Nations
that possess nuclear and nuclear-related technology
for purely peaceful purposes is something we should
welcome and endeavour to achieve without delay, not
least with a view to alleviate the situation of ordinary
Iranians who have had to bear the brunt and stigma of
sanctions that have been imposed on their country.
We regard the role of the 1737 Committee and
the work of its Panel of Experts, Malyasia shares the
view that both the Committee and the Panel of Experts
continue to perform an important role in investigating,
monitoring and reporting to the Council on compliance
and allegations of possible violations of the United
Nations sanctions regime.
During the present interim period before the full
application of the provisions of the Plan of Action, we
believe that the Committee and the Panel of Experts
continue to share a critical bridging function. In
addition to its ongoing activities, the Panel of Experts
might also consider undertaking a more vigorous
outreach in order to explain and clarify provisions of
the Plan of Action to all Member States and relevant
partners and stakeholders. We commend and support
the Panel of Experts for taking initial steps to that end,
as indicated in its recently adopted annual programme
of work. Mindful of the significant wealth of knowledge
and expertise accumulated by the Committee and by
the Panel of Experts over the years, we also believe that
there is potential and scope for continued cooperation
between the Panel of Experts, the IAEA and
relevant partners and stakeholders with regard to the
implementation of Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
The agreement on the Plan of Action is a significant
landmark, as it seeks to address concerns about nuclear
proliferation. It also serves to reaffirm the principle
of the peaceful uses of nuclear technology, which
is in line with the regime set up by the Treaty on the

15-280267/11

S/PV.7522

Non-proliferation

Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). On that
note, Malaysia reaffirms the centrality of the NPT
regime in stemming the proliferation of nuclear weapons
and related technologies. We continue to strongly
believe that the pursuit of nuclear non-proliferation
must be matched by a similar pursuit of general and
complete nuclear disarmament. We note that the efforts
towards nuclear disarmament by the nuclear weapons
States have stalled somewhat in recent years, and we
call upon them to reverse that trend. While achieving
a nuclear-weapon-free world may not be possible in
our lifetime, it is our collective responsibility to strive
towards removing the threat of nuclear holocaust from
succeeding generations to the furthest possible extent.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ambassador
Román Oyarzun Marchesi for his briefing. We would
like to express our appreciation for his diligence and
commitment in fulfilling the tasks of the Committee
under his responsibility.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela once again
expresses its satisfaction over the adoption of the
landmark agreement reached between the P5 + 1 and the
Islamic Republic of Iran on 14 July. This achievement
is a triumph of diplomacy and dialogue over bellicose
pronouncements that promote confrontation and
mistrust. This agreement shows that, when there is
political will and commitment among parties, solutions
can be reached that promote international peace and
security in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.
In view of recent developments concerning the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, Venezuela welcomes the
progress shown in implementing the Plan as adopted on
20 July in resolution 2231 (2015). We reiterate our full
support for the implementation of this historic effort,
which, in the short-term will result in the definitive
lifting of the sanctions regime applied to that brotherly
country, as well as other illegal, unilateral and coercive
measures that were imposed on other States owing to
their cooperation with the Islamic Republic of Iran.
In that regard, we call on all Member States to uphold
and comply with the provisions set out in this broad
agreement.
We are pleased that dialogue and cooperation have
been maintained between Iran and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), as underscored in
its report of 27 August. We encourage the parties to
intensify their efforts in order to resolve all outstanding
8/11

15/09/2015

issues between the IAEA and Iran by the end of 2015.
We acknowledge the important role played by the
Agency in resolving all issues related to the Iranian
nuclear programme. We hope that cooperation will
continue to be strengthened in order to move ahead
with the measures relating to the implementation of the
Joint Comprehensive Action Plan. The implementation
of the Plan of Action should ensure the Islamic
Republic of Iran its sovereign right to the use of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes with a view to promote its
technological and energy independence.
We note with satisfaction how over the past
several months the adoption of the Plan of Action
has contributed positively to the start of a new phase
of diplomatic relations based on mutual respect and
dialogue between Iran and several countries in the
international community. The Islamic Republic of
Iran shares borders with major countries in Asia and
the Middle East, which is why cooperation between
Iran and other countries in the region is of extreme
importance in facing common threats to peace and
stability in the region. Iran’s contributions should
not be underestimated. Any decision of importance
regarding this area should be based on cooperation,
so that our fellow country can play proactive role in
finding solutions that would contribute to the stability
and security of this unstable region, while dealing
jointly with threats that stem from terrorism and violent
extremism, among other challenges.
Furthermore, the strengthening of peace and
stability in the Middle East requires the establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region, as agreed
upon in 1995 at the Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, which also indefinitely extended the Treaty.
The nuclear agreement between the P5+1 and Iran
is a positive sign that encourages us to redouble our
efforts in order to achieve this important goal as soon
as possible, in order to prevent the proliferation of
nuclear weapons and other categories of weapons of
mass destruction in the region.
Similarly, this new phase in the relationship between
Iran and some States members of the international
community paves the way for establishing alliances of
cooperation in different areas. The lifting of sanctions
against Iran will make it possible to re-establish
economic, commercial and financial links with
countries that want to do business with this important
trade partner, which will lead to the achievement of

15-28026

15/09/2015

Non-proliferation

greater well-being and progress for the Iranian people
and the region.
With regard to the work of the Committee, we
emphasize that, in this crucial phase, it is important that
the Committee be able to contribute in a constructive
way to addressing the new challenges and goals that
are emerging in the face of this new dynamic, taking
into account the current political situation. We would
appreciate it if, in this new phase, the Committee
would reorient its tasks mainly towards providing
assistance to States and international institutions for
the implementation of the relevant measures adopted
in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. Similarly, it
would also be a good idea for the Committee to provide
support and advice to Member States that are looking
for technical guidance regarding new cooperation
initiatives on Iran on issues that fall under the mandate
of the Committee.
Mr. Adejola (Nigeria): I thank Ambassador
Oyarzun Marchesi for his briefing and we commend
the Panel of Experts for their work.
As this is the first meeting of the Council on the
subject after the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015), we
would like to reiterate our support for the agreement
between Iran and the P5+1 on the Iranian nuclear
programme. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,
endorsed by resolution 2231 (2015), presents a clear
road map for the implementation of the agreement. It
is our hope that it will lead to an early resolution of all
outstanding issues in Iran’s nuclear programme.
We support dialogue, diplomacy and the resolution
of crises through such agreements. In view of this,
we urge the parties to implement the agreement
transparently, in good faith and for the progress of
the people of Iran. We further welcome the continued
cooperation of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) with members. This is vital to
upholding and ensuring the integrity of the sanctions
regime.
Finally, let me commend the Chair of the
Committee for his astute leadership and assure him of
our continued support.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): Allow me to thank
Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi of Spain for
his report to the Council and to commend him for a
successful stewardship of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).

S/PV.7522

On 20 July, the Security Council unanimously
adopted the landmark resolution 2231 (2015) endorsing
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) agreed
by the E3+3 and Iran. We strongly believe that a deal,
which is based on Iran’s implementation of changes to
its nuclear programme in return for the phased lifting
of sanctions, has offered a real, durable and verifiable
path to resolving the decade-long dispute.
At this crucial moment, Lithuania reiterates that all
Security Council sanctions remain in effect and must
be robustly implemented by all Member States and,
in particular, by the members of the Council. In this
connection, we welcome the Committee’s readiness
to give guidance to Member States and international
organizations on the implementation of all relevant
Security Council resolutions.
We also reiterate our concern that Iran, while
taking steps in complying with the JCPOA, continues
to disregard certain provisions of the Security Council
resolutions, in particular those related to its ballistic
missile programme and transfers of conventional
weapons and related materiel. Iran should without
delay extend cooperation with the 1737 Committee,
inter alia, by providing information requested by the
Panel of Experts in conduct of its investigations.
Lithuania welcomes the reappointment of the
experts to the Panel and strongly supports their
ambitious programme of work submitted to the
Committee on 28 August. We encourage the Panel to
continue its investigations, particularly on new reported
episodes of non-compliance.
Iran’s continuous and full cooperation with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is a vital
element in restoring much needed trust between Iran
and the international community. We note the report
by which the IAEA confirmed that Iran has taken steps
of nuclear-related actions in accordance with resolution
2231 (2015). We call on Iran to provide the international
community with verifiable guarantees of the exclusively
peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.
In conclusion, Lithuania believes that, if
implemented fully and in good faith, the JCPOA
will become a fundamental element in building trust
between Iran and the international community. It will
open the door to a steady improvement of relations and
greatly contribute, in a positive manner, to regional and
international peace and stability.

15-280269/11

S/PV.7522

Non-proliferation

Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank the Permanent
Representative of Spain, Ambassador Román Oyarzun
Marchesi, for the presentation of the revised 90day report of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). We commend and support the
work of the Committee and the Panel of Experts on an
issue to which the international community attributes
fundamental importance.
We are pleased about the adoption by the Security
Council, on 20 July, of resolution 2231 (2015) endorsing
the recently concluded Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action, which was the first success of diplomacy in
the Middle East region in decades and is a landmark
towards a comprehensive and long-lasting solution to
the Iranian nuclear issue. Now, during the transitional
period, we urge the Government of Iran to undertake
specific actions, stipulated in the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, and comply with its provisions in order
to expedite the easing of the sanctions imposed by the
Security Council.
Finally, we remain committed to the measures
imposed by the relevant Security Council resolutions
on these issues towards implementation, taking into
account the exemptions provided for in resolution 2231
(2015).
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi
for presenting the quarterly report of the work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) and for his excellent guidance
of its work.
Chile welcomes the agreement reached on 14 July
between Iran and the E3+3 group. Its implementation
will contribute to resolving the discrepancies with
regard to the scope and the future of Iran’s nuclear
programme. We believe that the implementation and
verification of the agreement will preserve the integrity
of the multilateral non-proliferation regime and will
strengthen regional and global security.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons is the cornerstone of the nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation regime and the implementation of
its three pillars — disarmament, non-proliferation and
the right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy — should
be balanced. Therefore, in this discussion, we should
not forget the need to make progress on the obligations
under article VI of the Treaty pertaining to nuclear
disarmament.

10/11

15/09/2015

The establishment of internationally recognized
and verifiable nuclear weapon-free zones is a political
and legal commitment that brings us closer to the
universal ideal of a society free of nuclear weapons. To
that end, we reiterate the importance of establishing a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East and it is
essential for the international community to contribute
to it. It is imperative that all actors implement this
agreement, as set out in resolution 2231 (2015), which
requires specific actions, but also responsibility and
moderation by the actors in their statements.
In conclusion, we reiterate that Chile, as a member
of the Council and as a member of the Board of
Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
will provide all necessary support for the effective and
smooth implementation of the agreement.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to thank the Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006),
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi, for presenting the
quarterly report on the Committee’s activities from
23 June to 14 September.
With respect to the settlement of the Iranian nuclear
issue, Chad notes the statement of support issued by
the European Union Foreign Affairs Council on 20 July
for the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, adopted
in Vienna on 14 July, and the adoption of resolution
2231 (2015). We also note the vote that took place in
the United States Senate on 10 September, endorsing
the Plan. We take note of the statement made by the
President of the United States that the vote represented
a victory for diplomacy. Moreover, Chad notes that
the Iranian Parliament has established a 15-member
committee to review the agreement and take a position
on it by the end of the month. Chad encourages all
parties to fully implement the Plan once all national
procedures have concluded.
We reiterate that, pursuant to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Iran has the
right, in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of article
IV of the Treaty, to develop research, production and
use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
The agreement on the Iran nuclear issue
demonstrates that, when the international community
is determined to resolve a crisis, it can do so. Chad
reiterates its appreciation for the diplomatic efforts of
Germany, the five permanent members of the Security
Council, the High Representative of the European

15-28026

15/09/2015

Non-proliferation

Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
On the basis of the lessons learned in this matter,
Chad encourages all States, including the permanent
members of the Security Council, to urgently resolve
the issue of non-proliferation in the rest of the Middle
East. In that respect, it would be helpful to request the
States of the region that are rushing headlong into a
race for weapons of mass destruction or that already
possess such weapons, to cease such activities and to
establish a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in
the Middle East.
I turn now to the activities of the 1737 Committee.
Chad encourages Committee members to continue
to assist States and international organizations in the
implementation of measures called for by the Security
Council. We welcome the appointment by the SecretaryGeneral on 30 June of seven experts with a mandate
through July 2016, pursuant to resolution 2224 (2015).
We note the programme of work submitted by the Panel
of Experts on 28 August.
In conclusion, in the light of rising instability in
the region, which is exacerbated by the terrorist threat,
we underline the need for concerted efforts, including
on the part of Iran, to settle the various regional crises.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
We thank the Permanent Representative of Spain
for his report on the work undertaken by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), which
he chairs, during the most recent reporting period.
The Russian Federation welcomes the successful
conclusion of talks to resolve the situation concerning
the Iran nuclear programme. We are pleased by the
adoption of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) and hope that, as set forth in and endorsed
in resolution 2231 (2015), it will enter into force in the
coming weeks. We believe that the Plan not only allows
for a satisfactory resolution of the Iran nuclear issue, in

S/PV.7522

full respect for Iran’s right to engage in peaceful nuclear
activities, but also serves to strengthen confidence in
the Middle East, ensuring the lifting of obstacles to
normal regional economic and political cooperation,
with the full participation of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Active preparations are now under way to begin the
practical implementation of the JCPOA on a number
of different fronts. On 25 August, an extraordinary
meeting of the Board of Governors of the International
Atomic Energy Agency was held, at which the Agency
was mandated to undertake verification activities in the
framework of the JCPOA. This important step forward
will allow the Agency to reach agreement with Tehran
on specific parametres for future verification activities.
We believe that there is a need for the Board of
Governors to adopt, in due course, a separate resolution
to ensure Agency participation in the implementation
of the JCPOA on a sound footing and to consolidate the
continuity of the process.
We are carefully following the processes of
consideration of the agreement by the legislative bodies
of the United States and Iran. We hope that this will
all lead to a successful and smooth conclusion. With
Iran, we too are taking preparatory measures on certain
aspects of the JCPOA, which provides for bilateral
Russian-Iranian projects, including the establishment
of stable isotope production in Fordo and the shipment
of low enriched uranium from Iran.
Pursuant to the provisions of the JCPOA, 18 October
is the so-called date of adoption, after which Tehran
will begin taking practical measures to bring its nuclear
programme into conformity with its obligations under
the JCPOA. The United States and the European Union
members of the P5+1 will begin to prepare the legal
framework for the lifting of their unilateral sanctions
on Iran. We have no reason to doubt that all sides will
honour their obligations in good faith.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

15-2802611/11
