S/2020/139

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 February 2020
Original: English

Review of alternative modalities for the border crossing
of Ya‘rubiyah
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present review is submitted pursuant to paragraph 6 of Security Council
resolution 2504 (2020), in which the Council requested the Secretary-General to
report to the Council by the end of February 2020 on the feasibility of using
alternative modalities for the border crossing of Ya‘rubiyah in order to ensure that
humanitarian assistance, including medical and surgical supplies, reaches people in
need throughout the Syrian Arab Republic through the most direct routes and in
accordance with the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence.
2.
The information contained herein is based on available data from the United
Nations system and obtained from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and
other relevant sources, including field visits and a desk review, up to 19 February
2020.

II. Humanitarian situation in the north-east of the Syrian
Arab Republic
3.
Civilians in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic are among the country’s
most vulnerable. An estimated 1.9 million people are assessed to be in need of
humanitarian assistance in that region, the vast majority of whom – 1.34 million
people – are in areas not under government control. Some 70,000 people r emain
displaced in the north-east as a result of the launch of Operation Peace Spring on
9 October 2019. Prior to 9 October, the north-east already hosted approximately
710,000 displaced civilians. Children account for 42 per cent of the 710,000 displaced
persons, most of whom are hosted by local communities. More than 480,000 of those
displaced in the north-east are in areas not under government control, including more
than 66,000 people who reside in Hawl camp, almost 44,000 of whom are children.
More than 14,000 displaced persons are accommodated in collective shelters, almost
all of which were previously schools.
4.
Needs in the north-east are extremely high. As at the end of 2019, only 2 out of
16 public hospitals and 4 out of 279 primary health centres across the north-east were
functioning at full capacity. The challenges to health care, combined with major gaps

20-02806 (E)

260220

*2002806*

S/2020/139

in the availability of safe water, have resulted in several outbreaks of infectious diseases
in the past years across the north-east. Significant contamination from explosive
weapons continues to limit movement, making access to services even more difficult.
5.
Local actors report that, at current consumption rates, medical stocks are
expected to run out in the coming months. Reproductive health kit stocks could be
depleted by March. This means that, unless alternative modalities are found, items
needed to undertake medical procedures related to maternal health, such as delivery
by caesarian section, will not be available. By May, there is likely to be broader gaps
in basic medicines in medical facilities previously supplied by the United Nations
cross-border operation, should an alternative to Ya‘rubiyah not be found. The impact
of such gaps would be significant, limiting the ability of medical providers to deliver
a broad range of critical medical treatments to people in need. As detailed below,
delivery capacity is also a major challenge.
6.
On 15 October 2019, in a letter to United Nations entities in the Syrian Arab
Republic, the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic requested “the United Nations
humanitarian team to take immediate action by sending convoys of relief items, such
as food and medical items”, to the north-east of the country. On 21 October, in a letter
to the Secretary-General, the Government pledged to do everything possible to
facilitate the delivery of such assistance, in coordination with the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent and government agencies.
Humanitarian access
7.
Prior to the adoption of resolution 2504 (2020), the United Nations and
international and national non-governmental organizations (NGOs) had access from
both within the Syrian Arab Republic and across the border to populations in need in
the country. The choice between these two modalities depended on changes in control,
access routes for the provision of supplies, security and the consent of local
authorities. The United Nations no longer conducts cross-border operations into the
north-east following the adoption of resolution 2504 (2020).
8.
The humanitarian country team for the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic
is based in Qamishli. It brings together United Nations entities and one
non-governmental humanitarian partner. A total of 9 international and 20 Syrian
NGOs registered with the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic are present in the
north-east. The Syrian Arab Red Crescent is present in all three governorates in the
north-east. In addition, more than 30 international NGOs and numerous Syrian NGOs
conduct cross-border operations into the north-east. Despite initial disruptions to
programmes after 9 October, NGO activities continue. Details about the United
Nations and NGO humanitarian presence in the north-east can be found in table 1.
9.
United Nations entities are in the process of increasing their presence in the
north-east of the country. A total of 159 United Nations staff are based in Qamishli
and 25 staff have deployed on surge missions of up to two months, since October
2019. On 22 January 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) requested approval
from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to increase its full -time staff
presence in Qamishli. The United Nations is still awaiting a response from the
Government.
10. The United Nations and non-governmental organizations registered with the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic have regular and sustained humanitarian
access in most parts of Raqqah and Hasakah Governorates. They report similar levels
of access in Dayr al-Zawr Governorate, west of the Euphrates River. In December
2019 and January 2020, the United Nations completed 324 missions in the north -east
from within the country, with the consent of the Government. Manbij and Ayn al -Arab
remain difficult to access owing to the lack of agreement between parties in control
2/10

20-02806

S/2020/139

and insecurity. Areas east of the Euphrates in Dayr al-Zawr Governorate remain
difficult to access for some humanitarian organizations, mainly owing to explosive
ordnance contamination and insecurity.
11. Non-governmental organizations conducting cross-border operations have
mostly regular and sustained access in Raqqah and Hasakah Governorates. Currently,
international NGO staff have limited presence in western areas, including Manbij and
Ayn al-Arab districts. Operations continue in Dayr al-Zawr Governorate subject to
the security constraints mentioned in paragraph 10 above.
Table 1
Total number of humanitarian workers operating in the north-east of the
Syrian Arab Republic, as at 31 December 2019
Response modality

Within the Syrian Arab Republic

From across the border

International United Nations staff

17a

0

National United Nations staff

142

0

International NGO staff

183

242

National NGO staff

4 558

6 039

Syrian Arab Red Crescent staff/volunteers

1 350

0

6 250

6 281

Total
a

This total does not reflect the staff deployed on surge missions to Qamishli from other duty
stations in the Syrian Arab Republic to support ongoing operations.

Humanitarian response
12. The humanitarian response in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic
involves providing assistance to hundreds of thousands of people in need each month.
Organizations within the country deliver assistance and provide support for basic
services, in particular in camps for internally displaced persons, host communities
and major cities. NGOs conducting cross-border operations provide basic services to
much of the population, including health services, where government services (or
those of the local authorities) are unavailable or inadequate. Until 10 January 2020,
the United Nations complemented these activities with the delivery of cross -border
assistance, mainly health services and medical items that could not be consistently
delivered from within the Syrian Arab Republic or by NGO cross-border operations.
13. Humanitarian organizations scaled up activities in the north-east of the Syrian
Arab Republic in 2019. Between July and November, the response from within the
country increased by 36 per cent compared with the preceding six months, to reach
an average of 990,000 people per month. In November, the latest period for which
there is data, the United Nations reached 729,000 people with food aid and provided
life-saving water, sanitation and hygiene support to 200,000 people.
14. Since October 2019, NGOs conducting cross-border operations have also scaled
up emergency activities. This is in response to the significant number of internally
displaced people in the north-east of the country. These NGOs have regular access to
displaced families located in collective centres, informal settlements and newly
established sites, as well as those living with host communities in both urban and
rural locations. Overall, the NGOs ensure sustained service provision in the northeast, including education and other essential services, and provide food and non -food
items to people in need.
15. In the health sector, in 2019, WHO provided more than 2.54 million medical
treatments in the north-east, as well as significant amounts of medical equipment, in
20-02806

3/10

S/2020/139

total weighing some 451 tons. This medical assistance was delivered by air from
Damascus to Qamishli. Many health facilities not in government-controlled areas
could not be reached with supplies sent by air from Damascus to Qamishli.
16. There were no United Nations road convoys carrying medical items from
Damascus to the north-east in 2019. One road convoy carrying medical supplies has
been completed so far in 2020 (see para. 42).
17. WHO also shipped 1.43 million medical treatments and other medical equipment,
weighing some 210 tons, through the Ya‘rubiyah border crossing in 2019. Trauma kits,
inter-agency emergency health kits and other essential medicines and medical supplies
comprised the majority of the cross-border consignments. The United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA) dispatched 200 emergency reproductive health kits in two
convoys through Ya‘rubiyah in 2019. These kits are designed to facilitate the provision
of priority reproductive health services to displaced people without medical facilities
or to places where medical facilities are disrupted during a crisis.
18. The health items delivered from within the Syrian Arab Republic went to a range
of actors providing humanitarian support in the north-east, including the Ministry of
Health, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, NGOs and directly to local health facilities.
Through these actors, 77 health facilities received some form of support from within
the country in 2019, including 5 hospitals, 22 primary health fa cilities and health
posts and 34 mobile units.
19. Service provision by NGOs conducting cross-border operations is focused
heavily on the operation of medical facilities. In December 2019, those NGOs were
supporting 103 medical facilities across the north-east, including 13 hospitals, 46
primary health facilities and health posts and 35 mobile units, as well as facilities
providing specialized services for leishmaniasis, physical rehabilitation and dialysis.
All of these medical facilities received a significant amount of their medical supplies
from the United Nations through Ya‘rubiyah. At least 50 of the medical facilities,
located in 12 subdistricts in the north-east, were supported solely with medicines
provided from across the border.

III. Ya‘rubiyah border crossing
20. United Nations operations through the Ya‘rubiyah border crossing began in
early 2018, following improved security and changes in control in the area. Between
March 2018 and January 2020, 19 consignments crossed through Ya‘rubiyah,
comprising a total of 109 trucks. All assistance delivered was trans-shipped directly
from United Nations trucks onto trucks of partner organizations at the border for
delivery to their places of operation. As detailed in table 2, four United Nations
entities used the border crossing.
Table 2
Total number of trucks sent through the Ya‘rubiyah border crossing, per year,
per entity
Year

2018

2019

Total

World Health Organization

37

34

71

United Nations Population Fund

15

3

18

United Nations Children’s Fund

13

3

16

International Organization for Migration

4

0

4

69

40

109

Total

4/10

20-02806

S/2020/139

21. Aid delivered through the Ya‘rubiyah border crossing largely consisted of
medical items, as described in paragraph 17 above.

IV. Alternative cross-border modalities
Border crossings into areas not under the control of the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic
22. The relevant border crossings between Iraq, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Turkey are shown in the annex to the present report.
Border crossings from Iraq
23. There are two border crossings from Iraq into non-government controlled areas
in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic within 45 km of Ya‘rubiyah. The Walid
border crossing lies 25 km north of Ya‘rubiyah, and the Fish Khabur border crossing
lies 20 km north of Walid. While the Government of Iraq controls the Iraqi side of
Ya‘rubiyah, the Kurdistan Regional Government controls the Iraqi side of both the
Walid and Fish Khabur border crossings. Both are less practical options than
Ya‘rubiyah for the delivery of United Nations humanitarian assistance, as Walid is
only an informal border crossing and Fish Khabur operates over pontoon bridges.
Given their geographic proximity to Ya‘rubiyah and given their respective limited
capacities, they are not presented in the context of the present report as alternatives
to the Ya‘rubiyah border crossing.
Border crossings from Turkey
24. Tall Abyad is one of the six border crossings between Turkey and territory
controlled by non-State armed groups in the Syrian Arab Republic. From a logistical
perspective, it is a large, fully functional border crossing, which restarted operations
on 15 October 2019, following Operation Peace Spring. It has a 40,000 -m2 customs
area, space to accommodate the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian
Arab Republic, can accommodate up to 250 trucks crossing per day and is connected
on both sides of the border by paved roads that can support increased traffic. Within
the Syrian Arab Republic, the M4 highway, which runs from east to west through the
north-east, is 30 km south of the border crossing.
25. Tall Abyad has been proposed as a border crossing that could support needs
across the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic. The Government of Turkey has
provided assurances, based solely on United Nations independent assessments of
need, that aid could cross from Turkey into all areas of the north-east. There has been
some humanitarian access into the area that changed control during Operation Peace
Spring, although such access has been limited.
26. For Tall Abyad to be a viable alternative to Ya‘rubiyah, aid would need to be
moved across conflict lines to all parts of the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic,
requiring all relevant parties to allow safe, sustained and unimpeded access. In
addition, NGOs currently supporting medical operations in the north-east would need
to be authorized to work from Turkey. They would need to be able to enter Turkey for
the trans-shipment and delivery of humanitarian aid.
27. The issues noted above regarding Tall Abyad apply to the other five border
crossings from Turkey into areas under the control of non-State armed groups in the
Syrian Arab Republic. In addition, using these crossings as alternatives to Ya‘rubiyah
is likely to be more problematic, owing to security challenges and the need to cross
multiple lines of control. Furthermore, none of these options have logistical
capabilities comparable to Tall Abyad.
20-02806

5/10

S/2020/139

28. The three border crossings that link directly to areas under the control of local
authorities, Ayn al-Arab, Derbassiyeh and Diwar, would face fewer access challenges
compared with crossings into areas under the control of non-State armed groups, as
no conflict lines would need to be crossed. These border crossings, however, are less
well developed to provide the necessary logistical support. Furthermore, security
considerations at these border crossings pose additional challenges. Hu manitarian
organizations would need to require the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and
other military forces active in the area to facilitate safe passage before aid deliveries
could proceed.
29. Another option would be to use the border crossing currently authorized under
resolution 2504 (2020) at Bab al-Salam. It is fully functioning, and the United Nations
Monitoring Mechanism could be scaled up to support additional deliveries. However,
access to the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic from areas further west of Tall
Abyad is particularly difficult. Insecurity prevents reliable access along the
M4 highway. Multiple lines of control need to be crossed to move through the Manbij
area since 9 October. As with Tall Abyad, some NGOs would require authorization
from the Government of Turkey to use the border crossing.
Border crossings into areas controlled by the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic
30. Another option would be to deliver aid through border crossings controlled by
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and the Governments of neighbouring
countries.
31. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has identified Albu Kamal as a
viable border crossing to import humanitarian aid into the north-east of the country.
On 29 January 2020, in response to the request by WHO to import medical materials
through Ya‘rubiyah, the Government informed WHO that a consignment could be
delivered through the Albu Kamal border crossing. On 16 February, WHO informed
the Government that, based on their security and logistics assessment, conditions
were not conducive for the consignment to be transported through Albu Kamal. WHO
requested the Government to identify an alternative border crossing.
32. Any delivery through the Abu Kamal border crossing would require multiple
security guarantees from many parties across areas of control, which, experience
suggests, would be difficult to secure. Travel from Baghdad can take up to eight hours,
which would require staff to stay overnight in insecure and unsafe areas. Different
security interlocutors and non-State armed groups, including groups designated by
the Security Council as terrorist organizations, operate in Anbar Province, making
safe humanitarian access very challenging. On the Syrian side of the border, security
concerns limit the United Nations humanitarian access along the Euphrates valley and
beyond.
33. A further alternative would be to use the border crossing between Qamishli and
Nusaybin. In 2014, this border crossing provided an important pipeline for
humanitarian aid into the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic. In late 2014,
however, it was closed, and it has yet to be reopened. If the border reopens and aid
deliveries resume, humanitarian organizations would need to secure the necessary
approvals and guarantees of safe passage to transport materials across conflict lines
from Qamishli to areas in the north-east of the country previously supported by United
Nations cross-border operations.
General considerations
34. Were the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to consent to their use by the
United Nations, none of the above options would require Security Council
6/10

20-02806

S/2020/139

authorization. The consent of the Government of Turkey or the Government of Iraq
would also be required, depending on the border crossing.

V. Alternative cross-line modalities
35. Aid for nearly 1 million people is delivered from within the Syrian Arab
Republic to the north-east of the country every month. Except for medical items, the
cross-line operation has improved since the Ministry of Foreign Affairs approved the
use of land deliveries in July 2017. However, a number of significant restrictions
remain.
36. The cross-line delivery of medical items is particularly restricted. As noted in
paragraph 16 above, no road convoys carrying medical items went from Damascus to
the north-east in 2019. Trucks moving to the north-east often face bureaucratic
impediments as they exit government-controlled areas. Delays have become further
extended since November, with reports from agencies that trucks have been held at
checkpoints for up to five days. There are also impediments within the north-east
imposed by the local authorities, including on United Nations entities and the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent. Once all the necessary approvals have been received, convoys
may still be subject to delay or cancellation because of security conditions on the
ground.
37. In March and October 2019, WHO requested the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to use land routes to deliver medical supplies to the north-east of the Syrian
Arab Republic. Neither request was approved. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs
informed the United Nations in writing in March 2019 that health items sent to
Hasakah must be transported “by air freight exclusively”. Although the Ministry of
Health gave WHO verbal approval for land deliveries on 6 January 2020, formal
approval has not been provided in writing. Such approval would be required if the
United Nations is to increase the delivery of health materials to the north-east in a
sustainable manner because air freight is significantly more expensive than road
convoys.
Cross-line delivery of aid into the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic
38. The process to gain approval for deliveries of medical supplies by land or air to
the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic requires agencies to provide a request to
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic usually
takes three to four months to respond.
39. On 29 January 2020, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs requested that United
Nations entities provide a list of all humanitarian supplies (medical and non-medical)
pending approval for importation into the Syrian Arab Republic so that they could be
expedited. WHO reports that, since 3 February, 11 of 36 pending requests for
importation have been approved.
40. Once the medical supplies are imported into the Syrian Arab Republic, approval
is required for each convoy and for each agency that is part of the convoy. Each request
requires a load list that identifies the quantity of assistance due to be dispatched to
each destination. The Ministry of Health may then issue a signed facilitation letter for
each agency. This approval process usually takes one week. Once the facilitation letters
are received, additional approvals from the Ministry of Health and the security services
must be granted at the warehouses before the supplies can be loaded. Further
clearances are then required at the airport for shipments sent by air.
41. United Nations entities report that the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
sometimes is slow to respond or does not respond at all to approval requests. Securit y
20-02806

7/10

S/2020/139

officials at warehouses sometimes do not accept ministerial approvals. These refusals
can cause shipments to be cancelled or delayed. UNFPA reported a case in July 2019,
when security officials at the warehouse did not approve an air shipment, which led
to the delivery being cancelled.
42. Following the removal of authorization for the use of Ya‘rubiyah by the United
Nations and its implementing partners, WHO, on 21 and 22 January 2020, and
UNFPA, on 28 January, submitted requests for the delivery by land of medical items
to the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic. A response to the WHO requests is still
pending. On 3 February, the Ministry of Local Administration approved the UNFPA
request to transport 54 reproductive health kits and 100,000 doses of an oral
contraceptive. On 13 February, UNFPA dispatched these items by road from
Damascus to Qamishli. On 18 February, the materials arrived to UNFPA warehouses
in Qamishli. (As noted in paragraph 18 above, Qamishli has supplied a limited range
of medical facilities in the north-east. As noted in paragraph 19, many have not been
supplied from there.)

VI. Observations
43. In 2019, the United Nations and its humanitarian partners reached a record
number of people in need in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic, with supplies
delivered through Ya‘rubiyah and from within the country. Nonetheless, significant
gaps remained in helping the estimated 1.3 million people in need in the area. If viable
alternatives to Ya‘rubiyah are not found for medical items, the gap between the
humanitarian response and humanitarian needs will increase further. As I noted in my
report of December 2019 on the Syrian Arab Republic (S/2019/949), any reduction in
humanitarian access would cause further suffering. This remains true today.
44. New options are needed to fill these significant gaps and to continue the
humanitarian assistance previously delivered through Ya‘rubiyah. Under current
conditions, a combination of more cross-border and cross-line access is required to
sustain recent levels of, and preferably increase, humanitarian assistance in the north east of the country.
45. Under international humanitarian law, all parties to the conflict must allow and
facilitate rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief for civilians in need.
The Security Council has recalled that depriving civilians of objects indispensable to
their survival, including wilfully impeding relief supply and access, can constitute a
violation of international humanitarian law.
46. In order for all humanitarian needs to be met, the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic would need to facilitate greater cross-line access to the north-east of
the country, in particular for medical assistance. The Government would also need to
consent to the delivery of humanitarian assistance through cross-border operations
into the north-east, at safe and logistically feasible border crossings, using the most
direct routes.
47. In order for cross-line modalities to work effectively, the following is required:
(a) timely approval by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to import all
necessary medical supplies into the country; (b) a simplified, expedited and reliable
approval process by the Government to enable regular and predictable deliveries from
Damascus into the north-east by land; (c) approval by the Government to access all
areas and facilities within the north-east to ensure that assistance reaches all people
in need, impartially and without discrimination; and (d) facilitation of deliveries by
local authorities in the north-east to all locations without delay.

8/10

20-02806

S/2020/139

48. Should the steps outlined in paragraph 47 above not be taken, and in the absence
of consent from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic or neighbouring
countries to use border crossings into the north-east of the country, the Security
Council would need to authorize the United Nations and its implementing partners to
use additional crossings. Several options are available; however, from a security and
logistical perspective, in the current context, the Tall Abyad border crossing would
constitute the most feasible alternative to the Ya‘rubiyah border crossing.
49. The humanitarian imperative in the Syrian Arab Republic remains the same as
it was when the Security Council adopted resolution 2165 (2014), namely the need to
ensure that humanitarian assistance, including medical and surgical supplies, reaches
people in need throughout the Syrian Arab Republic through the most direct routes
and the need for all border crossings to be used efficiently for United Nations
humanitarian operations. Since the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014), humanitarian
needs have increased even further. All parties to the conflict and the Council itself
must live up to their responsibilities to ensure that the people in the north -east of the
country receive the assistance they so desperately need.

20-02806

9/10

S/2020/139

Annex
Map of border crossings in the north-east of the Syrian
Arab Republic

10/10

20-02806
