S/2006/338

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 May 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 26 May 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to my letter of 24 May 2006 (S/2006/319) conveying
a letter from the Government of Timor-Leste, which drew my attention to the
deteriorating internal security conditions in Timor-Leste and informed me that the
Governments of Australia, New Zealand, Portugal and Malaysia had been requested
to send defence and security forces to Timor-Leste as a matter of urgency.
Regrettably, the situation has continued to worsen, with reports indicating the
deaths on 25 May of nine members of the Timorese police (PNTL) and injuries to
almost 30 others, including two United Nations police advisers, as a result of
gunshot wounds following an attack on PNTL headquarters. There have also been
reports of gunshots heard during the day throughout the capital, Dili, and in the
surrounding hills.
I contacted the President of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, Kay Rala
Xanana Gusmão, and Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri by telephone yesterday. I
expressed my deep concern over recent events and signalled the readiness of the
United Nations to assist in facilitating negotiations to resolve the current crisis. In
view of the deteriorating security situation and the complex political situation, with
the concurrence of the Timorese leaders, I have requested Ian Martin, who served
during 1999 as my Special Representative and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in East Timor, to travel to Timor-Leste to assess the situation,
working closely with the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste and the Timorese
leadership.
I have also spoken with the Prime Ministers of Australia, Malaysia, New
Zealand and Portugal, who conveyed their commitment to send defence and security
forces to Timor-Leste in response to the Government’s request. I welcomed this
action on their part.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-36494 (E) 260506

*0636494*
