S/2015/918

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 November 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Central African Republic
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2217
(2015), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) to 30 April 2016 and requested me to report to the Council every
four months. The report provides an update on the situation in the Central African
Republic since my last report of 29 July 2015 (S/2015/576) and on the implementation
of the mandate of MINUSCA.

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation
2.
Despite significant progress in organizing the elections intended to return the
country to constitutional order, including a high rate of voter registration, attempts
to destabilize the political transition took place over the second half of the reporting
period, marked by an upsurge in violence, most notably in Bangui.
3.
Three months after the Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation in May, the
first plenary meeting of its follow-up committee was organized on 7 August.
Subsequent meetings revealed differences of opinion among the 25 -member
committee over the organization of its work, including its independence and financial
autonomy. The committee submitted a report to the Prime Minister on 26 September,
which reflected the limited progress made in implementing the Forum’s
recommendations.
4.
The constitutional review process continued, with the support of MINUSCA.
On 4 August, the Constitutional Court approved the draft constitution as amended by
a constitutional review workshop in July. However, the revised version adopted by
the National Transitional Council on 30 August re-introduced the establishment of a
senate. The good offices of MINUSCA and other international actors prevented this
controversial issue from blocking further work on the constitutional review. On
18 September, the National Transitional Council submitted a final draft constitution,
including elements on the establishment of a senate, to the Transitional Authority
and the National Electoral Authority for consideration ahead of the constitutional
referendum.

15-20704 (E)

031215

*1520704*

S/2015/918

5.
Following the 30 July 2015 decision of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) to extend the transition through 30 December 2015 to permit
elections to be held by the end of the year, the Constitutional Court confirmed, on
14 August, that the decision was in compliance with the Transitional Charter.
Subsequently, on 5 September, some 35 political coalitions, parties a nd independent
politicians signed a joint declaration calling for a new, multi -year transition that
would include the replacement of the Head of State, the Prime Minister and his
cabinet and the National Transitional Council. On 13 November, members of thi s
so-called third transition group as well as civil society and anti -balaka and former
Séléka factions signed an agreement calling for the establishment of a new 18 -month
transition, and for elections to take place during that new transition.
6.
The political and security environment in the Central African Republic
deteriorated in late September in Bambari and Bangui, triggered by the killing of a
Muslim man on 26 September (see para. 18 below), followed by intercommunal
clashes between elements of the anti-balaka and former Séléka armed groups.
Following this outbreak of violence, the Head of State of the Transition, Catherine
Samba-Panza, cut short her participation in the General Assembly to return to
Bangui on 30 September. Upon her return, she called for calm and denounced
unnamed political actors for instigating the violence, accusing them of an attempted
coup d’état. She decried the reversal of the advances made at the Bangui Forum and
announced a likely postponement of elections. In an attempt to bri ng national
stakeholders together and generate a new momentum towards ending the transition,
on 12 October, she launched consultations with representatives of civil society,
political parties, armed groups, community leaders and mayors of the districts of the
city of Bangui. However, these efforts were compromised when, on 26 October, a
delegation of the former Séléka Union pour la paix en Centrafrique faction that had
travelled to Bangui to participate in the consultations was attacked by alleged
anti-balaka elements (see para. 20 below). This incident further aggravated
intercommunal tensions.
7.
A reshuffle of the Transitional Authority took place on 29 October following
the aforementioned consultations held by the Head of State with some national
stakeholders. Changes to the Prime Minister’s cabinet included two new ministers,
the removal of three ministers and portfolio changes for five others. On
2 November, the Head of State addressed the nation and announced, inter alia, that
she had instructed the Central African Armed Forces, gendarmerie and national
police to join the international forces to address the violence. On 4 November, the
President of the National Transitional Council participated in a peaceful march
calling for the strengthening of the Central African Armed Forces in order to
provide security for the population, in coordination with international forces.
8.
Through my Acting Special Representative for the Central African Republic,
Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, along with my Special Representative for Central Africa,
Abdoulaye Bathily, the United Nations continued to provide good offices aimed at
supporting the conclusion of the political transition, including mediation among all
political actors and the provision of strategic advice on modali ties for reviewing the
electoral calendar and ensuring the continuity of the Government unti l elected
leaders are in place.

2/18

15-20704

S/2015/918

B.

Preparations for the elections
9.
Despite many daunting challenges, preparations for the constitutional
referendum and combined presidential and legislative elections progressed during
the reporting period. Consultations among key stakeholders, including political
actors, civil society, transitional institutions and the electoral authority yielded a
revised electoral calendar on 9 November. This calendar foresees the holding of the
constitutional referendum on 13 December 2015, the first round of the presidential
and legislative elections on 27 December 2015, a second round, as necessary, on
31 January 2016 and the proclamation of the final results by 24 February 2016. In
line with the spirit of the Transitional Charter and in coordination with the Central
African Republic’s international Mediator, President Denis Sassou Nguesso of the
Republic of the Congo, a summit, hosted by the ECCAS Chair, President Ali Bongo
Ondimba of Gabon, was held on 25 November, during which a final technical
extension of the transition through to 31 March 2016 was endorsed. On
11 November, the Alliance des forces démocratiques pour la transition, a pol itical
platform that includes the political parties of Martin Ziguélé, Desiré Kolingba and
Nicolas Tiangaye, who is the president of the alliance and former Prime Minister,
issued a declaration indicating that the revised calendar was neither based on
consensus nor in compliance with the electoral code.
10. Meanwhile, the population has demonstrated its keen interest in participating
in the elections. Voter registration closed on 16 November, with more than
1,980,000 voters registered, representing approxi mately 95 per cent of the estimated
electorate. In a related development, the National Electoral Authority began posting
a provisional electoral list on its website in order to facilitate access throughout the
country. At the same time, out-of-country registration of citizens of the Central
African Republic in the diaspora and of refugees from the conflict, of which
198,000 are estimated to be eligible to vote in neighbouring countries, progressed
slowly and unevenly. Registration did not take place in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo or in the Sudan, while efforts to register refugees in Cameroon, Chad and
the Republic of the Congo, following the signing of tripartite agreements between
the Central African Republic, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and the respective host countries, were delayed in part by
recurrent security incidents. There were also challenges with deploying sufficient
logistical, financial and security support to register refugees. With the closi ng of the
voter registration, approximately 53,500 refugees, or some 27 per cent of potential
refugee voters, had been registered in the above -mentioned three countries.
11. The National Electoral Authority has adjusted its operational plan in line with
the new electoral calendar and has implemented measures to address emerging
operational and coordination challenges, especially in inaccessible areas. For
example, in August, it completed the establishment of coordination centres for
electoral operations. The centres, comprising national and international actors at the
national, prefecture and sub-prefecture levels, have been effective in reinforcing
their monitoring and operational capacity in the electoral process.
12. Institutionally, the stability of the electoral management bodies and the electoral
process itself were challenged when the Vice-President and President of the
National Electoral Authority resigned on 26 August and 8 October, respectively. On
28 October, the Authority elected a new three-member board with Marie-Madeleine
N’Kouet Hoornaert, its former Rapporteur, as the new President.

15-20704

3/18

S/2015/918

13. The United Nations continued to provide technical, operational, logistical and
security support to the electoral authorities amidst a challenging security a nd political
environment, compounded by the onset of the rainy season. This included assistance
with the distribution of some 200 tons of electoral equipment to the 16 prefectures,
the return of 3,445 out of 3,498 registration kits (as of 15 November) from the
countryside to Bangui and the establishment of the coordination centres mentioned
above.
14. Significant efforts have also been made by the Transitional Authority and the
United Nations to mobilize international support and funding for the electoral
process, which is budgeted at $36.6 million. Additional financial contributions from
international partners were announced in August and September in response to my
appeals for support. Contributions from Cameroon, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg,
Morocco, the Republic of the Congo and the United States of America, and, most
recently, Gabon and Equatorial Guinea, as well as the United Nations Peacebuilding
Fund, have filled the financial gap in the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP)-managed basket fund for the elections. I extend my gratitude for these
contributions.

C.

Reconciliation
15. As follow-up to the Bangui Forum, UNDP, in collaboration with MINUSCA
and other United Nations and international partners, supported efforts by the
Transitional Authority to implement its national reconciliation strategy as outlined
in the Republican Pact for peace, national reconciliation and reconstruction (see
S/2015/576, para. 3). These efforts included the establishment of local peace and
reconciliation committees at the prefectural level, drawing on existin g initiatives,
where possible, and in support of the already established 13 peace committees in
different parts of the country. In addition, intercommunal reconciliation initiatives
included a facilitated dialogue between the Muslim community in the third district
of Bangui and the predominantly Christian community of the Boeing district on
access by Muslims to their cemetery there. To support this initiative, MINUSCA and
UNDP initiated income-generating activities and social cohesion projects in both
areas.
16. Following the outbreak of violence in Bambari in August (see para. 24),
representatives of the Ministry of Reconciliation, UNDP and MINUSCA assisted the
Muslim and Christian communities in restarting the reconciliation process and
intercommunal dialogue, including through the creation of a peace platform in
Ouaka prefecture composed of local authorities and representatives from all civil
society and religious groups. MINUSCA also established a still tenuous weapons free zone aimed at reducing tension between the former Séléka and the anti-balaka
in Bambari on 8 September. The visit of Pope Francis to Bangui on 29 and
30 November further validated the commitment of the international community to
helping resolve intercommunal tensions.

D.

Security situation
17. The security situation across the country remained tense throughout the
reporting period. Clashes between opposing armed groups, particularly former

4/18

15-20704

S/2015/918

Séléka and anti-balaka, and heightened criminal activities continued. Despite a
slight improvement during the month of August and through most of September, the
situation rapidly deteriorated at the end of September, notably in the capital.
18. On 26 September, the discovery of the body of a decapitated young Muslim in
front of a mosque in Bangui triggered a series of reprisal attacks in several
neighbourhoods of the capital, resulting in at least 77 persons killed and more than
400 injured over the following four days, as well as the displacement of close to
40,000 people. During the violence that ensued, armed crowds took to the streets,
erecting barricades to prevent the movement of people, as well as access to the
airport. Segments of the population called for the resignation of the Head of State
and the redeployment of the Central African Armed Forces. The violent
demonstrations were accompanied by incidents of looting and attacks on local
police stations, the gendarmerie headquarters, churches, mosques and the national
radio station, as well as on residences and convoys of United Nations per sonnel and
non-governmental organizations, including humanitarian partners and their
premises. In addition, on 28 September, 689 inmates escaped from the central prison
in Bangui. These events paralysed the city for a week.
19. After the initial days of the crisis, gang-related criminal violence, chiefly
associated with anti-balaka elements, as well as incidents led by Muslim selfdefence groups, coupled with reported movements of former Séléka elements into
Bangui, remained a cause of serious concern in the capital. Reprisal attacks by
armed elements of both Christian and Muslim communities continued.
20. On 26 October, while visiting Bangui at the invitation of the Head of State for
consultations with the Government, a delegation from the former Séléka U nion pour
la paix en Centrafrique faction in Bambari was attacked by armed elements,
resulting in the injury of one member and the disappearance of two others, who are
presumed dead. The attack on the delegation triggered a cycle of reprisal attacks
between Christian and Muslim communities in Bangui’s third and sixth districts,
during which an estimated 26 people were killed, scores injured and a further 2,000
displaced; the destruction of property was severe.
21. Reacting to the events in Bangui since the end of September, a number of
former Séléka Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique armed
elements moved towards Bangui via Kaga Bandoro in early October, leading to the
temporary displacement of some 10,000 people in Kémo -Gribingui prefecture. The
movement culminated in a clash, on 10 October, with international forces — the
French Sangaris force and MINUSCA — near Sibut, resulting in the death of at
least 12 members of the armed group, reportedly including Oumar Younous, an
individual under United Nations sanctions, and dozens of injuries among their
fighters. In response to the movements of former Séléka forces, anti -balaka
elements moved from neighbouring towns into Bangui. From 17 to 19 November,
MINUSCA, supported by the French Sangaris force, launched an operation to
guarantee free movement in the third and sixth districts of Bangui. Meanwhile, the
former Séléka Union pour la paix en Centrafrique reportedly deployed additional
elements in areas under its control around Bambari, allegedly in preparation for the
seasonal movement of cattle herders along their predefined routes.
22. Armed groups also continued illegal activities in areas under their control,
including mining. Anti-balaka factions remained active in Bangui and the western
part of the country, while former Séléka elements largely continued to control areas

15-20704

5/18

S/2015/918

in the northern and eastern parts of the country. Reports of illegal arrests, detention
and exactions by elements of armed groups continued. Civilians also continued to
face threats from other armed groups, including the Lord’s Resistance Army.
23. In the west, the security situation remained challenging, particularly in areas
bordering Cameroon and Chad. MINUSCA provided armed escorts to commercial
and humanitarian convoys along the main supply road from Cameroon to Bangui;
attacks on convoys remained a persistent threat. Facing regular, lethal attacks on
convoys, Cameroonian truck drivers have gone on several strikes, affecting the
delivery of essential goods to Bangui and impeding the deployment of MINUSCA.
24. In the central part of the country, clashes among armed groups increased
tensions. In Bambari on 20 August, anti-balaka elements reportedly killed a Muslim
in retaliation for an earlier attack by the former Séléka Uni on pour la paix en
Centrafrique. Three people were killed and five injured in reprisal attacks. In t he
eastern and northern regions, the two main former Séléka armed groups, the Front
populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique and the Union pour la p aix en
Centrafrique continued to assert influence in their respective areas of control.
Activities by the Lord’s Resistance Army reportedly increased in the Yalinga area,
Haute Kotto prefecture, where the population deserted some villages. In Bria, Haute
Kotto prefecture, on 24 August, intercommunal violence resulted in five deaths and
10 injured, including an increase in the number of internally displaced persons.

III. Protection of civilians
25. In response to imminent threats of physical violence, the protection of
civilians remained a high priority for MINUSCA, which continued to work closely
with the protection cluster, including the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), UNHCR and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to
identify and address protection issues. MINUSCA has witnessed continued tensions
between and within armed groups in Bangui and the central part of the country.
These tensions have adversely affected areas with mixed populations, in particular
in Bambari, Batangafo, Grimari, Kaga Bandoro, Kuango, Mbres and Sibut, as well
as Muslim neighbourhoods in western parts of the country.
26. MINUSCA developed a series of initiatives, including flashpoint matrices and
a peacekeepers handbook that provides tactical guidance o n the protection of
civilians to contingent commanders. In Bangui and the prefectures, MINUSCA
military and police continued to adapt their deployment to protection flashpoints.
Outside Bangui, the Mission established temporary operating bases in Aibando,
Kabo and Yalinga — areas where the local population had suffered from increased
attacks by armed groups. MINUSCA also continued efforts to ensure the protection
of minorities, including Muslims living in enclaves across the country, and deployed
joint protection teams to communities at risk, including displaced Fulanis.
27. Bambari and Kouango continued to be high priority areas for the protection of
civilians. Following clashes between former Séléka Union pour la paix en
Centrafrique elements and anti-balaka in late August, MINUSCA deployed
additional companies to Bambari in early September to enforce the withdrawal of
elements of Union pour la paix en Centrafrique from the right bank of the Ouaka
River and the establishment of a weapons-free zone. MINUSCA established a
temporary operating base in early October in the Kouango area to address renewed

6/18

15-20704

S/2015/918

violence between the two groups. MINUSCA reinforced its Bangui -specific strategy
to enhance coordination between civilian components, humanitarian actors and th e
Joint Task Force, fostering an integrated response to threats through early warning
analysis, the mapping of priority areas and the streamlining of rapid response
mechanisms.
28. The MINUSCA nationally recruited community liaison assistants played a key
role in carrying out the Mission’s protection of civilians strategy across the country.
During the September crisis in Bangui and in Kaga Bandoro, Kémo and Nana
Grébizi prefectures, they engaged with the local population, national authorities and
security forces to identify needs and prevent and diffuse intercommunal tensions.
Recruitment is under way for 28 additional community liaison assistants, who will
be deployed across the country.

IV. Human rights situation
29. The human rights situation remained critical throughout the country. As of
15 November, MINUSCA reported 710 new verified incidents of human rights
violations or abuses against a total of 1,178 victims, including 135 women, 29 boys
and 31 girls. This represents an increase of 504 documented incidents and an
increase of 938 victims over the previous reporting period (1 April-30 July 2015).
Of serious concern are documented incidents of arbitrary killings (114), cruel and
inhumane treatment (123), conflict-related sexual violence (26) and arbitrary arrests
and detention (107) committed mainly by anti-balaka and former Séléka elements
against civilians. Persons accused of practising witchcraft continued to be killed,
buried alive or subjected to cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment.
30. In an effort to combat the pervasive impunity and lack of accountability that
persists in the country, MINUSCA has initiated investigations into the gross human
rights violations and serious violations of international humani tarian law committed
during the recent violence that began on 26 September. Preliminary findings
confirmed that armed groups of anti-balaka and former Séléka, self-defence groups
and Central African Armed Forces elements committed grave violations, includi ng
targeted killings, rape, abductions and widespread destruction of property,
particularly arson, pillaging and looting. MINUSCA also documented an increase in
serious violations of the right to life committed by internal security forces (police
and gendarmerie).
31. During his visit to the Central African Republic from 1 to 4 September, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights acknowledged the efforts
made by the Transitional Authority to improve the human rights situation,
emphasizing that long-term stability can only be achieved through the
re-establishment of an independent and impartial justice system, founded on the rule
of law and the protection of human rights.
32. MINUSCA and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Hu man
Rights (OHCHR), in partnership with the Transitional Authority, organized an
international seminar on the fight against impunity from 2 to 4 September in Bangui.
The more than 160 representatives of the transitional institutions, civil society and of
human rights and other organizations who took part in the seminar recommended the
development of a national strategy for the fight against impunity and the
identification of resources for the establishment of transitional justice mecha nisms.

15-20704

7/18

S/2015/918

A.

Conflict-related sexual violence
33. During the reporting period, MINUSCA received 24 allegations of conflict related sexual violence, of which 15 cases were investigated and verified to have
been committed against 15 victims (6 women and 9 girls). All cases were committed
by members of armed groups. The actual number of cases is believed to be much
higher. Preliminary investigations following the violence in Bangui in September
and October indicate that anti-balaka and former Séléka elements committed crimes
of sexual violence, including assaulting victims in their homes during house -tohouse searches. There are indications from health-care providers that there was a
significant increase in the number of victims seeking services for rape and sexual
assault, which is being verified by MINUSCA and relevant United Nations partners
on the ground. MINUSCA, together with national and international partners,
including UNICEF and the United Nations Population Fund, undertook efforts to
guarantee safe access to medical care for victims of rape and sexual assault and to
implement prevention measures through the work of joint protection teams and
outreach activities.

B.

Child protection
34. From 1 August to 15 November, MINUSCA documented the killing of
28 children and 49 injuries due to conflict, with the events in Bangui causing 25 of
those deaths and 31 of the injuries. In two instances, children were specifically
targeted. During the crisis, some children participated in the hostilities by mannin g
checkpoints, erecting barricades alongside armed groups and participating in
looting. In some circumstances, armed elements affiliated with the anti -balaka
forces used children as shields when attacking MINUSCA forces. MINUSCA also
documented 13 cases of rape of children by members of armed groups, four of
which were attributed to the former Séléka groups Union pour la paix en
Centrafrique and Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique, and nine to
members of the anti-balaka forces. MINUSCA also recorded 38 incidents of denial
of humanitarian access to children by armed individuals from different
communities; 23 of these incidents took place during the violence in Bangui.
35. MINUSCA and UNICEF continued to co-lead the country task force on
monitoring and reporting grave violations against children. As of mid -November,
the anti-balaka and the former Séléka Union pour la paix en Centrafrique had
released 638 children in the Basse Kotto, Mbomou, Ombella -Mpoko, Ouaka and
Ouham prefectures, while 283 children demobilized themselves from the anti-balaka
forces in Ouham prefecture. All the children were reunited with their families or
host families and referred to reintegration programmes supported by UNICEF.

V. Humanitarian situation
36. The recent violence in Bangui led to a new wave of population displacement
that adversely affected many of the 2.7 million people already living in dire
humanitarian conditions and set back progress achieved in promoting voluntary
returns. As of the end of October, there were about 450,000 internally displaced
persons in the Central African Republic, with more than 58,000 living in 32 sites in

8/18

15-20704

S/2015/918

Bangui. Violent attacks against national and international non -governmental
organizations, most notably in the capital, continued to hamper humanitarian
operations.
37. In early November, UNHCR reported that there were nearly 470,000 Central
African refugees living in neighbouring countries. Humanitarian resources continue
to be stretched. An estimated $613 million is urgently required to cover the needs of
2.7 million people, including refugees, with only 46 per cent of the required funds
received to date.
38. During his visit to the Central African Republic from 20 to 23 October, the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator
underscored the determination of the humanitarian community to deliver assistance
to all those in need, especially to those displaced, until the conditions are sufficient
for their voluntary return. He also underlined the need for national authorities to
ensure the free movement of people, including those belonging to vulnerable groups
and minorities at risk.

VI. Socioeconomic developments
39. The economy of the Central African Republic remained stagna nt, with inflation
at 5.7 per cent. The adverse security situation, including armed attacks along the main
supply route and the strikes of transport workers, caused the disruption of
investments and household consumption, as well as an increase in prices o f basic
commodities by 13 per cent, according to the Central African Institute of Statistics,
Economic and Social Studies.
40. The Transitional Authority continued to face enormous difficulties in meeting
its primary expenditures and in financing the country’s development needs. In that
regard, key international partners and financial institutions continued to work with
the Transitional Authority on public finance management reforms to control
expenditure and increase revenue. International partners, namel y UNDP, the World
Bank and the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund, continued to finance the salaries
of civil servants, members of the Transitional Authority and the internal security
forces (police and gendarmerie). The cumulative deficit for August throug h October
amounted to approximately $16 million, or 15 per cent of the total domestic revenue
expected for 2015.

VII. Extension of State authority
41. MINUSCA, in cooperation with the United Nations country team and
international partners, supported the deployment of approximately 1,000 civil
servants across the country. These efforts aimed at enhancing the role of the State in
the organization of elections, the provision of social services to the population, the
undertaking of social cohesion activities and the protection of civilians. MINUSCA,
jointly with UNDP, facilitated a series of workshops to support the Ministry of
Territorial Administration in training administrative authorities and civil servants
prior to their deployment.
42. On 23 September, the Head of State, the Prime Minister and the Minister of
Territorial Administration signed a decree nominating 1,074 individuals, including

15-20704

9/18

S/2015/918

Muslims and Christians and 213 women, as members of “special delegations” to
serve as municipal councils at prefecture and sub-prefecture levels. MINUSCA, in
collaboration with the Ministry of Territorial Administration and the Government of
France, is providing training to the delegations.
43. MINUSCA, together with relevant United Nations agencies, also continue d to
support the deployment of national police and gendarmerie outside Bangui.
MINUSCA continued to carry out joint activities with internal security forces in
Bambari, Bangassou, Bangui, Bossangoa, Bouar, Bria, Kaga Bandoro and Ndele, as
well as with border and airport police.

VIII. Rule of law
A.

Implementation of urgent temporary measures
44. The escape of nearly 700 prisoners, including some high-profile individuals,
from Ngaragba prison on 28 September, and 50 other prisoners from a gendarmerie
holding facility in Bouar on 29 September, marked a significant setback for the
Transitional Authority in its efforts to restore law and order and to fight impunity.
At the request of the Transitional Authority, MINUSCA has reinforced security at
Camp de Roux in Bangui, where 12 high-profile inmates are detained, while also
supporting the refurbishment of the Ngaragba prison through quick -impact projects.
45. MINUSCA provided technical advice to the national judiciary authorities on
the handling of cases involving suspects who were arrested under the urgent
temporary measures mandate, including cases that will fall under the jurisdiction of
the Special Criminal Court, to ensure their efficient processing. Due to a lack of
national capacity, additional MINUSCA corrections officers are needed to ensure
that individuals arrested are detained in safe, secure and humane detention centres.

B.

Special Criminal Court
46. MINUSCA and the United Nations country team continued to assist the ad hoc
Advisory Committee, composed of representatives of the Ministry of Justice,
MINUSCA, UNDP and bilateral partners, on the establishment of the Special
Criminal Court, including the allocation of premises, the selection of national
magistrates and the profiles of international magistrates and staff. The establishment
of the Court will follow a phased approach in order to allow different parts of the
Court to become operational as funds become available. Under the United Nations
Global Focal Point arrangement, a team of experts was deployed for the month of
August to support the work of MINUSCA and the United Nations country team to
prepare a project document for the Court’s operation. This deployment was
organized following the technical mission conducted in May that assessed the total
financial costs and resource requirements of the Court, including measures for the
protection of victims and witnesses and for a strong judicial response to sexual
violence in conflict-related crimes.

10/18

15-20704

S/2015/918

C.

Support to justice and corrections
47. MINUSCA, UNDP and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), working jointly under the Global Focal
Point arrangement for police, justice and corrections, supported the Ministry of
Justice by rehabilitating and reopening courts in Bouar and Bria as part of an overall
strategy to extend legal authority and build national capacity across the country.
MINUSCA and the United Nations country team also supported the first criminal
court sessions held in Bangui since 2010. The court acquitted 15 individuals and
sentenced 61 persons for various crimes, including manslaughter, murder, criminal
association, illegal possession of weapons and armed robbery.
48. MINUSCA continued to coordinate international stakeholders and provide
mentoring and technical support to five main detention facilities (Bimbo, Bouar,
Bria, Camp de Roux and Ngarabga), as well as to various police a nd gendarmerie
holding facilities, including improvement of security, the registries and the
provision of food and basic health care.

IX. Disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
49. MINUSCA continued to provide technical and logistical support to the efforts
of the Transitional Authority to implement the Bangui Forum agreement on
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation. Under article 4 of the
agreement, which provides for the cantonment of armed groups by the Government
with partners’ assistance, MINUSCA continued to provide food support to some
1,500 former Séléka elements and families gathered in three camps in Bangui.
A joint task force, composed of MINUSCA and the national High Commission for
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration and Security Sector Reform of the
office of the Prime Minister, undertook awareness -raising activities in Bangui and in
the prefectures to explain the pre-disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
concept as a preparatory stop-gap phase to encourage disarmament in exchange for
food support in advance of the launch of full disarmament, demobilization and
repatriation activities. MINUSCA and the Transitional Authority carried o ut 13 visits
across the country to sensitize local authorities and armed groups about the terms of
the agreement signed during the Bangui Forum.
50. MINUSCA, in cooperation with the United Nations Office for Project Services,
carried out labour-intensive projects for former combatants worth $2 million in
support of initial disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation in
Bambari, Bouar, Bria and Kaga Bandoro. The United Nations and the World Bank
explored collaboration in a number of areas linked to the security-development nexus,
including the development of infrastructure, labour-intensive projects and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. With regard to community violence
reduction, MINUSCA secured $3.5 million from the Peacebuilding Fund to carry out
projects in Baboua, Bossangoa, Bouar, Koui and Nana Bakassa. MINUSCA launched
pre-disarmament, demobilization and reintegration operations in Birao, Bria and
Kaga Bandoro, including the registration of 299 combatants. While some armed
groups remain reluctant to hand over weapons, MINUSCA continued to engage with
armed groups in order to enhance their willingness to disarm and to ensure a safe
environment for the upcoming elections.

15-20704

11/18

S/2015/918

X. Weapons and ammunitions management
51. During the reporting period, MINUSCA destroyed 18.3 tons of commercial
explosives in Birao and retrieved 267 various explosive items and ammunition.
Due to the recent violence in Bangui, MINUSCA received and safeguarded only
33 voluntarily-handed-over weapons. MINUSCA assessed the status of weapons and
ammunition and their storage conditions for seven static posts, and supported the
training of 18 members of the national security services in weapons storage
management. The Mission also conducted 1,608 education sessions on the risk of
weapons and explosives for 22,053 children and 15,530 adults at local markets,
places of worship, camps of internally displaced persons and schools in Bangui and
Kaga Bandoro.

XI. Security sector reform and vetting
52. MINUSCA continued to provide good offices to support efforts by national
and international members of the Strategic Committee for Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration and Security Sector Reform to implement
relevant recommendations of the Bangui Forum. On 21 September, the Committee
approved a road map for security sector reform developed by the technical
committee, and on 12 November the Committee also approved plans for a national
round table scheduled in early December 2015.
53. MINUSCA, in cooperation with UNDP and the Swiss Foundation of Demining,
completed a project funded by the multi-partner trust fund that included the supply
of medical equipment to military hospitals in Camps Kassaï and Obrou in Bangui.
MINUSCA and the European Union Military Advisory Mission are working with
the Ministry of Defence on the rehabilitation of the main military school in Bouar,
which will be essential to the reform process through the recruitment and training of
new personnel.
54. As of 15 November, MINUSCA, in cooperation with the European Union
Military Advisory Mission and the Swiss Foundation for Mine Action, had assisted
the Ministry of Defence in the simplified verification of 2,822 of the 7,300
registered Central African armed forces personnel. The simplified ve rification
criteria include non-affiliation with active armed groups and non-violation of human
rights and international humanitarian law standards, but fall short of international
standards on vetting.

XII. Coordination of international assistance
55. MINUSCA, together with the United Nations country team, continued to
strengthen international assistance coordination mechanisms to better align multiple
approaches by international partners and Central African stakeholders. Together
with the Transitional Authority, steps were taken to prioritize human security in
national development strategies as part of a pilot project on social cohesion, conflict
prevention and human security, supported by the United Nations Trust Fund for
Human Security.

12/18

15-20704

S/2015/918

56. On 1 October, the Secretary-General co-chaired, with the Head of State of the
Transition, a high-level meeting on the Central African Republic on the margins of
the General Assembly to encourage sustained political support and mobilize
additional funding for the most urgent priorities identified at the Bangui Forum.
More than $16.5 million in humanitarian assistance was pledged by internation al
partners during the meeting.

XIII. Deployment of the Mission
A.

Military
57. As of 15 November, MINUSCA had deployed 9,556 military personnel, or
approximately 89 per cent of its authorized strength of 10,750 troops. This includes
the deployment of 10 out of 12 infantry battalions, with the necessary enablers,
including three engineering companies, one heavy transportation company, three
level-2 hospitals, two signal companies and three helicopter units, including attack
helicopters. Although progress was made by certain troop -contributing countries in
upgrading the equipment of their contingents, gaps in conting ent-owned equipment
continued to pose a significant challenge for certain contingents that have yet to
meet United Nations standards. The Mission maintained 52 operating bases,
comprising 32 permanent and 20 temporary bases. Meanwhile, efforts are under
way to accelerate the deployment of the remaining military and police units, as well
as to temporarily augment MINUSCA forces through inter -mission cooperation
arrangements, including the deployment of 250 troops from the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI).

B.

Police
58. As of 15 November, the MINUSCA police component comprised 331 individual
police officers or 83 per cent of the authorized strength of 400 police officers, and
1,506 personnel of 11 out of 12 mandated formed police units deployed (including
99 women), which represents 89 per cent of the authorized strength of 1,680 formed
police unit personnel. Of the 11 formed police units on the ground, eight formed
police units and two protection support units are deployed in Bangui, and one formed
police unit in Bouar. The deployment of police officers outside Bangui (14 per cent
of the total strength) continued, with officers deployed in Bambari, Bossangoa,
Bouar, Bria, Kaga Bandoro and Ndele.

C.

Civilian personnel
59. As of 15 November, 1,003 or 61 per cent of the posts for civilian personnel of
MINUSCA were encumbered, including 575 international posts, 282 national posts
and 146 United Nations Volunteers. Women comprise 29 per cent of the current
civilian personnel.

15-20704

13/18

S/2015/918

D.

Mission concept and revised component concepts
60. MINUSCA is finalizing a revised mission concept, taking into account new
elements on the prioritization and phasing of tasks set out in Security Council
resolution 2217 (2015) as well as the evolving situation in the country. In that
context, the immediate priority of MINUSCA is to support activities that will
conclude the political transition (phase III) and lead to long -term support for
stabilization activities (phase IV), when a newly elected government is installed.
61. Following the violence in Bangui that began at the end of September, the
MINUSCA military component assumed control of the Bangui Joint Task Force,
which was previously under police command. The new command and control
structure takes into consideration specific needs to protect civilian s and supports the
electoral process and the extension of State authority, including increased police
patrolling and an initiative to establish a field office in Bangui.

E.

Status-of-forces agreement
62. Despite efforts by Central African authorities, progress in ensuring respect for
the privileges and immunities enjoyed by the Mission and its personnel has been
slow. Outstanding issues include the imposition of a fuel tax, a registration fee on
residential leases and a “tourist tax” imposed on MINUSCA personnel upon their
departure from the Central African Republic. MINUSCA continues to work with the
Transitional Authority to resolve these issues.

XIV. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
63. United Nations and humanitarian personnel continued to operate in conditions
of insecurity, with an increase in criminality throughout the country. Following the
outbreak of violence on 26 September, MINUSCA extracted close to 350 United
Nations and humanitarian personnel under conditions of extreme risk between
27 and 30 September and transported some 230 humanitarian workers safely to
M’Poko airport for evacuation. Outside Bangui, United Nations and humanitarian
personnel and assets remained targets of attacks. Attacks on United Nations
peacekeepers continued, with numerous incidents, resulting in 3 deaths and 10 injuries
to peacekeepers during the reporting period.

XV. Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
64. During the reporting period, 23 allegations of misconduct were reported,
including 10 related to sexual exploitation and abuse, with four cases involving
minors. MINUSCA followed up on reported cases, undertook risk assessment visits
to military contingents and police compounds and instituted awareness-raising
measures, including reinforcing the accountability of commanding officers. The
Mission, in line with its zero-tolerance policy, organized induction training for
incoming personnel on sexual exploitation and abuse as well as training sessions for
military and police focal points. The Mission also established out-of-bounds/off-limits
areas/venues and disseminated the Mission code of conduct and leaflets, including
information about procedures on how to report misconduct. My Special Representative
led a task force on sexual exploitation and abuse composed of senior staff from all
Mission units and components.

14/18

15-20704

S/2015/918

XVI. Observations
65. Since my last report, the country has made tangible progress towards end ing
its transition. However, certain elements continue their attempts to derail the
process through violence. The unprecedented registration of nearly two million
voters demonstrates what can be achieved in the Central African Republic. It is a
remarkable expression of the will of the people to resolve their differences through
peaceful means, namely the election of leaders to represent their interests. Political
actors who would seek to betray this hope and hold the public hostage to their
narrow interests have no place in governing the country. I welcome, in particular,
the efforts made to ensure that no group is disenfranchised, in particular the
refugees who have fled since 2013, in order to contribute to the inclusiveness, local
ownership and credibility of the process. In this regard, I call upon countries in the
subregion to ensure that the Central African refugees hosted by them are allowed to
exercise their democratic right to vote in the upcoming elections.
66. The holding of elections in the Central African Republic is the final step in
concluding the transition phase and putting a democratic and legitimate Government
in place. While elections will not resolve the country’s longstanding problems, and
carry their own risks, there can be no lasting stability without the establishment of
inclusive institutions. The recently published electoral calendar must be adhered to
as a further extension of the transition would only increase the risks of instability,
with consequences not only for the Central African Republic, but for the entire
region. I welcome in this regard the communiqué of the Heads of State of the
Economic Community of Central African States of 25 November, in which a
technical extension, through to 31 March 2016 was endorsed. I call on all actors to
rally behind this objective and facilitate the free expression of the people’s will in
order to ensure that the State can be rebuilt with the legitimacy and means to
address the root causes of the lengthy and devastating conflict. All national
stakeholders, including the Transitional Authority, political parties, candidates and
civil society members, as well as the media, are accountable for ensuring peaceful
elections through compliance with and respect for the electoral code of conduct.
Elected officials will have to represent the interests of all citizens of the Central
African Republic and move the country forward towards peace, reconciliation and
long-term sustainable development. With the end of the transition, a new page must
be turned, away from divisive agendas and political and social intolerance.
67. The successful organization of credible elections will require that all citizens
of the Central African Republic put the interest of their country above their own. It
will also need the continued support of the international community. I welcome the
pledges made at the high-level meeting held on the margins of the General
Assembly, as well as the most recent announcement of pledges following the
ECCAS summit on 25 November that have fully reduced the financial gap for the
elections. I express my gratitude for these contributions and urge that all pledges be
quickly fulfilled. The United Nations stands ready to play its part in support of a
peaceful, inclusive and credible process.
68. The upcoming elections will take place in a volatile environment. The recent
cycle of violence that began in Bangui in late September — so close to the end of
the transition process — is a stark reminder that peace and security remain elusive
in a country that has known little of either in recent years. I deplore the killing of
more than 100 civilians, the injuries to over 400 and the displacement of some

15-20704

15/18

S/2015/918

40,000 civilians during the recent upsurge of violence in Bangui and other parts of
the country. I strongly condemn those responsible for these acts, either directly or
indirectly. I urge the Transitional Authority, as well as regional and international
partners, to make a concerted effort to prevent the enemies of peace, both within
and outside the country, from threatening the transitional process. MINUSCA will
continue to adopt a robust posture to deter and counter anyone threatening the peace
process. I am particularly disturbed by recent attempts to exacerbate intercommunal
violence. I commend the subsequent efforts of the Transitional Authority to promote
dialogue and advance preparations for free, fair, transparent and inclusive elections.
69. I am appalled by the continuing human rights abuses committed by
anti-balaka, former Séléka, some elements of the Central African Armed Forces and
internal security forces, self-defence groups and other armed groups and criminal
elements across the country. MINUSCA is determined to continue using all
necessary means to protect civilians, in support of the Transitional A uthority, which
bears primary responsibility for the security of all citizens of the Central African
Republic. I deplore all attacks against civilians, including targeted violence against
women and children, the destruction of property and the looting of h umanitarian
premises. I strongly condemn attacks against and the killing of United Nations
peacekeepers, which may constitute war crimes. I call upon the Transitional
Authority to investigate these attacks and to hold the perpetrators and their political
backers accountable and bring them to justice. I call on all signatories of the
Brazzaville agreement on the cessation of hostilities to abide by their commitments.
I urge the Transitional Authority to sustain the political dialogue with the armed
groups and to encourage them to join the pre-disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration activities launched by MINUSCA.
70. The coming weeks will be a turning point for the Central African Republic. All
citizens of the Central African Republic have an opportunity to choose peace and
economic recovery over conflict. Elections will be an important milestone, but
peace will take time to consolidate. The United Nations stands ready to support the
Central African people and the new government, once elected, in moving the
country forward. Following the completion of the transition, I urge all stakeholders
to support the new government in undertaking reforms that reflect the aspirations of
its citizens on governance, security, rule of law and sustainable development as
outlined in the recommendations of the Bangui Forum. I also appeal to the
international community to continue its generous support in the priority areas
identified during the Forum.
71. The challenges facing the new government will be daunting, on many fro nts.
The task of rebuilding the social fabric of the Central African Republic while
building a viable State will take time and determination. In the meantime, it will be
crucial, in the months ahead, to maintain the momentum and continue addressing
both the consequences and the causes of the conflict. Reconciliation and
confidence-building measures between communities remain essential. I urge all
national actors to promote reconciliation at all levels of society. The participation of
women and young people in these efforts is of paramount importance in achieving
long-term peace and stability. I applaud the efforts of religious and community
leaders who stand against violence and whose work with communities in Bangui has
helped to calm tensions. I welcome the visit of Pope Francis in support of peace and
reconciliation. His message of forgiveness and tolerance, urging communities
deeply divided by religious and ethnic differences, is a timely opportunity for

16/18

15-20704

S/2015/918

citizens of the Central African Republic to renew their commitment to lay down
their arms and live together in peace and harmony.
72. The violent attempts to disrupt the transition process during the reporting
period underscore the urgent need for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and for security sector reform, in line with internationally accepted
standards. I am deeply concerned about the role of some elements of the Central
African Armed Forces during the recent violence. The stability of the country will
only be sustained if the national defence and internal security forces are transformed
into professional, multi-ethnic and regionally balanced forces under the civilian
control and oversight of a democratically elected government. I welcome efforts by
the Transitional Authority to address this complex challenge through the development
of a security sector reform road map based on the recommendations from the
Bangui Forum and the holding of an inclusive dialogue on national security before
the elections.
73. The recent crisis in Bangui and continuing insecurity in the countryside has
highlighted the need to redouble efforts to reduce community-level violence. With
the support of the international community, an elected Government will have to
address the political and socioeconomic grievances that have repeatedly led
segments of the population to take up arms. In this regard, I request donors to
support the post-transition process as part of a holistic effort to foster stability,
establish a legitimate functioning government and facilitate the g radual restoration
of State authority.
74. I welcome the recent criminal trials that have taken place in Bangui. However,
serious human rights violations, including acts of sexual and gender-based violence,
continue to be carried out with impunity. The fight against impunity remains a key
challenge. There has been some progress towards the establishment of the Special
Criminal Court, however, the Court has yet to become operational due to a lack of
funding and the challenge of maintaining a secure environment, which is essential to
its effective functioning. I call upon the Transitional Authority to expedite the
establishment of the Court. I urge international partners to provide the critical
financial and technical support required for the Court to quickly assume its role as a
key institution to strengthen the country’s justice system and end the culture of
impunity. Recurring prison breaks in the Central African Republic, compounded by the
lack of national capacity, also have a negative impact on the fight against impunity.
The most recent mass escape of detainees from the Bangui central prison demonstrates
the urgent need for additional resources to strengthen the corrections sector.
75. The humanitarian situation remains critical. Unhindered and safe access for
humanitarian actors must be secured to assist those in need. Across the country,
almost half a million people, including those living in enclaves, as well as more
than 450,000 refugees in neighbouring countries, have not been able to return home.
It is deeply troubling that humanitarian organizations have been the target of looting
and destruction in a country where 2.7 million people depend on humanitarian aid.
MINUSCA stands ready to support the Transitional Authority in ensuring that those
responsible for the violations of international humanitarian law are held accountable
for their crimes. I reiterate the need for timely and sustained support to humanitarian
operations and call on international partners to respond generously to the humanitarian
appeal for the Central African Republic, which is severely underfunded.

15-20704

17/18

S/2015/918

76. I am outraged by the continued allegations of misconduct, including sexual
exploitation and abuse, by MINUSCA personnel. I reiterate my unwavering
commitment to ensuring that all United Nations personnel — civilian and uniformed —
comply with the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on misconduct, particularly
sexual exploitation and abuse. The United Nations will continue to take swift action
to ensure that thorough and prompt investigations into serious allegations involving
peacekeepers are conducted by relevant Member States or the United Nations.
Through its strategy for victim assistance, the United Nations, in coordination with
in-country partners, is also ensuring that victims of abuse by United Nations
personnel receive the assistance they need. I urge all troop - and police-contributing
countries to United Nations and non-United Nations-led operations to ensure that
such violations do not occur by taking preventive measures and promptly addressing
allegations. I look forward to the report of the independent external panel I established
to review the United Nations response to allegations of sexual exploitation and
abuse and other serious crimes by members of foreign military forces not under
United Nations command in the Central African Republic.
77. I am grateful to my Special Representative for the Central African Republic
and Head of MINUSCA, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, for his tireless efforts, and to my
former Special Representative, Babacar Gaye, for his dedicated service to the
United Nations. I am deeply appreciative of the work by the personnel of
MINUSCA and the United Nations country team in a dangerous a nd unpredictable
environment. I reiterate my deepest condolences to the countries and families of
United Nations personnel and humanitarian workers who have lost their lives in the
line of duty in the Central African Republic. I am also grateful to my Spec ial
Representative for Central Africa, Abdoulaye Bathily, for his role in international
mediation efforts in the Central African Republic. I thank the African Union, troop and police-contributing countries, the ECCAS Conference, the European Union, the
World Bank, international partners and multilateral and non -governmental
organizations for their continued efforts to end the suffering of the population of the
Central African Republic and work with them towards a better future.

18/18

15-20704
