UNITED NATIONS

OFFICI
THIRTY-SEVENTH

th
MEETING

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2387)

... . .. ,... .. ... .. ,. .. ... .. .... . ... .. .

1

Adoption of the agenda . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . ,. . . . ,

I

The situation in the Middle East:
((1) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162):
(h) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent Representatives of Egypt
and France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15316) . . . . . . ., , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , , . . . . . . . . . ,. . . . . . . . .

I

SlPV.2387

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Suppletnents of the Oflicinl Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Secwrity Carmcil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2387th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 3 August 1982, at 11.45 p.m.
President:

Mr. Noel DORR (Ireland).

Pwwnt:
The representatives of the following States:
China,
France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan. Jordan,
Panama,
Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Zaire.

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2387)

1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
(II) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15162);
(h) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent Representatives of Egypt and France to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/l53 16)

of the agenda

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
(n) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162);
(h) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives of Egypt and France to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15316)
I.
The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken
at previous meetings on this item 12374th.
2375th, 2377th clnd 2384th wwti~~.~.v 1, I invite the representatives
of Lebanon and Israel to take places at the
Council
table: I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) to take a place
at the Council table: I invite the representatives of
Egypt and Pakistan to take the places reserved fat
them at the side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them documents S/IS334 and addendum
I,
which contains the reports of the Secretary-General
submitted
in pursuance of Council resolution 516
( 1982).
3. Members of the Council also have before them
document S/15333, which contains the text of a letter
dated 1 August from the representative of Lebanon
to the Secretary-General.
4. I should like to draw the attention of members
of the Council to documents S/ 15332 and S/ 15336.
which contain the texts of letters dated I and 2 August.
respectively,
from the representative
of Jordan to
the President of the Council.
5. Members of the Council have received photocopies of a letter dated 3 August from the representative of Jordan to the President of the Council: it will
be published as a document of the Security Council
tomorrow morning under the symbol S/15340.
6. Members of the Council have also received photocopies of a letter dated 3 August from the representative of Israel to the Secretary-General:
it will
be published as a document of the Security Council
tomorrow morning under the symbol S/15341.
7. Following consultations
with members of the
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on their behalf in connection with the present grave situation in Lebanon:
“I.
The members of the Security Council are
seriously concerned at the prevailing high state of
tension and at reports of military movements and
continued outbreaks of firing and shelling in and
around Beirut, contrary to the demand in resolution 516 (1982). which was adopted at 1325 hours,
New York time, on I August 1982, for an immediate cease-fire and cessation of all military activities within Lebanon and across the LebaneseIsraeli border. They consider it vital that these
provisions be fully implemented.
“2. The members
of the Security
have taken note of the Secretary-General’s

Council
reports

submitted pursuant to resolution 5 16 ( 1982) [S//5334
r//~d Add./ 1. They express full support for his efforts and for the steps he has taken following the
request of the Government
of Lebanon, to secure
the immediate
deployment
of United
Nations
observers to monitor the situation in and around
Beirut. They note with satisfaction from the Secretary-General’s
report that some of the parties have
already assured General Erskine of their full cooperation for the deployment
of United Nations
observers and they call urgently on all of the parties
to co-operate fully in the effort to secure effective
deployment
of the observers and to ensure thei]
safety.

which is blocking the sending of United Nations
observers to Beirut: the United States is doing every
thing to help Israel achieve that purpose.
13. And so, with one hand. in public, in the Council
chamber, the United States votes in favour of reso.
lution 516 (1982). but with the other hand, it in fact
helps Israel to block the implementation
of that resolution. Again there is this great gap between the words
and the deeds of the United States.
14. Now, why should the United States and Israel
be objecting to the sending of United Nations observers to the Beirut area? The Israeli representatives
state that they are not the ones who are violating the
cease-fire, that somebody else is doing that and they
are only replying by way of, so to speak, self-defence.
But, then, why should Israel be afraid of the establishment of the facts by United Nations observers?
Why should it do everything to block the sending of
observers? The answer to that question is simple:
Israel is constantly violating the cease-fire, Israel is
afraid of objective data about who in fact is violating
the cease-fire.

“3. They insist that all parties must observe
strictly the terms of resolution 5 16 ( 1982). They call
further for the immediate
lifting of all obstacles to
the dispatch of supplies and the distribution
of aid
to meet the urgent needs of the civilian population
in accordance with previous resolutions
of the
Council. The members of the Security Council will
keep the situation under close review.” [S//5.?42. ]
8. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union
of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (intpI,~~I'c?(ltiotl
.fi-ot?l Rlasiut~):
We should
like, first, to express our satisfaction that, after long
hours of work, the Council has found itself in a position to adopt the statement that you have just read out,
Mr. President, in behalf of all the members of the
Council.

15. And here we come to the main point. While the
members of the Council were discussing the text of
a possible statement by the President. the Israeli war
machine again was carrying out an attack on west
Beirut, a massive invasion. Why that has happened
is more than understandable from what we have jusl
said: because Israel has a protector, The United States
could have stopped the Israeli aggressor-both
yesterday and today. It deliberately did not do that.

9. At the same time, we must note that it is clear
that this statement is not as strong as it should have
been in order to meet the demands of the moment,
the demands of a very serious situation. It is necessary for everyone to know what happens at times
behind the scenes and why the statement on behalf
of the Council is not the strong statement it should have
been. Who bear-s the responsibility
for that? Who is
protecting the aggressor? The delegation of the United
States.

16. Moreover, the entire United States policy is
aimed at using Israel to impose United States policy
in the Middle East. The world has certainty seen with
its own eyes the extent to which Washington supports
the aggressive plans of Tel Aviv and how unlimited
are the ambitions of the Israeli leaders, who are prepared to pave the way to the implementation
of their
age-old idea of the establishment of *‘Greater Israel”
on the ruins of an entire country, on the corpses of
thousands and thousands of persons.

IO. The delegation of the United States said that
it could not accept the words “absolutely imperative”
--I
repeat:
“absolutely
imperative”-to
ensure
observance of the cease-fire. But those are the very
words used in public a few days ago by the highest
authority in this country. Why, then, did the United
States delegation categorically object to the words?

17. Facts are facts, The blood of Lebanese and Pales.
tinians, the blood of Arabs, stains the hands today not
only of Israel but of the United States.
18. The PRESIDENT:
the Palestine Liberation

I I. There are three possible explanations
for this.
The first is that the United States delegation does not
follow the statement of its own President-but
that
is hardly likely. The second is that, in deciding to
object to these words, the United States delegation
consulted with the wrong capital. The third is that the
United States says one thing in public to Israel, but
it does something else.

I call on the representative of
Organization.

19. Mr. TERZI
(Palestine
Liberation
Organiza
tion): After eight hours of labour, the Council arrived
at the statement read out by the President. I can well
understand the labour that must have gone into the
production of such a paper, which, to say the least,
is not at all consistent with what the Secretary-GC@
era1 has told the Council in his reports [S/15334 &
Add./ I. Those reports are very clear about which
parties have responded positively to resolution 516

12. Secondly, the United States is doing everything,
behind the scenes of the Council. to protect Israel.
2

( 1982) and to the Secretary-General’s
endeavours to
carry out the Council’s request that United Nations
observers should be deployed. Yet the Council has not
seen fit to quote what the Secretary-General reported:
we are left to use our judgement as to who are the
“some” that have already assured General Erskine of
their full co-operation-and
“some” implies at least
two-and
which was the other party that presumably
told General Erskine that it is not willing to co-operate.

23. With all due respect, the least that one could
have expected of the Council was a call for a prompt
return to the cease-fire position by troops which may
have moved forward subsequent to 1.25 p.m., New
York time. on I August, when resolution 516 (1982)
was adopted. That would not have been an innovation: in the past, violators of a cease-fire have been
called upon, as an immediate step, to return to the
positions they occupied when the cease-fire resolution was adopted. But, of course, playing for time is
a very well-known part of Israel’s way of doing things.

20. In paragraph I of the report contained in document S/ 15334/Add. I 1 the Secretary-General
tells the
Council that the Israeli Cabinet will discuss the subject
on 5 August, following the return of the Foreign Minister from abroad. Now what does that mean? Despite
the fact that resolution 516 (1982) calls for an immediate reply-within
four hours in fact-Israel,
in total
contempt,
says, “Wait until we have met on 5 August.”
It may be understandable that a democratic
Government
cannot take a decision owing to the
unavailability
of the Minister: in a democratic Government there is no one who could replace that Minister, who was democratically
elected to assume the
full responsibility
and exclusive authority to decide
on such affairs. That I can understand, But what I cannot understand is that since resolution 516 (1982) was
adopted on Sunday, Israel has escalated its aggression
and its attacks.

24. The occupation and destruction of Beirut and
the elimination
of the Palestinian people and the PLO
are well-known intentions of the Israelis. Beirut is
being taken and devoured by the slice-a
sort of
“salami approach”.
25. We are sorry that the Council was unable to
take any stronger action against the criminals who
attacked and continue to attack Beirut. But we do hope
that the full implementation
of resolution 516 (1982)
in the shortest possible time will be the prime responsibility of the Council and that it will make use of a11
the powers vested in it by the Charter of the United
Nations to see to it that a so-called Member State of
the Organization will comply with the Council’s resolutions and implement them.
26. Mr. GERSHMAN
(United States of America):
As is well known, the United States Government has
been deeply and intensively involved in the search
for a peaceful resolution to the conflict in Lebanon.
Mr. Philip Habib has been working tirelessly to find a
solution that will restore territorial integrity, independence and sovereignty to the Government of Lebanon,
and indeed to achieve peace in the entire region. As
part of that search, the United States has joined in the
statement read out by the President tonight [S/1.%$2].

21. The President has referred to documents circulated by the representative of Jordan; I should like
to cite one of them: the latest letter, circulated this
evening in photocopied form, describing the Israeli
onslaught
which started on 3 August and which still
continues
[S//5340, tr,ll?cs]. The latest news that has
come to us about that onslaught-or
assault, as some
may prefer to call it-is that a column of Israeli tanks
and armoured vehicles, 20 to 25 in number, have
crossed what is known as the Green Line in Beirut
and have started an invasion of the heart of Beirut.
That was preceded by an advance on Museum Road
in Beirut and an Israeli attempt to gain control of the
Mansour
Palace, which houses the Lebanese Parliament:
I am certain that the Parliament building in
Beirut
has not become a PLO stronghold. It is still
the Lebanese Parliament,
and it should have been
respected.
especially by those who claim that they
are there to ensure that there is democratic Government in Lebanon. So the first act of a democratic Government
is to destroy the very structure of the Lebanese Parliament. That was preceded by very intensive
shelling
and by clashes on all the axes.

27. The United States obviously rejects the intemperate and unfounded statements made by the Soviet
representative.
I might add that it is, in our view,
inconsistent with the spirit of confidentiality
for the
Soviet representative to comment in a formal meeting
of the Council on statements made in informal consultations.
Such indiscretion
by the Soviet representative is, regrettably, not uncommon.
28. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (itZtrl.pl’Ct(ltioM from Russitr/~j: The representative of the United States has said that the Soviet
representative
is, so to speak, “disclosing”
confidential information
put forward during consultations
among Council members. But it is precisely the United
States delegation which acts as the main source fol
the dissemination of confidential information from our
informal consultations.
It is precisely on the basis of
that source that American journalists write about what
the United States delegation does during meetings,
what amendments
it makes, what amendments
it
rejects. Such disclosures cannot be blamed on the
Soviet delegation.

22.
All this was made possible by the deliberate
intervention
of the representatives
of the United
States ---and Israel made good use of it. United States
repl’esentatives
are very keen on semantics. While
they were playing around with semantics, Israel was
trying to achieve its purpose: to advance within Beirut,
to b,ring about more and more destruction in the city
and to cause more and more victims, both Palestinian
and Lebanese civilians living in Beirut.
3

2Y. Furthermore,
there is :I gap between the positions of the United States and the Soviet Union with
regard to what is done in open meetings as opposed
to what is done in informal consultations.
The Soviet
delegation
defends in informal
consultations
the
very same positions it defends in open meetings, But
there are two edges to the United States policy: the
United States says one thing in open meetings of the
Council and something else behind the scenes, because
it fears publicity.

“Israeli
tanks rolled into west Beirut ear1Y
Wednesday and advanced into the heart of the PLO
stronghold in the besieged Lebanese capital. eyewitncsses and Lebanese security forces said. Witnesses
said a column of Israeli tanks crossed over the
Green Line from Christian east Beirut into Muslim
west Beirut through the Museum crossing-point.”
The dispatch continues, but I think that what I have
read out is self-explanatory.

30. In addition,
I note with satisfaction that the
United States representative has not rejected a single
specific accusation put forward by us against the
United States delegation.
31. The PRESIDENT:
tative of Israel.

37. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

I call on the representative of

38. Mr. BLUM (Israel): I was gratified before at
the statement of the representative of the Soviet
Union. It is equally gratifying to note the solidarity
displayed by the representative of Poland with his
Soviet colleague. The fact that two persons maintain
something that is untrue does not make it become true.
At least here we have a subject on which the representative of the Soviet Union and of Poland can
whole-heartedly
agree: their common assault on
Israel. Is it that some atavistic feelings are at work
for both of them?

I call now on the represen-

32. Mr. BLUM (Israel): The representative of the
Soviet Union told us in his first statement that facts
were facts. I agree. I would only add that truth is
truth, lies are lies. and the statement of the representative of the Soviet Union belongs to the latter
category.
33. The representative
of the Soviet Union alleged
that the Israel Defence Forces were moving into west
Beirut. It is not quite clear to me what this statement
was based on: presumably, on a report from the TASS
news agency. The veracity of the statement would
strongly indicate that.

39. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (intcl,pt’ct(rtiotz jiwn Rl/x,siun): The representative of Israel is not pleased that the Soviet Union
and other socialist countries are subjecting Israel to
harsh criticism and condemnation.
He made some
dirty innuendoes in this connection, but it is not the
Soviet Union, nor is it any of the socialist countries,
that has ever challenged Israel’s right to exist. If we
criticize Israel, it is that country’s aggressive policy
we criticize and the viciousness with which the Israeli
aggressors, the Israeli occupiers are carrying out their
aggression against and occupation of Arab land. Until
Israel withdraws its forces from all the territories
occupied in 1967, until Israel withdraws its forces from
the newly occupied territory of southern Lebanon. we
will continue to direct merciless criticism against the
aggressor. We will harshly condemn the aggressor
and we will unmask its horrid and true Face before
the entire world.

34, The facts are different. My Mission was in contact with Jerusalem 10 minutes ago, and I am authorized to say that the statement of the representative
of the Soviet Union is untrue. The Israel Defence
Forces have not been moving into west Beirut.
35. It is gratifying, at the same time, to note that the
Soviet Union now supports a United Nations presence
in Lebanon, which it has consistently opposed ovet
the years, from the day of the establishment
of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
And, as is well known, the Soviet Union has never
voted for any of the extensions of the UNIFIL
mandate. Since the representative of the Soviet Union is
so much in favour of a United Nations presence at
flash-points around the world, the time has surely
come for him to sponsor LI resolution for the deployment of United Nations observers in Afghanistan to
monitor the ongoing genocide of the Afghan people
by the Soviet forces, as well as the chemical and bacteriological warfare which the Soviet forces conduct
against the people of Afghanistan. I invite the representative of the Soviet Union to sponsor such a resolution.

40. Mr. NOWAK
(Poland): The representative of
Israel has indulged in his usual habit of making in&
missible and uncivilized remarks of a personal nature.
This is nothing new and is done only to provoke discussion on other subjects and thereby divert the attention of the Council from what is going on in Lebanon,
which is aggression and more aggression.
41. I would make one further point. When we Speak
here. it is because we are also expressing the commOn
feeling that now prevails in Poland among the Polish
people when they watch television and when they
look at news photographs, because those images
remind us of what happened in 1939 and afterwards,
namely, the destruction of our own capital by Nazi
forces.

36. Mr. NOWAK
(Poland): With regard to what we
have heard from the representative of Israel, I should
like only to read out this brief dispatch just received
from United Press International
(UPI):
4

42.

The PRESIDENT:

I call on the representative

of

annexed without a peace treaty islands that did not
belong to them: in Afghanistan: as well as in other
countries.

Israel.
43. Mr. BLUM (Israel): The representative of the
martial-law rCgime in Poland wishes to teach us about
civilization
and civilized behaviour. We all watch
television
these days, and it is not difficult for us to
ascertain the feelings of the Polish people with regard
to the martial-law
regime that the representative of
Poland represents here and with regard to the Power
that is behind it. So much for the feelings of the Polish
people these days.
44.

48. What right has the representative of the Soviet
Union to teach anybody on mutters of aggression? Only
one right: the right of pure and unadulterated
arrogance, the right of the strong. the right of a permanent
member of the Security Council that enjoys H veto in
this body and can block any resolution it regards as
unfavourable to its interests. Beyond that, it is only
the right of immorality.
the right of shamelessness,
for the Soviet representative to pontificate here on
matters of aggression and self-defence.

Are you really sure. Mr. Nowak, that you speak
of the Polish people?

for the feelings

The representative
of the Soviet Union very
kindly acknowledged
Israel’s right to exist as an independent State. I would refer him to my observations
in this regard in the Council last week.

49. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (i,zfc/p/,crtrfion ,fbo/n R/rs.vitr\l): I agree that
no one has the right-and,
I would add. any reasonto teach Israel how to practice aggression. Israel
knows how to practice it.

46.
Let me tell him very clearly that we have no
opposition
to the existence of the Soviet Union, only
to the products of Soviet aggression world wide.

SO. The PRESIDENT:
the Pnlestine Liberation

45.

I call on the representative
Organization.

of

51. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
I would like merely to reiterate that the Council was
told by the spokesman of the invasion forces that the
Israeli army has not moved tonight and that what UPI
has reported is untrue. We shall hold the Council
responsible for seeing to it that that statement is true:
and if it is not true, the Council should then invoke
any powers in it by the Charter of the United Nations
in order to deal with the spokesman of the forces of
invasion.

47.
Let
announce

the representative
of the Soviet Union
here in the Council that his country is now
willing.
after three decades and more, to give LIP the
fruits of aggression in eastern Czechoslovakia-or,
as it used to be called, sub-Carpathian
Russia; in
Romania.
Bessarabia and Bucovina: in eastern Poland:
in eastern Prussia. Konigsberg-whose
name they
changed
to Kaliningrad:
in Lithuania,
Latvia and
Estonia,
three formerly independent countries which
they
subjugated:
in eastern Karelia, which they
detached from Finland: in the Far East, where they

5

HOW

TO

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

OBTAIN

UNH’ED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section.
New

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aupres
des ventes.
New York ou Gcneve.

COMO

CONSECUIR

in United

Nations.

New

York

DES

NATIONS

DE LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Nacioncs

00300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

sent en vente dans les librair:es
et Its agences
de votre lihraire
ou adressez-vous
a : Nations

PIJBLKACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes
del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

depositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Seccidn de Ventas,

~~-6oyXy--j”ne

1%9--2..05~
