UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/238
16 March 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 12 MARCH 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated
11 March 1998, which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (see annex).
I would appreciate your bringing it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.

(Signed)

98-06528 (E)

160398

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1998/238
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 11 March 1998 from the Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed
to the Secretary-General

In accordance with United Nations Security Council resolution 1088 (1996),
I enclose herewith the fourteenth monthly report on the operations of the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) (see appendix). I would appreciate your making the
report available to the Security Council.

(Signed)

Javier SOLANA

/...

S/1998/238
English
Page 3

Appendix
Fourteenth monthly report to the Security Council on the
operations of the Stabilization Force

1.
There are approximately 35,000 troops currently deployed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia, with contributions from all the nations of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and 20 non-NATO countries.
2.
Over the reporting period (21 January-20 February), the Stabilization Force
(SFOR) continued to conduct surveillance and reconnaissance by means of ground
and air patrols. A total of 2,750 sorties were flown by combat aircraft, with
the SFOR helicopter fleet flying 203 hours. Between 8 and 13 February
commanders and staff from the countries contributing forces to SFOR's Strategic
Reserve Force (Italy, Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Turkey, United States of
America) deployed to Bosnia and Herzegovina to conduct pre-exercise
reconnaissance in preparation for Exercise Dynamic Response '98, a deployment
exercise for SFOR's strategic reserve, which will take place between 25 March
and 7 April.
3.
Over the reporting period, SFOR continued to secure the transmission towers
used by Srpska Radio Television (SRT) at Duga Nijva, Udrigovo and Veliki Zep in
Multinational Division North (MND(N)) and at Trebevic and Leotar in MND
(South-East). On 13 February, interim arrangements for the management of the
SRT were signed by President Biljana Plavšić, the Republika Srpska Minister of
Information and the Senior Deputy High Representative. Discussions between SFOR
and the Republika Srpska Government are under way to reach agreement on
transferring control and security of the SRT towers.
4.
On 22 January, in support of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, SFOR troops in Bijeljina detained a person indicted for war crimes.
He was subsequently transported to The Hague. On 14 February, two others
voluntarily surrendered to SFOR troops in Bosanski Šamac. They too were
subsequently transported to The Hague.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
5.
The parties remain generally compliant with most military aspects of the
Peace Agreement across the whole area of operations. However, over the
reporting period, there has been increased tension in Drvar, in MND (SouthWest), and in Stolac in MND (South-East). In Drvar, which has been identified
as a priority area for minority refugee returns in 1998, 14 Bosnian Serb homes
have been destroyed by arson since 31 January. Serbs from the town have
expressed their desire to return but have been hampered by the arson attacks.
Bosnian Croat local police have been accused by the United Nations International
Police Task Force (IPTF) of participation in the arson attacks and of
mistreating Bosnian Serb refugees. At the beginning of February, in Stolac, the
Bosnian Croat Chief of Police was decertified by the IPTF and subsequently
relieved of his duties by the cantonal authorities, following accusations that
he had given tacit approval for attacks against Bosniac and Serb refugees trying
to return to the area.
/...

S/1998/238
English
Page 4

6.
On 11 February, a weapons amnesty programme was publicly launched. The
Bosnian Presidency's Standing Committee on Military Matters (SCMM) and the armed
forces of both entities expressed their support for the amnesty and the entities
have agreed to issue the appropriate legislation by 19 March. The programme
will be in two phases, the first focusing on mines, ordnance and warlike
matériel and the second on weapons. This initiative will be led by the
entities, with the support of SFOR and other international organizations in
theatre, in particular the Office of the High Representative and IPTF. Local
police are taking the lead in organizing and running the amnesty, with the
entity armed forces providing support in the handling of mines and explosives.
SFOR will provide the appropriate assistance. The collection period will last
from 2 March to 15 April.
7.
At the meeting of the Joint Military Commission on 16 February, the SFOR
Deputy Commander, Operations, issued instructions to the parties requiring them
to reduce both combat and infrastructure sites by a further 25 per cent to
approximately 400 sites. The execution of this programme will begin on
1 May 1998, following approval by SFOR of the entities' plans, and will end on
20 December 1998.
8.
The Republika Srpska Police Anti-Terrorist Brigade remains subject to the
control of SFOR. A ban on all activities continues to be imposed on the Brigade
until further notice owing to its non-compliance with the instructions of the
SFOR Commander. On 12 February, SFOR convened a Joint Special Police
Subcommission meeting in Bijeljina to discuss bringing the Police Unit for the
Protection of People and Buildings under SFOR control. SFOR will shortly issue
an amended set of instructions for specialist police, confirmation of the
buildings and VIPs to be guarded and any other special compliance instructions
regarding personnel lists and the structure of specialist police units.
9.
Over the reporting period, SFOR carried out a total of 383 military weapons
storage sites inspections: 107 Bosniac, 117 Bosnian Croat, 7 Federation and 152
Bosnian Serb. The following weapons were confiscated: from the Bosniacs,
80 kilograms of non-authorized explosives; from the Bosnian Croats, 4,700 small
arms rounds; and from the Bosnian Serbs, 1 rocket-propelled grenade launcher,
7,145 rocket-propelled grenades, 18 rifle grenades, 97 hand grenades, 3 mortar
shells, 12 mines, 46 long-barrelled weapons and 24,116 small arms rounds.
10. SFOR continues to support, on a case-by-case basis, the IPTF-led
inspections of local police stations. Weapons in excess of the expected
inventory are immediately confiscated and subsequently destroyed. Over the
reporting period the following weapons were confiscated: from the Federation,
26 grenades, 3 mines, 10 rifles, 1 long-barrelled weapon and 828 small arms
rounds; and from the Republika Srpska, 2 rifles, 19 grenades, 306 small arms
rounds and 5 120-mm mortar rounds.
11. Over the reporting period, no unauthorized checkpoints were reported. The
new common licence plate approved by the High Representative in January was made
available to the public on 15 February and will be compulsory for all vehicles
within Bosnia and Herzegovina from 31 July 1998. With effect from 30 April, the
new licence plates will be mandatory for any vehicle-owner wishing to travel
abroad.
/...

S/1998/238
English
Page 5

12. During the reporting period, SFOR troops monitored a total of 508 training
and movement activities: 124 Bosniac, 65 Bosnian Croat, 114 Federation and 205
Bosnian Serb. On 31 January, SFOR lifted the ban that had been placed on the
Butila Unit of the Federation Rapid Reaction Brigade for non-compliance during
the elections and for threatening behaviour. Currently there are no training
and movement bans imposed on either armed force.
13. Over the reporting period, SFOR monitored 170 demining operations carried
out by the entity armed forces: 54 by the Bosniacs; 95 by the Bosnian Croats;
and 21 by the Bosnian Serbs. Both entities continue to demonstrate satisfactory
compliance with the counter-mine campaign. The SFOR programme to train deminers
is running smoothly, with 76 students graduating at the end of January
(30 Bosnian Serb, 30 Bosniac and 16 Bosnian Croat). The entities began their
own courses on 16 February, with the graduates from the first SFOR course acting
as instructors.
14. The last meeting of the Subregional Consultative Commission discussed
modalities for reconfiguring a limited number of tanks for use in demining.
Progress in this area continues and the entities are working closely with SFOR
in their efforts to move the process forward.
Cooperation with international organizations
15. Within its capabilities, SFOR continues to provide assistance to the
international organizations in theatre, working routinely with the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Office of the High
Representative, IPTF, the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
16. SFOR is continuing to support the installation phase of the municipal
elections, primarily through providing a secure environment and area security,
and through participation in the OSCE election results implementation committees
at regional levels. On 31 January, SFOR supported the meeting of the Republika
Srpska National Assembly in Banja Luka by ensuring a safe environment and
freedom of movement to and from the city for all Assembly members. On
4 February, SFOR supported the inaugural meeting of the Zepce Municipal Council
and, between 10 and 19 February provided a safe environment for, and movement
to, the Municipal Council meeting in Srebrenica.
17. SFOR continues to provide assistance to the Office of the High
Representative in the field of civil air traffic, with particular reference to
expanding civil air operations at Sarajevo airport. SFOR has held several
meetings with airlines and the Office of the High Representative to facilitate
future commercial activity within the country and has provided advice on
resolving the problems caused by the lack of a bilateral airspace agreement
between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
18. SFOR has continued to provide support to the efforts of the Office of the
High Representative to establish common institutions, with particular emphasis
on the Standing Committee on Military Matters. The Standing Committee met on
11 February and was briefed by a representative from NATO headquarters on NATO's
proposed security cooperation activities with Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
/...

S/1998/238
English
Page 6

Standing Committee also discussed military representation abroad and agreed
that, initially, representatives would be posted to Washington, Brussels and
Vienna. It was further agreed that they would represent the entities and Bosnia
and Herzegovina and would submit reports to the Presidency, the Standing
Committee and the Ministries of Defence. The next meeting of the Standing
Committee is provisionally scheduled for 18 March.
19. SFOR continues to develop proposals to increase support for the return of
displaced persons and refugees, including through additional support to the
Reconstruction and Return Task Force chaired by the Office of the High
Representative.
Outlook
20. Tension is likely to rise in Brcko in anticipation of the arbitration
decision, which is expected in mid-March. SFOR will continue to contribute to a
secure environment by enhancing patrols in the area.
21. On 20 February, following consultations with the non-NATO countries
contributing to SFOR, the North Atlantic Council agreed that, subject to the
necessary mandate from the Security Council, NATO is prepared to organize and
lead a multinational force in Bosnia and Herzegovina following the end of SFOR's
current mandate in June 1998.

-----
