S/PV.8625

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8625th meeting

Friday, 20 September 2019, 10.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Safronkov. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Ms. Niamke
Mr. Fiallo Billini Portorreal
Mr. Elé Ela
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Ruddyard
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-28845 (E)
*1928845*

S/PV.8625

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Paragraph 2 of resolution 2334 (2016) calls on
Israel to

Adoption of the agenda

“immediately and completely cease all settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem” [and to] “fully respect
all of its legal obligations in this regard”.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Israel and
Jordan to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ayman Safadi, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates of Jordan.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with the provisional rules of
procedure and previous practice in this regard, I
propose that the Council invite His Excellency Mr. Riad
Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Observer
State of Palestine, to participate in this meeting.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Al-Malki
to today’s meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: Today, I will devote my regular
briefing on the situation in the Middle East to presenting,
on behalf of the Secretary-General, the eleventh report
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), which
covers the period between 11 June and 11 September.
Let me reiterate that developments during the
reporting period cannot be divorced from the broader
context — Israel’s continued military occupation of
Palestinian territory, settlement activity and the threat
of annexation; Hamas’ continuing hold over Gaza and
its militant activity; unilateral actions that undermine
peace efforts; severe challenges to the fiscal viability
of the Palestinian Authority; and the persistent risk of
military escalation in the region. All those developments
collectively erode the prospects for a two-State solution.
2/24

20/09/2019

No steps were taken to that effect during the reporting
period. During this period, however, Israeli authorities
advanced some 3,000 housing units in the occupied
West Bank, including some 400 units in East Jerusalem.
Among the plans advanced were 354 units in Nili, 346
in Beit El and 215 in Asfar, which are all located east
of the route of the separation barrier. In addition, the
Security Cabinet reportedly discussed on 30 July the
advancement of another 6,000 housing units. However,
in a rare step, the Government also approved granting
construction permits for 715 housing units for
Palestinians living in Area C.
A decision by the District Court in Jerusalem,
published on 29 June, determined that under the
so-called market regulation principle, four houses
built in the Israeli settlement of Alei Zahav could be
retroactively regularized under Israeli law, despite
being built on private Palestinian land without the
consent of the owner. The market regulation principle
allows for houses built “in good faith” on private
Palestinian land without the consent of the owner to be
retroactively regularized under Israeli law and the owner
compensated. The decision is the first implementation
of this principle, according to which up to 2,000 housing
units in settlements could be retroactively regularized.
In response to the 23 August terrorist attack near
Dolev, the Israeli Government decided to submit a plan
for the establishment of a new neighbourhood in the
settlement with approximately 300 new housing units.
This decision is in line with the practice to expand
settlements in the wake of attacks in the West Bank.
Finally, on 29 August, a year after being evicted from
a disputed building in Hebron’s H2 area, several dozen
Israelis moved into the compound, despite ongoing
legal proceedings to determine ownership.
Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures by Israeli authorities have continued across
the occupied West Bank and East Jerusalem. Citing the
absence of Israeli-issued building permits, which are
nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain in Area C
and in East Jerusalem, 165 Palestinian-owned structures
were demolished or seized during the reporting period,
19-28845

20/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

which resulted in the displacement of 170 people,
including 85 children. Of those, nine structures were
demolished by their owners, including seven in East
Jerusalem and two in Area C of the West Bank.
On 22 June, Israeli authorities demolished nine
buildings in the Wadi Al-Hummus neighbourhood in
the village of Sur Bahir in East Jerusalem, most of them
located in Areas A and B of the West Bank, although on
the “Jerusalem” side of the wall, citing their proximity
to the separation barrier as a security concern. This
resulted in the displacement of 24 Palestinians,
including 14 children.
On 3 July, the authorities delivered several
demolition orders for structures in the Hebron
governorate, the first such orders based on military
order 1797, which authorizes an expedited process for
demolition of unauthorized new structures in Area C
and gives owners only 96 hours to demonstrate to the
authorities that they possess a valid building permit.
During the reporting period, three structures have been
demolished on the basis of this military order.
On 10 July, after a costly 24-year legal battle, a
Palestinian family was evicted from its property in
the Silwan neighbourhood of East Jerusalem and the
premises handed over to Israelis. This was done after
the Israeli Court ruled in favour of a settler-related
organization, which had obtained ownership of much
of the property.
On 26 August, the authorities demolished a house
and a restaurant — the latter for the third time — in
Beit Jala, displacing five Palestinians and affecting the
livelihoods of another 32. Following the demolition,
a new Israeli settlement outpost was reportedly
established nearby, without a building permit from the
Israeli authorities.
Resolution 2334 (2016) also “calls for immediate
steps to prevent all acts of violence against civilians,
including acts of terror, as well as all acts of provocation
and destruction. However, the reporting period saw
worrying levels of violence throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory.
In the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, three
Palestinians, including one child, and two Israelis, also
including one child, were killed, and 336 Palestinians
and 21 Israelis were injured in various incidents,
including clashes with the Israeli Security Forces (ISF),
security operations, attacks and settler-related violence.

S/PV. 8625

On 27 June, in the Al-Issawiya neighbourhood
of East Jerusalem, a 21-year-old Palestinian, who is
alleged to have targeted Israeli forces with fireworks,
was shot and killed by a policeman. Throughout the
following two months, tensions in the neighbourhood
remained high, as security forces have conducted
raids, house searches and arrests. These operations
have triggered clashes with residents and were usually
conducted at night, causing disruption and trauma to
residents and businesses.
According to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), on
30 June, three Israeli settlers physically assaulted a
70-year-old Palestinian man living near the Abraham
Spring in the H2 area of Hebron. On 6 July, a group of
seven Israeli children physically assaulted a 10-yearold Palestinian child near the Al-Ibrahimi Mosque in
the H2 area of Hebron. On 12 July, a nine-year-old
Palestinian boy was shot in the forehead by the ISF
during clashes in Kafr Qaddum, in the West Bank, and
remains in critical condition.
On 8 August, a 19-year old Israeli was stabbed to
death in the West Bank, close to the settlement of Migdal
Oz, south of Bethlehem. Two Palestinian suspects were
later arrested by the ISF. On 15 August, two Palestinian
teens stabbed and injured an Israeli police officer in
Jerusalem’s Old City. One of the assailants was shot and
killed. On 16 August, two Israeli teens were injured in
a car-ramming attack near the settlement of Elazar,
south of Bethlehem. The 26-year-old driver was shot
and killed by an off-duty policeman. On 23 August, an
improvised explosive device was detonated near the
settlement of Dolev, northwest of Ramallah, killing a
17-year-old Israeli girl and severely injuring her father
and brother. According to the OHCHR, a Palestinian
family was forced to leave its home in the West Bank
village of Urif after repeated attacks over the past year.
Tensions in Jerusalem’s Old City also continued.
On 10 August, the Muslim Eid Al-Adha and the Jewish
commemoration of Tisha B’Av coincided, which led to
tensions at the holy sites. Israeli authorities allowed
Jewish visitors to gain access to Al-Haram Al-Sharif/
Temple Mount on that day under police protection. In
the days before the holiday, Muslim religious leaders
had urged worshippers to come en masse to Al-Aqsa
Mosque for Eid prayers. Clashes between police forces
and worshippers reportedly resulted in 29 Palestinians
and four Israeli security officers being injured.

19-288453/24

S/PV.8625

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In Gaza, the overall levels of violence and ensuing
casualties have decreased during the reporting
period, but tension continues. The Israel Defence
Forces (IDF) continues to use riot dispersal means
and live ammunition against the continuing Great
March of Return demonstrations. In this context, four
Palestinians, including two children, were killed, and
496 were injured by live fire. Some 10 Palestinian
militants, meanwhile, were killed in other incidents,
and 13 were injured, while one Israeli soldier was
injured by a grenade thrown across the fence, and three
were injured in other incidents.
In the same period, 33 rockets and mortar shells
were launched from Gaza towards Israel. Most were
intercepted but 18 landed in Israeli towns, causing
material damage. Although fewer incendiary kites,
balloons and other devices have been launched from
Gaza compared to the last reporting period, at least 140
fires were reported in Israel.
In a worrying development, on 27 August,
three Palestinian policemen were killed, and three
pedestrians were injured in two separate apparent
suicide explosions targeting police checkpoints inside
Gaza. On 6 September, the Israeli Security Forces shot
and killed two Palestinian teenagers, aged 14 and 17,
during the Great March of Return demonstrations at the
Gaza perimeter fence. On 7 September, according to
the IDF, an armed drone launched from Gaza dropped
an explosive device on an Israeli military vehicle at the
perimeter fence. In retaliation the IDF struck a number
of Hamas targets in Gaza.
Separately, between 23 and 27 June, three men were
arrested and reportedly subjected to ill treatment during
interrogation by Hamas for organizing a charity event
coordinated with a non-governmental organization
connected to Israel. Between 6 and 8 August, at least
four men were detained after they criticized Hamas on
social media. All were subsequently released.
Resolution 2334 (2016) calls upon the parties
“to refrain from provocative actions, incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric”. Unfortunately, such actions
continued during the reporting period. On 12 July, a
senior Hamas official called on Palestinians overseas
“to attack every Jew on the globe by way of slaughter
and killing,” telling them “enough of the warming up”.
The official’s statement was condemned as repugnant
by the Palestinian Authority, and Hamas later said that
it did not represent the organization’s views. On several
4/24

20/09/2019

occasions, however, officials from Hamas and other
Palestinian factions welcomed and celebrated stabbing,
car ramming and bombing attacks against Israelis in the
occupied West Bank, calling the perpetrators heroic.
Fatah officials also continued to honour and glorify
perpetrators of past terrorist attacks.
Israeli officials also made provocative and
inflammatory statements. Leading politicians have
sought to publicly minimize the connection of
Palestinians to their ancestral land, called for the
annexation of Israeli settlements in Area C of the West
Bank, and rejected the notion of Palestinian Statehood.
During a visit to Hebron on 4 September, senior
Israeli officials reiterated pledges for the expansion
of settlements there and the annexation of the city.
Further, on 10 September, the Prime Minister declared
his intention, if elected, to “apply... Israeli sovereignty
over the Jordan Valley and the northern Dead Sea”, as a
first step to applying Israeli sovereignty over
“settlements in Judea and Samaria, as well and also
on other important regions for [Israel’s] security,
for our heritage, and for our future”.
Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterated calls by the
Middle East Quartet for affirmative steps to be taken
immediately to reverse negative trends on the ground
that are imperilling the two-State solution. Some positive
developments were witnessed during the reporting
period, but they were once again overshadowed by
negative trends.
In Gaza, the United Nations and its partners
continued to implement the critical economic and
humanitarian interventions identified in the last two
reports of the Office of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process to the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians. With those
efforts, the energy supply to households in Gaza
has more than doubled and some improvements in
the economy have been felt. A slight decrease in the
unemployment rate to 46.7 per cent in the second
quarter of 2019, from 47 per cent, was reported.
Qatar has continued to generously fund the supply
of fuel to the Gaza power plant and the daily availability
of electricity has more than doubled. More than 10,000
jobs, including 3,000 for women, have been created
by the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and other United
19-28845

20/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Nations agencies. Some easing of the import and export
restrictions by Israel, additional permits, as well as the
extension of the permitted fishing zone to 15 nautical
miles from the coast and the return of confiscated
fishing boats, are also welcome developments.
Despite those efforts, Gaza’s health-care system
remains on the brink of collapse. In July, 44 per cent of
essential medicines in Gaza were completely depleted
and 26 per cent of essential medical disposables had
less than one month’s supply remaining. Over 1,000
people injured in Gaza will require complex limb
reconstruction treatment and may risk losing limbs due
to infection.
On 22 August, Israel and the Palestinian Authority
reached an arrangement, whereby the Palestinian
Authority received on an ad hoc basis approximately
$568 million in reimbursed taxes levied by Israel on fuel.
While providing some temporary relief, the Palestinian
Government’s ability to deliver services remains
severely affected by the continued disagreement over
the bulk of the tax revenue transfers.
On 27 August, Palestinian families demonstrated
throughout the West Bank and Gaza, calling for
the return by Israel of the bodies of the Palestinians
killed, while allegedly carrying out attacks on or
clashing with the Israeli security forces. In a decision
on 9 September, the Israeli High Court of Justice
reversed an earlier ruling and decided that Israel is
authorized to withhold Palestinian bodies. According
to the Palestinian Authority, 253 such bodies are being
withheld by Israel. Sadly, almost two years after the
reconciliation agreement brokered by Egypt, internal
Palestinian divisions remain deeply entrenched.
The generous support of Member States to date has
allowed UNRWA to reduce its funding shortfall from
$211 million in January 2019 to $120 million. As a result,
half a million Palestinian children resumed school on
time this year. In East Jerusalem, however, UNRWA
has reported on efforts by the Jerusalem municipality
to interfere with its work, including obstructing solid
waste services in Shuafat camp, replicating sanitation
services and attempting to enter an UNRWA vocational
training centre in Kalandia without authorization by
the Agency.
In its paragraph 5, resolution 2334 (2016) calls
on Member States “to distinguish, in their relevant
dealings, between the territory of the State of Israel
and the territories occupied in 1967”. I note ongoing

S/PV. 8625

separate proceedings in the European Court of Justice
and the Federal Court of Canada related to the labelling
of products originating in Israel and the territories
occupied in 1967. The resolution also calls upon all
parties to continue, inter alia, to exert collective efforts
to launch credible negotiations. No meaningful efforts
were made in that direction during the reporting period.
In closing, on behalf of the Secretary-General, I
would like to share some broad observations concerning
the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) during the
reporting period.
The expansion of settlements has no legal validity
and constitutes a flagrant violation of international
law, as stated in resolution 2334 (2016). It must cease
immediately and completely. The expansion of illegal
Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, continues unabated. The existence and
expansion of settlements, including in East Jerusalem,
fuel anger and disillusionment among the population and
significantly undermine the prospects for establishing a
contiguous and viable Palestinian State, with Jerusalem
as the future capital of both States.
I reiterate the Secretary-General’s concern over
statements regarding the annexation of the Jordan
Valley and the northern Dead Sea as a first step towards
applying Israeli sovereignty over all settlements and
other areas in the occupied West Bank. Such steps, if
implemented, would constitute a serious violation of
international law. They would be devastating to the
potential of reviving negotiations and regional peace,
while severely undermining the viability of the twoState solution.
The demolition and seizure of Palestinian structures
also continues. The Sur Bahir demolitions and the
evictions in Silwan, as well as the use of military order
1797 to demolish structures, are particularly concerning.
Some 200 Palestinian families in East Jerusalem have
eviction cases filed against them, mostly by settlerrelated organizations. The number of structures
demolished and people displaced since the beginning of
2019 has already exceeded figures for the entire year of
2018. Such policies must be reversed, and Israel should
abide by its obligations under international law.
The situation in Gaza remains volatile. It is shameful
and intolerable that people, including children, continue
to be killed and injured during demonstrations and
by indiscriminate rocket attacks or other hostile acts.
The Israeli security forces have the responsibility to

19-288455/24

S/PV.8625

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

exercise maximum restraint and to use lethal force only
when strictly necessary, as a last resort, in response
to an imminent threat of death or serious injury and
in accordance with international law. Children should
never be the target of attacks or exposed to violence.
The launching of rockets and mortars towards Israeli
civilian populations is prohibited by international
humanitarian law, and Hamas and the Palestinian
Islamic Jihad must cease that practice immediately.
I unequivocally condemn all attacks on Palestinian
and Israeli civilians, including settler-related violence,
and call on all sides to refrain from violence and to
clearly and unequivocally condemn attacks when they
occur. All perpetrators must be held accountable for
their crimes. I also reiterate the call for the status quo
at the Holy Sites to be upheld, in line with the special
and historic role of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
as custodian of the Muslim and Christian holy sites in
Jerusalem.
I remain deeply concerned about developments
relating to the clearance of revenues of the Palestinian
Authority. Despite the Palestinian Authority’s
temporary reprieve as a result of the reimbursed taxes
levied by Israel on fuel, the financial crisis is very far
from over. I urge both sides to engage in a constructive
manner with the goal of restoring the revenue transfers
in full, in line with the Paris Protocol on Economic
Relations.
I would like to also reiterate that the fate of two
Israeli civilians and the bodies of two Israeli Defence
Forces soldiers missing in Gaza remain an important
humanitarian concern for all of us.
Despite our sustained efforts, the deteriorating
humanitarian and economic situation in Gaza is a
mounting concern. It is not possible to genuinely and
sustainably improve the socioeconomic situation
there without significantly easing restrictions on the
movement and access of goods and people, with the
goal of ultimately lifting them, in line with resolution
1860 (2009), and by reuniting Gaza and the West
Bank under a single, legitimate Palestinian national
authority. At the same time, it is critical to ensure that
the current calm be sustained in order to gradually
introduce longer-term projects that will support Gaza’s
development.
I reiterate the call on all Palestinian factions to
actively engage with Egypt on reconciliation. Despite
the challenges, it is critical that those efforts continue.
6/24

20/09/2019

The United Nations remains steadfast in its support
of Egyptian efforts in that regard, and all Palestinian
factions must take concrete steps to ensure the
reunification of Gaza and the West Bank. Gaza is and
must remain an integral part of a future Palestinian
State as part of the two-State solution.
As we approach third anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 2334 (2016), we can only lament the
worsening situation on the ground. Settlements have
expanded, demolitions have accelerated, violence and
incitement have continued. Achieving intra-Palestinian
unity seems an ever-more distant prospect, and credible
negotiations have yet to be launched.
It is hard to tolerate the steady deterioration of the
already difficult status quo. It reflects the collective
failure of leaders, politicians and the international
community to deliver on the vision that peace between
the State of Israel and the State of Palestine can be
achieved through peaceful negotiations, with support
from the international community, based on the 1967
lines, international law, relevant United Nations
resolutions and previous agreements.
There is no other viable solution to end the conflict.
Those who continue to support a two-State outcome
must acknowledge that derailing that prospect means
that Palestinians and Israelis are facing a grim future
of perpetual occupation, endless violence and threats
to regional stability.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Al-Malki (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to begin by expressing my sincere thanks
and gratitude to the President of the Security Council
and the Russian delegation for their able leadership of
the Council and for convening this important meeting.
We also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). I also
welcome His Excellency Mr. Ayman Safadi, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the sisterly
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
We listened today to the eleventh report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
19-28845

20/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

2334 (2016). Unfortunately, it lists only further crimes,
violations and arbitrary, as well as illegal Israeli
policies. As was the case with previous reports, its
outlook is not at all promising in terms of progress in
the implementation of the resolution’s provisions.
That leads us to wonder: In requesting the
Secretary-General to submit these required reports,
did the Security Council not intend to follow up on the
implementation of the resolution on the ground, assess
the parties’ commitment to it and consequently take the
necessary measures to ensure its implementation? We do
not believe that the purpose of the Council’s request for
periodic reports by the Secretary-General was to listen
only to the extent of violations of international law and
the number of civilian casualties and ignore the reports’
warnings about the diminishing prospects for peace,
further incitement, violence and settlement activities.
At the next presentation of the report of the
Secretary-General, we will not expect to hear any
mention of positive steps towards the implementation
of 2334 (2016), as long as there is no motivation or
deterrence that would lead Israel to reconsider its
military occupation of our Palestinian land, cease
targeting Palestinians civilians and reverse its
expansionist colonialist settlement activity, which
preclude all hope of ending the illegal occupation of our
territory and may render the two-State solution within
the 1967 borders all but impossible.
Israel is not committed to upholding the relevant
resolutions or the Charter of the United Nations; it has
never respected the rights of the Palestinian people or
recognized the Palestinian people’s natural right to selfdetermination and to establish their independent and
free Palestinian State. Israel has arrogantly continued
to violate international law and resolutions without any
regard for either, believing that it enjoys an exceptional
status that affords it the right to assault the rights
and territories of others and shields it from criticism
and accountability.
Israel’s disregard for the rights of the Palestinian
people and for the security of the region as a whole
has reached the point at which our precious national
territories are presented as gifts to bribe extremist rightwing Israeli groups and win their votes. Netanyahu’s
declaration that he intends to annex occupied land in
the valleys and the area north of the Dead Sea is merely
a criminal’s confession of the crime he has perpetrated.
Will the criminal enjoy impunity?

S/PV. 8625

Israel’s systematic attempts to change the
demographic and geographic structure of the Palestinian
land, including East Jerusalem, occupied since 1967
are illegal and rejected, and will not change the legal
status of Palestinian territory as occupied. Nor will
such attempts legitimize the Israeli occupation of our
land. The intention of the occupation authorities has
been revealed. It is to usurp the occupied land by force,
annex it, forcibly displace Palestinians and transfer
Israeli citizens to our lands, which is in stark violation
of international humanitarian law and constitutes war
crimes under the Rome Statute.
Israel is the occupying Power. It has imposed an
illegal blockade on the Gaza Strip, built an expansion
racist wall in the West Bank and isolated occupied
East Jerusalem. It deliberately murders a nurse and a
journalist, kidnaps a child sleeping in his own bed at
night and shoots him in the head or heart in a cowardly
manner. It prevents a young girl from going to school
in Khan Al-Ahmar; it demolishes a family home
in Sur Baher; it stops a young man from Gaza from
travelling abroad to pursue his studies or a woman from
receiving urgent health care; it deprives a man of the
right praying in Jerusalem; and it protects settlers who
have seized a Palestinian house and forcibly taken up
residence therein.
Israel also carries out provocative activities at
Al-Haram Al-Sharif and other holy sites. It rejects the
international presence documenting its racist practices
in Hebron. It establishes arbitrary military checkpoints
extending from the far north to the far south of our
occupied land. It storms Palestinian villages and
refugee camps searching for anyone who rejects its
injustice and suppression, and locks away in its prisons
and detention centres anyone who seeks freedom and
dignity. It pillages our money and natural resources and
refuses to accept any criticism at the United Nations or
any other international forum.
Is that reasonable? Israel, the occupying Power,
continues to create new realities on the ground with the
purpose of changing the nature of the final status, while
seeking to subjugate the Palestinian people, antagonize
their leadership and blackmail their Government, while
rejecting the implementation of all signed bilateral
agreements. It imposes further absurd conditions
requiring the Palestinian side to be content with that
reality and accept the little offered to it, as though this
were the only road that we can take in order to achieve

19-288457/24

S/PV.8625

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

20/09/2019

a fair and lasting peace among the peoples of the region
and ensure the safety of future generations.

reality. The will of peacebuilders needs to prevail over
that of bulldozers.

Is there anyone in the Council who would accept
such a settlement? Our rights are not mere aspirations,
and they are not to be compromised. We are a proud
people, our land is precious, and our just cause is not
for sale.

In that regard, allow me to commend the steady
and consistent positions expressed by Security Council
members and the international community at large
by demonstrating how deeply rooted and constant the
international consensus for just and lasting peace is.
I also wish to thank all those that provide support to
the Palestinian people, including Palestinian refugees
through the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. We also
commend the strong response of the Arab world, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and freedom- and
peace-loving nations around the world to provocative
statements regarding the annexation of Palestinian land.

In fact, a peace plan that does not consider the
presence of Israel on our land an occupation and
considers the two-State solution a mere slogan, while
it sees that the international resolutions and the agreed
terms of reference are obsolete and out of date, as well
as expecting from the international community as a
whole to anticipate that the Palestinians would accept
such a situation, runs counter to the conditions for
peace. Any serious negotiation process must be based
on ending the occupation since 1967, including that of
East Jerusalem, within a set time frame and with the
aim of addressing all final-status issues in line with the
internationally agreed parameters, the relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Madrid terms of reference,
including the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map, as well as the twoState solution and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State within the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital under international sponsorship,
in line with the statement of President Mahmoud Abbas
to the Council in February 2018 (see S/PV.8183).
It is not a Palestinian condition or argument, as
some claim, to avoid dialogue, reject negotiations or
obstruct peace. It is the settlement to which the entire
world agreed. Today we reiterate our acceptance of
that solution and our commitment to it. The reference
to international law for negotiation is a requirement of
common sense for any negotiation process and political
initiative to resolve a conflict.
The Palestinian question must not be an exception.
It is not reasonable that international resolutions be
selectively implemented based on narrow interests.
(spoke in English)
While important, it is not enough to declare that
there is no plan B. We need to identify the means for
plan A to prevail and to be aware of the alternative
reality that Israel is creating on the ground.
In order to be able to counter it, let us give it a
name. It is not a one-State reality but an apartheid
8/24

I also take this opportunity to thank Jordan for its
role in support of the rights of the Palestinian people
and as custodian over the Christian and Islamic holy
sites in East Jerusalem, including its role in protecting
the historic status quo of Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
In adopting its resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016), the Security Council was motivated by
the pursuit of international peace and security in
fulfilment of its mandate. However, stating the law
is not enough. We must find the channels to act so as
to ensure its enforcement. Each country represented
here at the United Nations can further contribute to
peace by upholding its obligations, including pursuant
to resolution 2334 (2016). Member States should do
that, first, by supporting our rights, including to selfdetermination and their fulfilment, and by providing
humanitarian and development assistance to the
Palestinian people. Secondly, they should not recognize
Israel’s illegal activities, including those that seek to
alter the character and status of Jerusalem. Thirdly,
they should not support or assist illegal settlement
activities. Fourthly, in their relations Member States
should distinguish between the territory of the State of
Israel and the territories occupied since 1967. Fifthly,
they should ensure accountability, since impunity is the
greatest obstacle to peace.
We should make no mistake. At the United Nations
the real bias towards Israel shields it from accountability.
Impunity is the greatest obstacle to peace, as it allows
the occupying Power to take advantage of its occupation
instead of facing the consequences and promotes illegal
actions instead of ensuring compliance with the law.
19-28845

20/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

A State that believes that it is beyond the law will be
tempted to continue to act as an outlaw State.
For the sake of peace, the benefit of all peoples of
the region and the authority of international law, we
must urgently and collectively act to change course,
restore hope and achieve a just and lasting solution to
the conflict. We seek justice, not vengeance, freedom,
not conditional liberty, and peace, not apartheid.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): I would like, Sir, to recognize
your presidency of the Security Council this month and
to welcome Ambassador Kelly Craft. We welcome her
presence here and look forward to her voice being heard
on behalf of the American people.
We look forward to hearing what the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan considers the security challenges
in the Middle East. We value our relationship with the
Kingdom. Our peace treaties with Jordan and Egypt
provide a framework for reconciliation and security for
the rest of the region. That peace is based on mutual
respect and recognition and an understanding that our
peoples face mutual challenges that demand cooperation.
Today I will share our perspective on the greatest
challenges that every nation in the region, including
Jordan, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Yemen and the
Islamic Republic of Iran face. For years, Israel has
too often been the lone voice in the international
community calling attention to the danger and threats
that the Iranian regime poses to its people, the region
and the world. Many try to paint Israel as the boy who
cried wolf. In truth, Israel is like the boy in the Dutch
story who plugs a hole in the dyke with his finger,
holding back the dangerous sea.
Today we have more partners and allies standing
with us at that dyke preventing the sea from engulfing
the town. That sea is the Iranian regime.
For more than 40 years, Iran has exported bloodshed
and chaos. Let us consider what has transpired over
the past few weeks alone. Only this weekend, a strike
against the oil processing facilities in Abqaiq and
Khurais in Saudi Arabia sent oil prices skyrocketing
and threatened to destabilize the international energy
market. Iran is trying to hide behind the Houthi militia,
which it is funding and arming. But make no mistake
that such as attack has Iran’s fingerprints all over it.

S/PV. 8625

Last month Iran attacked international shipping
vessels in the Strait of Hormuz and shot down a
United States drone in international airspace. After we
discovered its secret nuclear warehouse in Turquzabad,
which we exposed to the world last year, the regime
covered up the site, trying to hide its violations. That
was not the first time that Israel has caught the Iranians
lying regarding their nuclear programme. Last week the
International Atomic Energy Agency reported that it
had found traces of uranium at the site, proving beyond
a shadow of a doubt Iran’s violations.
While Foreign Minister Zarif smiles and pretends
to extend his hand in friendship, it is the Quds Force
commander, Qasem Soleimani, who executes Iran’s real
destabilization strategy, sowing chaos and destruction at
the instruction of Supreme Leader Ayatollah Khamenei.
If we were to consider only these most recent examples,
it is clear that Iran is building its own case for why it is
deserving of international sanction and condemnation.
We have 40 years’ worth of examples.
I recount this recent behaviour to demonstrate that
Iran poses the greatest danger to regional stability and
security. Iran must be stopped — not with smiles and
handshakes, but with economic, political, diplomatic and
any other pressure, as necessary. I call on the members
of the Council to act against the Iranian violations and
exert greater pressure on Iran. Faced with a regime that
has genocidal ambitions and the largest stockpile of
ballistic missiles in the region and spends billions of
dollars a year supporting terrorist organizations on our
border, Israel must take every threat seriously and act
accordingly. We must be able to defend ourselves.
Israel is a small country with narrow borders, yet
in negotiation with Egyptian President Anwar Sadat,
we returned the vast Sinai peninsula in exchange for
peace. We did this because this came with a guarantee
of security. This means defensible borders, something
that every nation in this Chamber and around the world
is entitled to. Currently our borders are threatened by
the same strategy of aggression and terror that Iran
applies to the region. On 24 August, the Israel Defense
Forces prevented a large-scale terror attack in which
the Quds Force had plotted to send explosive drones
into Israel for one purpose: to kill Israelis. They did not
intend to launch those drones from Iranian territory but
rather from Syria, just outside Damascus.
We know that Iran does not operate just in Syria. It
also operates in Lebanon, through its proxy Hizbullah,

19-288459/24

S/PV.8625

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

an internationally designated terrorist organization. On
1 September, Hizbullah fired several anti-tank missiles
from southern Lebanon, targeting and hitting an Israeli
military outpost and vehicle in northern Israel. This
flagrant violation of Israel’s sovereignty marks yet
another stage in Hizbullah’s ongoing efforts to attack
Israel. Furthermore, as we discussed here in the Council
a few weeks ago, Iran has been converting rockets in
Hizbullah’s arsenal into precision-guided missiles. We
cannot and will not allow it.
The Quds Force again oversaw this operation,
which established facilities across Lebanon, including
in Beirut. Israel will continue to act against these
threats. Israel will continue to do whatever is necessary
to protect its civilians and national security interests.
Any country that would allow attacks against Israel
from its territory should and will bear the consequences.
We are looking forward to hearing Jordan’s position.
Nonetheless, Israel has its own position, one that
guarantees defensible borders for our country. Israel
cannot have defensible borders without control of the
Jordan Valley. In his final speech before the Knesset,
Israel’s former Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, said:
“The security border of the State of Israel will
be located in the Jordan Valley in the broadest
meaning of that term.”
Prime Minister Netanyahu repeated this exact
phrase last week. Defensible borders are not just
required for Israel’s security but are a necessary
condition for regional stability. We would never accept
a situation in which Iran also conducts its terrorist
strategy from the outskirts of Ramallah and in the
Judean hills overlooking our Ben Gurion airport, Tel
Aviv and Israeli civilian and financial centres. Their
belief that Israel should compromise on its claims would
sacrifice our security and potentially our existence on
the altar of political expediency after a misreading of
the regional situation.
This position is consistent not only with the
resolutions of the Security Council but also with our
right to self-defence and self-determination, which
form the very basis of the United Nations Charter. That
is our firm position. We understand that Jordan and
others have their own stances; these differences create
an opportunity for dialogue.
As we have always said, we would like to move the
political process forward. We welcome the efforts of
10/24

20/09/2019

the United States Administration to revive meaningful
dialogue. We are still ready to engage in direct bilateral
talks with the Palestinians. Will they come to the table?
Will Foreign Minister Al-Malki come to the table to
negotiate with us directly, bilaterally? We are waiting for
that day. Would Mr. Abbas or Prime Minister Shtayyeh
sit with Israel? It is only half an hour between Ramallah
and Jerusalem. We can come to them, or they can come
to us. Or will the Palestinian leadership continue down
its own unilateral path to avoid making the bitter
concessions necessary to bilateral negotiations?
The Arab States, the United Nations and other
members of the international community ask themselves
what they can do to break the stalemate and promote
peace. The answer is simple: stop enabling Palestinian
rejectionism, pull the Palestinians back from their
maximalist demands and urge the leadership to come to
the negotiating table without preconditions. Today, like
every day for the past 71 years, Israel remains willing
to discuss the political process. We are here, ready,
waiting for a partner to decide that it is time to look
forward, not backwards, and build a brighter future for
our people.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to those members of the Council wishing to
make statements.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State of Palestine,
Mr. Riad Al-Malki, and His Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, Mr. Ayman Safadi, to our meeting. I
also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his eleventh
briefing on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016). We commend the efforts that he has undertaken
to implement his mandate, which we fully support.
In paragraph 2 of resolution 2334 (2016), the
Council demands that
“Israel immediately and completely cease all
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and that it fully
respect all of its legal obligations in this regard”.
It is for this reason that in my intervention I would
like to underscore the main following points.
First, the Israeli occupying Power continues to
build and expand illegal settlements in the occupied
19-28845

20/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

State of Palestine, including in East Jerusalem. This
is a clear message that proves the determination of
Israel to defy the will of the international community,
international law and international resolutions. We
regretfully reiterate that international inaction has
clearly encouraged Israel to persist in its defiance
and obstinacy.
Secondly, as Mr. Mladenov has repeatedly said
in this Hall, most recently today, new settlements are
being built and the annexation of territory in the West
Bank and in East Jerusalem undermines the possibility
of creating a Palestinian State, in conformity with the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the twoState solution.
Thirdly, Israel, the occupying Power, has
continued to take measures and adopt policies that defy
international public opinion by announcing recently the
construction of more than 2,300 housing units in the
West Bank. This recent measure was followed by the
provocative announcement concerning the annexation
of territories occupied in 1967, in stark violation of
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
relevant international resolutions, including resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
Fourthly, Israel’s illegal plans to annex Palestinian
territories has led to an increase in the number of
settlers and, as a result, in the number of violent
and criminal attacks waged by the settlers against
Palestinian civilians, under the very noses of the Israeli
occupying forces.
Fifthly, more than ever before, the international
community is clearly responsible for upholding
international law and holding Israel accountable for
all its violations, including the seizure of Palestinian
buildings and homes, the arbitrary arrest of Palestinian
civilians and such unilateral decisions as depriving the
Palestinian Authority of part of its tax revenue, putting
pressure on the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
using live ammunition against demonstrators taking
part in the Great March of Return. Those actions could
constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity.
In conclusion, the absence of serious measures
to ensure accountability, pursuant to resolution 2334
(2016) and other United Nations relevant resolutions
calling on the Israeli occupying authority to abandon
to its illegal policies and measures in the occupied
territories, including East Jerusalem, and end the

S/PV. 8625

occupation, which has lasted more than 50 years, has
unfortunately led to additional flagrant violations by
the occupying Power. Nevertheless, we still believe
that a lasting, comprehensive and fair solution must
end occupation in accordance with agreed terms of
reference, namely, relevant Council resolutions, the
principle of land for peace, the road map and the Arab
Peace Initiative based on the two-State solution — with
a view to the Palestinian people recovering all their
legitimate political rights and establishing their own
independent State on their territory, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): As the
Council is aware, this is my first time participating in
this monthly briefing. With this in mind, I would like
to step back for a moment and speak broadly on how I
intend to approach issues related to the State of Israel.
First, I believe it is important to be clear on serious
matters. So allow me to be clear on the relationship
between the State of Israel and the United States of
America. In the past, the United States has always
supported Israel, the United States supports Israel
today, and the United States will always support Israel
going forward. Israel will have no better friend than
Kelly Craft.
Unfortunately, on matters related to Israel at the
United Nations, many Member States do not play fair.
I could speak endlessly about the excessive attention
Member States give to the affairs of Israel, including
complaints, unwarranted criticism and the incessant
number of resolutions condemning this great nation.
However, I do not wish to dwell on those well-worn
points. As a person who finds value in emphasizing the
positive, I wish to, instead, highlight Israel’s astonishing
record of achievements. Since its creation, Israel has
served as a refuge and sanctuary for those fleeing
persecution and repression. A vibrant and accomplished
democracy, Israel has stood tall and steadfast despite
constant threats to its peace and security. All the more
impressive is that, in this threatening environment,
Israel strongly supports press freedom, defends gender
equality and houses a robust and innovative free-market
economy. And in opposition to what has been stated
here, Israel is a nation that deeply respects the rule of
law. Indeed, we have much to learn from her.
Further, as a hub for innovation, Israel has
cultivated and earned its reputation as a start-up nation.
It is a global leader in research and development and

19-2884511/24

S/PV.8625

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

has a vast network of international collaboration in this
space. In fact, it is a leading investor in research and
development as a percentage of gross domestic product
and has been home to 5,000 new start-ups in the past 10
years alone.
Much like the way they built their great nation,
Israelis have used their spirit of courage, faith in
education and dogged determination to help their
brothers and sisters around the globe. Many nations
that are eager to condemn Israel should instead study its
resolve, its constant efforts toward making the country
stand as first among equals to any of the modern world
and its benevolent pursuits in arts and sciences. In so
doing, I believe a different picture will emerge — one
that showcases all that Israel is and all that the world
can gain from this great nation.
Please do not mistake my remarks here. My
statement is not meant to indicate that other issues
discussed here today, including the continued violence
and terror from Hamas in Gaza, as described by
Mr. Mladenov in his briefing, are not important.
However, as we sit in this building that was created as
a hall of peace, I believe it critically important that we
acknowledge that no country should face the ceaseless
barrage of unwarranted criticism, one-sided antagonism
or repeated negative spotlight.
The United States remains tirelessly committed
to supporting Israel’s fair treatment here in this organ
as well as in the United Nations system in general.
Further, it should come as no surprise that this is one of
my chief priorities. The United States stands with our
close friend and partner and will continue to oppose
actions and statements that unfairly single it out. And
as the representative of the United States to the United
Nations, I will work relentlessly to fight every effort
that seeks to delegitimize Israel or undermine its
security. It is inexcusable that persuasive anti-Israel
bias still exists in the United Nations and that we
continue to witness attempts by some States Members
of the United Nations to undermine Israel’s standing as
a full member of the community of nations. The United
States vigorously opposes all such efforts.
As I said when opening my remarks, I believe it
is very important that I be clear on serious matters, so
allow me, once again, to be clear on the relationship
between the State of Israel and the United States — in
the past, the United States has always supported Israel,
the United States supports Israel today and the United
12/24

20/09/2019

States will support Israel going forward. Israel will
have no better friend than Kelly Craft.
Mr. Ruddyard (Indonesia): Let me begin by
thanking the delegation of the Russian Federation
for convening this briefing and for presiding over the
Security Council for the month of September.
I would also like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing. On behalf of my delegation, let me
also welcome the Foreign Minister of Palestine,
Mr. Riad Al-Malki, and the Foreign Minister of Jordan,
Mr. Ayman Safadi, to this meeting.
Exactly one month ago, in this Chamber, the
Council met in the spirit of responsibility to address
the agenda item entitled “Maintenance of international
peace and security: Challenges to peace and security
in the Middle East” (see S/PV.8600). At that meeting,
Member States expressed their views on the way
forward for the Middle East, underlining the primacy of
multilateralism and international law in our endeavour
to achieve lasting peace in the Middle East.
Last week, however, the incumbent Prime Minister
of Israel openly declared that if re-elected, he would
annex parts of the West Bank. Against that backdrop, I
would like to stress the following points.
First, we must denounce any act that undermines
multilateralism and international law. There are times
when it is dangerous to mince words. This is one of them.
Indonesia unequivocally condemns Mr. Netanyahu’s
arrogant proposal. We affirm that such a proposal is
not designed to — nor can it possibly — yield security
or stability for Israel or for the region. If anything, the
plan would bury the prospects for a negotiated twoState solution between Israelis and Palestinians upon
which United Nations policy has rested for decades
and the work of the Quartet has depended for so long.
Secretary-General Guterres has already described
the plan as being devastating to any hope of peace.
Similarly, at the extraordinary meeting of Council
of Foreign Ministers of the Member States of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation last Sunday in
Saudi Arabia, the Organization strongly rejected and
condemned Mr. Netanyahu’s stated intention.
My second point is that the Council must assert its
authority in the event of any violation of international
law and relevant United Nations resolutions. For
the Council, this is a very straightforward matter. In
19-28845

20/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8625

resolution 2234 (2016), inter alia, the Council stressed
that it would not, I repeat, would not, recognize any
changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard
to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties
through negotiations. The Council affirmed that Israel’s
establishment of settlements in the Palestinian territory
constitutes a flagrant violation of international law. Not
only does it threaten peace between them and in the
region, it also promises permanent insecurity.

with regard to the borders, the status of Jerusalem and
continued settlement expansion, is deeply disturbing.
The recent pronouncement by Israel on the possible
annexation of large parts of the West Bank has gone
unchallenged and further undermines prospects for
peace. The continued expansion of settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories deliberately violates
international law, undermines prospects for peace and
contravenes decisions of the Security Council.

Lastly, I would like to also remind us all of the
suffering of the Palestinian people in the occupied
Palestinian territories and of Palestinian refugees.
While we defend the hope of a two-State solution, let us
not forget the humanitarian crisis facing our Palestinian
brothers and sisters. We need to remain steadfast in
our efforts aimed at assisting the Palestinian people,
not only for humanitarian reasons, but also to enhance
the capacity of Palestinians to fully govern themselves.
To this end, we need to renew our commitment to
supporting all possible avenues by lending our utmost
assistance to the work of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East and by strengthening our joint efforts through any
possible means.

Since 1948, or 71 years ago, the Council has adopted
numerous resolutions, including resolution 42 (1948),
of 5 March 1948, resolution 43 (1948), of 1 April 1948,
and others in 1944, 1945, 1947, 1948 and 1949 — we
can go on and on. All in all, there has been a total of 72
Council resolutions, with zero implementation. What
does that say about the Council?

Indonesia wishes to reiterate that a peaceful
resolution of the Palestinian issue can only be found in
the vision of two States coexisting within internationally
agreed parameters. We call on the international
community to come together to put the peace process
back on track and implement the two-State solution.
This is the only way to ensure that dangerous proposals
such as this do not arise again in future.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I would like to begin
by thanking Mr. Mladenov, the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing on the
situation in Israel and Palestine and welcome Ministers
for Foreign Affairs Al-Malki and Safadi of the State of
Palestine and of Jordan to the Security Council.
As we and many other delegations have stated in
the Council before, the only true and just resolution to
the situation in the Middle East is one built on the twoState solution, based on the 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as the capital of an independent, sovereign
Palestinian State, in keeping with resolution 242 (1967),
of 22 November 1967.
The continued disrespect and disregard for the
prevailing and long-standing peace process, such as the
systematic foreclosing of final status issues, particularly

As we sit here today, thousands of Palestinians live
in fear of having their homes and schools destroyed,
their property confiscated and their already severely
limited freedoms further curtailed. Yet the Council
has been unable to act to address these ongoing blatant
violations of international law. Just yesterday, it
deliberated on the protection of civilians and the dire
humanitarian situation in Syria (see S/PV.8623). When
will the Council address these same concerns with
regard to the Palestinian people? When?
The Security Council’s lack of action reduces it
to a body unable to uphold its own decisions, whose
credibility is being eroded. Therefore, South Africa
continues to insist on the full implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) and underscores that violations
of Security Council resolutions would in any other case
lead to strict measures against the party responsible.
In this regard, and in accordance with resolution 2334
(2016), my delegation also strongly calls for written
reports by the Secretary-General on the matter.
South Africa believes that the Council should make
every effort to restore trust in the legitimate peace
process that has been pursued for decades and prevent
the further development of antagonism between Israel
and Palestine. The exchange of hostilities, including
rocket fire and bombings in Gaza, remains a case in
point and is deeply concerning. My delegation remains
deeply troubled by the continued violations of human
rights in the occupied territories and emphasizes that
such violations only contribute to fostering hatred
and divisions between Palestinians and Israelis. In the
place of such antagonistic gestures as the building of

19-2884513/24

S/PV.8625

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

additional barriers and walls, the closing of schools and
the killing of civilians, the Council should encourage
gestures of hope and the building of trust between Israel
and Palestine, which have been lacking in recent times.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to reiterate
our call for the Council to reconsider its long-delayed
visit to the region. We would like to again suggest that
should some members of the Council be unwilling to
participate in the visit, the Council might consider a
mini-mission, which would include those Council
members interested in taking part. A visit to the region
would be a clear indication that the international
community has not washed its hands of the core and
oldest conflict in the Middle East. Similar to the
Council’s other field visits, like the one we will take
next month to Juba, it will also offer Council members
an opportunity to meet relevant actors on the ground,
including members of the Government in Israel and
Palestine, civil society actors and all role-players, and
ask them to embrace peace efforts, respect one another,
coexist and live in harmony, as we all do in our own
countries and regions. We in South Africa are ready to
assist in that direction if we are asked to do so.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates of Jordan and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Palestine to our debate.
I thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov
for his informative briefing. His presentation of the
eleventh report on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) again draws our attention to the gravity of
the situation, in particular with regard to the issue of
colonization. Ahead of the meetings to be held under
resolution 2334 (2016), I would again like to thank the
Secretariat for granting our request for regular written
reports. They are essential tools for documenting the
issue of colonization, as well as that of violence, and for
guiding the work of the Council.
The threats to the two-State solution are of great
concern. Announcements concerning the possible
annexation of some areas in the West Bank, in particular
the Jordan Valley, the northern coast of the Dead Sea
and, eventually, the settlements on the West Bank
are very worrisome. If implemented, such measures
would constitute not only a serious and unprecedented
violation of international law, but would also provoke
instability in the region by exacerbating tensions and
fuelling extremism of all forms. We therefore call on
14/24

20/09/2019

the parties to refrain from any action that is at variance
with international law and that would jeopardize
the viability of the two-State solution. Together with
our European partners, we will continue to monitor
the situation closely, including any move towards
annexation, and act accordingly.
Ongoing colonization is also a cause for deep
concern for France. We have condemned the decisions
taken by the Israeli authorities in August to allow the
construction of 2,300 housing units in the West Bank.
We also condemn the decision by the Israeli Government
on 15 September, under Israeli law, to legalize the
illegal settlement in the Jordan Valley. As reaffirmed
by resolution 2334 (2016), settlement activity is illegal;
it serves to heighten tensions. By undermining the
viability of the two-State solution, it jeopardizes the
conditions for a just and lasting peace between Israelis
and Palestinians and must stop. In that regard, I thank
the Special Coordinator for his quarterly briefing on
the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
Lastly, the deterioration of the situation in recent
weeks in Gaza — where the firing of rockets into
Israel has resumed and several more demonstrators
have been killed — sparks fear of a further escalation.
We call on all parties to show the utmost restraint. We
reiterate our condemnation of the firing of rockets from
Gaza into the occupied areas of Israel, as well as of
the disproportionate use of force against Palestinian
demonstrators. Those developments come against
the backdrop of the deadlock in intra-Palestinian
reconciliation, despite Egypt’s efforts, which I
welcome, and the deteriorating humanitarian situation,
including a shortage of medicines and the crisis in the
health-care system.
The support of the international community, in
particular for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, is
essential. However, there will be no lasting improvement
in the situation in Gaza without a political solution,
involving the return of the Palestinian Authority and the
lifting of the blockade, along with credible guarantees
for Israel, whose security, I repeat, is not negotiable.
In that regard, the imminent session of the General
Assembly should be an opportunity for us to reaffirm
our collective commitment to the parameters agreed
upon by the international community and to Security
Council resolutions.
19-28845

20/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The objective must remain that of a Palestinian
State, living in peace and security alongside the State
of Israel, within secure and internationally recognized
borders drawn on the basis of the 1967 borders, with
Jerusalem as the capital of both States. France stands
ready to support any peace effort in that context. Any
attempt to deviate from those internationally agreed and
collectively defined parameters would be doomed to
failure. It could also lead to regional destabilization, as
there is no viable alternative to the two-State solution.
None of the two peoples can sustainably satisfy its
aspirations to the detriment of the other. The path to
lasting peace requires a two-State solution. As a friend
of Israel and Palestine alike, France remains more
determined than ever to support them on that path.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I, too, would also like to
welcome Nickolay Mladenov and the representatives of
Israel and Palestine. We would like to say a few special
words to the Foreign Minister of Jordan. We consider
Jordan to be the key pole of stability in the region. I
welcome the Foreign Minister to today’s meeting.
The last time I spoke to the Council (see S/PV.8623),
I highlighted the importance of and need for respect for
the rule of law and the implementation of international
law. We believe that respect for international law is
best for the harmonious coexistence of countries and
the well-being of their people. Resolution 2334 (2016) is
part of international law. It is a binding resolution that
was adopted by the Council three years ago. There was
no objection to it.
Germany believes that the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) would be best for the coexistence
of Israel and Palestine and the well-being of their people.
For once, let us just imagine that we had implemented
resolution 2334 (2016) in 2016. There would be no
more settlement activities, no announcements about
annexation, no acts of terrorism, no violence against
civilians, no incitement, no provocative actions and
no inflammatory rhetoric. There would be no firing of
rockets from Gaza into Israel by Hamas and others. If
resolution 2334 (2016) had been implemented in 2016,
I am sure we would now be following real negotiations
for a two-State solution, based on internationally
agreed parameters.
We believe that only a two-State solution could fulfil
the aspirations of Israel and Palestine — Palestine’s
aspirations for statehood and sovereignty and Israel’s
aspirations to live in peace as a democratic Jewish State.

S/PV. 8625

I again thank Mr. Mladenov for his report. His
conclusion was quite depressing, as he spoke about
the deteriorating situation and grim future. We believe
that we must not stop trying to work towards the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) to ensure the
well-being of Palestinians and the security of Israel, to
which Germany remains committed.
Ms. Niamke (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
commend Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his detailed
briefing on the latest developments in the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
Côte d’Ivoire notes with regret the persistent climate
of violence in the Middle East, which is increasingly
detrimental to the prospect of the restoration of peace
in the region. Given the complexity of the situation,
it is important for the Council to propose innovative
approaches to peacefully resolve the various conflicts
in the region.
With regard to the conflict in Syria, the
consequences on the region are worrisome. Côte
d’Ivoire once again deplores the lack of consensus
within the Council, which impeded the adoption of a
draft resolution yesterday on the humanitarian situation
in Syria aimed at easing the suffering of millions of
Syrians. We are convinced that there is no military
solution to that crisis. My country wishes to reiterate its
support for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for his tireless efforts to find a lasting political solution
to that crisis, in line with the provisions of resolution
2254 (2015).
Turning to the Palestinian question, Côte
d’Ivoire, given the impasse in the Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations, believes that the following imperatives
are necessary. On the one hand, an appropriate
framework for negotiations must be established and the
political process launched, and, on the other, there must
be compliance with the resolutions on the Palestinian
question and international law.
My delegation laments the fact that to date no
compromise has been reached to meet the aspirations
of both sides, namely, the right of the Palestinians
to self-determination and independence and Israel’s
right to ensure its security. In response to that, and in
accordance with the recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General dated 26 August,
Côte d’Ivoire calls on the international community to

19-2884515/24

S/PV.8625

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

20/09/2019

redouble its efforts to resume the political process for a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the crisis,
as soon as possible.

he is carrying out with his team. I also welcome the
presence of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Jordan
and Palestine.

My country remains convinced that a lasting and
mutually acceptable solution to the conflict can be
reached only through strictly adhering to international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016). In that regard, we
reaffirm our commitment to the solution of two States
peacefully coexisting within the framework of the
1967 borders.

We are deeply concerned over what is no longer a
status quo but a continuous deterioration of the situation
on the ground, which is moving us further and further
away from the two-State solution. The settlement in
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, continues
unabated and undermines the very foundation and
feasibility of a two-State solution. Numerous legislative
initiatives contribute to encouraging the settlement
policy and facilitating accompanying measures, such
as demolitions, evictions and forced displacements.

My delegation also calls on the Palestinian and
Israeli authorities to ensure respect for the rights of
all vulnerable persons, including children, who are
paying a high price in the conflict, an aspect that
various UNICEF reports regularly stress. Similarly,
Côte d’Ivoire supports all possible efforts towards
inter-Palestinian reconciliation, including between
Fatah and Hamas, with a view to enabling the Palestinian
Authority, which has the primary responsibility for
meeting the social and humanitarian needs of the
Palestinian people, to exercise its sovereign functions
in Gaza and the West Bank.
My delegation also remains concerned about
the humanitarian situation in Gaza owing to the
extremely difficult socioeconomic conditions, as well
as difficulties with the energy supply and in access
to basic services. Those precarious living conditions
represent potential threats to regional stability,
especially since this humanitarian crisis is aggravated
by a difficult socioeconomic situation, resulting in
the irregular payment of civil servants’ salaries and
a high unemployment rate, which especially affects
young people. The easing of restrictions is therefore
necessary, both for the delivery of humanitarian aid
and for the movement of goods and people. In that
regard, Côte d’Ivoire underscores the crucial role
that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) plays in
addressing the needs of nearly 5.4 million people.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the material
and financial support of the United Nations specialized
agencies and international partners of UNRWA and
reiterates its call on them to continue their vital efforts
for the benefit of the Palestinian population.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I thank the Special Coordinator, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, for his detailed briefing and the work that
16/24

We note with concern, for example, that 51 schools
are being threatened with demolition, including the
Um Sidra school, in Hebron governorate. That policy
seriously undercuts the exercise of the fundamental
rights of Palestinians and is illegal under international
law, including resolution 2334 (2016).
We reiterate our deep concern at the worrying
increase in the demolition and confiscation of the
infrastructure of humanitarian projects. We demand that
the Israeli authorities put an end to those demolitions
and grant reparations or compensation for the damage
incurred. Moreover, we are deeply concerned about the
increase in the use of violence by settlers, as well as
against settlers. We reiterate our firm condemnation of
any use of violence, regardless of the perpetrator.
Resolution 2334 (2016) calls on States to make a
distinction in their exchanges between the territory
of the State of Israel and the territories occupied
since 1967. In that regard, Belgium recalls that the
European Union has adopted several measures and
instruments to achieve that differentiation. Belgium
remains committed to the full, continuous and effective
implementation of that policy.
The viability of a Palestinian State also means a
return to stability in Gaza. We call on all parties to
exercise restraint and recall the imperatives of protecting
civilians and respecting international humanitarian
law, including the principles of proportionality
and distinction.
We are deeply concerned about the humanitarian
and health situation. All parties must ensure free
humanitarian access at all times, also taking into
account the gender dimension and the specific needs
of women and girls. Here I would like to commend the
19-28845

20/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

indispensable role of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
the mandate of which Belgium will continue to support.
The resolution of the crisis in Gaza requires
a fundamental change, including the lifting of the
blockade and the full opening of the crossing points,
while taking into account Israel’s legitimate security
concerns. A political solution to the crisis also requires
the return of Palestinian territory to the control of the
Palestinian Authority. We call on all parties to engage
constructively in inter-Palestinian reconciliation efforts.
For Belgium, there is no alternative to the twoState solution within secure and recognized borders,
based on the 1967 lines, with Jerusalem as the capital
of both States. We will not recognize any changes to
the previous 1967 borders, including with regard to
Jerusalem, except those agreed by the parties.
In conclusion, Belgium calls on all parties to
the conflict to refrain from unilateral measures and
declarations taking us farther away from the parameters
agreed by the international community and endorsed
by the Council. It is time, now more than ever, to work
for a solution under international law to achieve a just
and lasting peace and a stable regional environment.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the holding of this meeting and to
Mr. Mladenov for his comprehensive briefing and the
work that he is doing with his team. We welcome the
participation of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Palestine and Jordan.

S/PV. 8625

international humanitarian law and human rights
law. We are alarmed that the prospects for reaching a
political solution are becoming increasingly faint and
that unilateral decisions, actions and their subsequent
declarations could degenerate into an even greater
escalation of tension and violence.
We recognize Israel’s right to safeguard its
own security and existence through the exercise of
legitimate self-defence, provided it do so in accordance
with the principles of legality, proportionality and
precaution. The human rights of Palestinian citizens,
including those of minors, cannot be ignored. To that
end, we must recall Israel’s obligation to comply with
the relevant Security Council resolutions. In particular,
we believe it urgent, in line with resolution 2334
(2016), to end the rise in settlement activities, property
demolitions and evictions in the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967. Such practices run contrary to
international law, seriously jeopardize the territorial
integrity of the Palestinian State and undermine the
chances of reaching a two-State solution.
We also emphasize the urgent need to address
the basic needs of the people of Gaza, as poverty
and marginalization provide fertile ground for those
advocating violence and terrorism. We encourage the
continuation of infrastructure and development projects,
the pursuit of efforts to ensure that the Palestinian
Authority can regain effective control of the area, and
the provision of stable and predictable funding to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.

Peru is following with deep concern the situation
in Palestine. The uncompromising positions, the lack
of dialogue between the parties and the continued
violence have led to a stalemate in the peace process.
The situation is unsustainable and destabilizing for
the Middle East and the international community. We
must continue to condemn the persistent indiscriminate
attacks against the Israeli civilian population by Hamas
and other radical Palestinian actors, the disproportionate
response by the Israelis, and the aggressive rhetoric
of their respective leaders, which perpetually fuel the
hostile dynamics of the situation.

In conclusion, we express our full support
for Mr. Mladenov in his efforts to prevent further
escalation and to promote dialogue among the parties,
while reaffirming our commitment to finding a solution
to the question of Palestine, which will undoubtedly
contribute to the achievement of sustainable peace in
the region.

In that regard, we stress the importance for the
Security Council to regain its unity on this sensitive
issue so that it can speak out when the situation on the
ground warrants and demand that the parties comply
strictly with their obligations under international law,

In 2016, the Security Council adopted resolution
2334 (2016), in which it calls on all parties to end
territorial claims, respect sovereignty and liberate the
occupied territories. Unfortunately, the situation has not
changed since then. The reality is that the occupation

Mr. Fiallo Billini Portorreal (Dominican
Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Special
Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his report and the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs for their presence among
us today.

19-2884517/24

S/PV.8625

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

20/09/2019

has illegally expanded without any consequences,
thereby preventing any step towards achieving peace.
According to reports, Israeli authorities have approved
more than 12,000 housing units in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.

for the maintenance of world peace and security, the
achievement of which demands firm and effective
actions, complemented by our positions, in accordance
with the authority and respect that this beacon of world
order deserves.

The Dominican Republic continues to agree with
the existing international consensus that the only
way forward for Palestinians and Israelis lies in the
negotiation of the solution of two States living side
by side in peace and security. The Security Council
must remain committed to working with all parties
concerned to achieve that goal.

Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Mladenov
for his briefing.

The Dominican Republic remains deeply concerned
about the humanitarian and security situation in Gaza,
which continues to seriously deteriorate. The healthcare system is on the verge of collapse after years of
blockade and is now overburdened with the thousands
of those injured as a consequence the recurrent Great
March of Return demonstrations. The increase in
violence and tension only raises concerns about a new
escalation of hostilities. We therefore commend the vital
work being carried out on the ground by the relevant
organizations and agencies of the United Nations
system, as well as the support of friendly countries, to
alleviate suffering and bring about change.
In that regard, we also note with concern the violent
incidents in the West Bank that have resulted in the
death of or serious injury to Israelis and Palestinians
alike. According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, 350,000 people living in
67 communities in the West Bank are vulnerable to
settler violence. The Palestinian Authority cannot
access that area to provide vital services, such as
health care, education and social and policing services.
Construction restrictions also hinder the economic and
social development of that area. Access to and control
over natural resources remain major problems facing
the community.
We call on Hamas and other armed groups to end
all acts of violence and provocation that endanger the
lives of civilians, which we condemn in the strongest
terms. We encourage the Palestinian Authority, Israel
and regional and international actors to propose
sustainable solutions to the threat posed to Israel’s
security by Hamas.
In conclusion, expressing how we feel — as we
often do in this Chamber — does not relieve us of the
key responsibility conferred upon the Security Council
18/24

The United Kingdom has long made its position clear
that Israeli settlement activity is illegal. The increased
pace of settlement advancement and the retroactive
approval of unauthorized settlement outposts — as
seen in the Jordan Valley on Sunday — further threaten
the physical viability of a two-State solution. We have
also previously made clear our deep concern about
suggestions that any part of the occupied Palestinian
territories could be annexed.
In the light of further recent comments, I want
to reiterate the United Kingdom’s opposition to the
unilateral annexation of all or part of the West Bank.
As we have stated before in the Security Council,
such a move would be contrary to international
law and damaging to peace efforts, and could not
pass unchallenged. The United Kingdom remains
seriously concerned by the continued demolition of
Palestinian property by the Israeli authorities. In all
but the most exceptional circumstances demolitions
are contrary to international humanitarian law. The
practice causes unnecessary suffering to ordinary
Palestinians and is also harmful to the peace process.
We urge both sides to enable Palestinian development
to accelerate, including in Area C.
Settlements and demolitions are not the only
obstacles to peace. The people of Israel deserve to
live free from terrorism, anti-Semitism and incitement
to violence.
Returning to Gaza, the ongoing levels of violence
are troubling. The loss of life and the large number of
injured Palestinians is tragic. We call on Israel to take
all action possible to limit civilian casualties. But the
recent increase and infiltration attempts risks Israel’s
security and contribute to an environment of terror. We
call on Hamas and other armed groups to permanently
end their incitement and rocket fire against Israel. Such
violence is destructive to peace efforts. I would also
add my voice to those who have called for the release
of the remains of the deceased Israeli soldiers. Holding
on to those soldiers’ remains and not allowing their
19-28845

20/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

families to complete their grieving is inhumane and
beneath those who do it.
We continue to welcome the efforts of Egypt
and the United Nations to work towards a cessation
of violence and sustainable improvements in the
humanitarian situation. Ultimately, a long-term solution
that addresses the underlying causes of the conflict and
returns the Palestinian Authority to Gaza is required to
end the cycle of violence.
A just and lasting resolution that ends the occupation
and delivers peace to both Israelis and Palestinians is
long overdue. As we have said before, we encourage
the United States Administration to bring forward
detailed proposals for a viable Israeli-Palestinian peace
agreement that addresses the legitimate concerns of
both parties. The United Kingdom continues to believe
that the best way to achieve that is through substantive
peace talks between the parties leading to a two-State
solution, with Jerusalem as a shared capital. We call on
all parties to immediately end actions that undermine
support for the two-State solution and ultimately make
peace more difficult.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing, which
was very precise and informative, as always. Allow me
also to welcome in the Chamber Their Excellencies
Mr. Riad Al-Malki and Mr. Ayman Safadi, Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Palestine and Jordan.
Let me begin by reaffirming Poland’s commitment
to a just and comprehensive resolution of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict through a two-State solution, and
an agreement that ends the occupation, which began in
1967, ending all claims and fulfilling the aspirations of
both parties, including Israeli and Palestinian security
needs and Palestinian aspirations for statehood and
sovereignty on the basis of relevant Security Council
resolutions and internationally agreed parameters.
Poland will continue to call on all parties to refrain
from actions in contravention of international law that
would imperil the viability of a two-State solution.
In that context, we are concerned about the recent
announcements of a possible annexation of areas in
the West Bank, particularly the Jordan Valley and the
northern shore of the Dead Sea. If implemented, that
would constitute a serious breach of international law.
The situation in Gaza remains dire, continues to fuel
extremism and radicalization and fosters instability.

S/PV. 8625

We call on all parties to take urgent steps leading to
a fundamental change in the humanitarian, political,
security and economic situations in Gaza, including
by ending the closure policy and a sustained opening
of the crossing points important to the daily lives of
Gazans, while at the same time addressing Israel’s
legitimate security concerns. We commend the efforts
led by Egypt, Qatar and the United Nations Special
Coordinator to improve the humanitarian situation in
Gaza, as part of the future Palestinian State.
We must be frank with ourselves. On the political
track, we must acknowledge that the process is currently
almost entirely blocked. The intra-Palestinian division
only aggravates the situation of the people of Gaza and
weakens the national aspirations of the Palestinians.
There is an urgent need to relaunch the intra-Palestinian
reconciliation process. Everyone must be committed to
the Egyptian efforts in that regard.
We should uphold the existing international
consensus that the only way forward for the Palestinians
and Israel is the negotiation of a two-State solution,
with the State of Israel and an independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State in the West
Bank and Gaza living side by side in peace and security.
Today our main aim should be to restore a political
horizon for the resumption of such a meaningful peace
process. A resolution of all final-status issues, including
Jerusalem, should be found through the negotiated twoState solution.
Regrettably, the situation on the ground continues
to deteriorate, and the idea of a two-State solution
continues to be dismantled piece by piece, in particular
by an expansion of Israeli settlements. We are very
close to the point at which it would be difficult, if not
impossible, to establish a viable Palestinian State.
Poland’s position on the Israeli settlement policy in
the occupied Palestinian territory is clear and remains
unchanged. It is also the European Union’s wellknown stance. All settlement activity is illegal under
international law. Not only does it erode the viability
of the two-State solution and the prospects for a lasting
peace, but — we must to be honest with ourselves — it
is an obstacle to peace.
The adoption of resolution 2334 (2016) provided a
strong reaffirmation of the international consensus on
that matter. The resolution underlines the illegality of
the Israeli settlements, stressing that the cessation of

19-2884519/24

S/PV.8625

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

settlement activities is essential for salvaging the twoState solution.
Allow me to conclude by praising the collective
efforts by the international community to allow the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to fulfil its
mandate to provide essential relief, development and
protection services to Palestinian refugees and those
displaced by the conflict. In our opinion, UNRWA
remains a key contributor, providing humanitarian
assistance, stability and security in the region.
Mr. Elé Ela (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish):
Equatorial Guinea welcomes Their Excellencies
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Jordan
and the State of Palestine and wishes them a pleasant
stay in New York. We also thank the team represented
by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for the valuable briefing.
The prolonged lack of a lasting political solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and, consequently, the
ongoing deterioration of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, as well as the insecurity with
which the Israelis live, remain a source of deep concern
to Equatorial Guinea.
It is now almost 70 years since this question was first
introduced at the United Nations in 1947. Most of those
who were living at that time are clearly dead and many
of those who were born during that period are now old.
Both sides have lost many loved ones and significant
basic infrastructure. Added to that are the millions of
Palestinians who have been forced to flee their homes
and properties to depend on humanitarian assistance in
various parts of the Middle East and the world. This
suffering, which has scarred the civilian population in
the course of this long-running conflict, should sound
alarm bells and means that we have run out of time to
continue with the business-as-usual adoption of endless
resolutions without any improvement whatsoever on
the ground.
On 23 December 2016, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2334 (2016) urging Israel to refrain
from any measures aimed at altering the demographic
composition, the character or the status of the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem.
In that connection, and in order to preserve the
viability of the two-State solution, Equatorial Guinea, a
20/24

20/09/2019

friend of both Israel and Palestine, regrets the fact that
today the Israeli Government is continuing to pursue
its settlement policy, which is a flagrant violation of
international law. Given that, and given past history,
there is a good case to be made for the fact that in
today’s world we should be able to peacefully resolve
many of the problems faced by our countries if all
parties wish to do so.
The members of the Security Council must maintain
a united front and demand that both parties implement
the provisions of all relevant resolutions, which are
one of the most important instruments for resolving
conflicts. We cannot overlook Israeli concerns over
the ongoing security threats coming from Gaza. The
ongoing instability in that Palestinian enclave could
lead it to become one of the preferred destinations of
insurgents who wish to entrench terrorism in the region.
We therefore reiterate our call for the Palestinian
Authority in Gaza to retake its place as the best-placed
entity to deal with security and socioeconomic issues,
which weigh so heavily on the minds of the civilian
population there, including women and innocent
children. Thus there is a growing need for the support
of the international community for the mediation
efforts of Egypt and the United Nations to accelerate
the process of intra-Palestinian reconciliation, and
here the restoration of the Palestinian Authority to its
rightful place is vital.
Our delegation very much welcomes last month’s
agreement between Israel and the Palestinian Authority,
which will see the latter body receive $568 million
as a reimbursement for fuel taxes collected by Israel.
Nonetheless, it is key to resolve this question once and
for all. Here we agree with Mr. Mladenov in that both
parties must continue cooperating constructively and
abide by the provisions of the Protocol on Economic
Relations between the Government of the State of Israel
and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
We wish to pay tribute to the work of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which, despite
its precarious financial situation, is working tirelessly
to improve humanitarian conditions for the millions
of Palestinian refugees, reducing the pressure on host
countries. The vital work of UNRWA must enjoy the
full support of the international community in terms of
financing to render it more effective.
19-28845

20/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Finally, on the Palestinian question in general,
Equatorial Guinea reaffirms its commitment to
support any initiative that takes into account existing
instruments of international law, such as the resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly and
other internationally recognized agreements. As far as
we are concerned, the most pressing issue is to find
a solution that will bring about negotiations between
Israelis and Palestinians and that is supported by
the international community. Such a solution would
necessary involve two States, with East Jerusalem as
the capital, living in peace and with security guarantees
for both and other States of the region,
In that respect, we cherish the hope that the
Government that results from the current electoral
process in Israel will work for a peaceful solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which began
when the United Nations had barely marked its
second anniversary.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing on the
situation in the Middle East and the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016). We welcome the presence
of Mr. Al-Malki, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Palestine, and Mr. Ayman Safadi, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates of Jordan.
China has listened attentively to the statements
made by both Palestine and Israel. The recent period
has witnessed an increase in the negative momentum
prevailing in the Middle East, where inflammatory
statements have intensified tensions in the region.
The construction of settlements continues unabated,
the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip is further
deteriorating and the Middle East peace process
has stagnated. Chinese is highly concerned over all
these developments.

S/PV. 8625

a two-State solution. All settlement activities in the
occupied territories should cease immediately. The
demolition of Palestinian homes should be stopped,
and the destruction of Palestinian properties should be
stopped and measures taken to prevent violence against
civilians. All illegal acts and unilateral initiatives
aimed at legalizing settlements should be stopped
immediately, concurrently with practical measures to
eliminate their effects.
Secondly, it is imperative to promote a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the
question of Palestine on the basis of the existing
international consensus. The international community
should commit to the two-State solution as its
ultimate goal, abide by the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the land-for-peace principle and the Arab
Peace Initiative as the fundamental guidelines, and
take positive actions to promote the early resumption
of peace talks between the Palestinians and Israelis,
culminating in the establishment of a Palestinian
State with full sovereignty, based on the 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. Any new initiatives
should, without exception, meet the aforementioned
international guidelines.
Thirdly, dialogue, negotiations and political
consultations are the fundamental way to resolve the
Palestinian issue. Neither violence for violence nor
inflammatory statements can help solve problems. China
is concerned about some recent incendiary remarks
concerning the annexation of the occupied Palestine
territories, including the Jordan Valley, and opposes
any unilateral act that may lead to the intensification
of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. In our view, Israel
should act with caution and avoid aggravating regional
tension and turbulence and earnestly safeguard the
foundation of the Middle East peace process.

First, resolution 2334 (2016) should be effectively
implemented. The resolution bears great significance,
as it reflects the common aspirations and expectations
of the international community and responds to the
legitimate calls of Palestinian and the Arab countries
at large.

Fourthly, we should follow closely and improve
Palestinian and economic and humanitarian conditions.
Of late, the medical system in the Gaza Strip has suffered
serious material shortages, and the humanitarian
situation remains dire. The parties concerned should
comprehensively lift the blockade of the Gaza Strip
as soon as possible and fully implement the relevant
United Nations resolutions.

Continued advancement of the construction of
settlements by the relevant parties would undermine
mutual trust and seriously dampen the prospects of

The international community should continue to
support the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and continue to

I wish to highlight the following.

19-2884521/24

S/PV.8625

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

contribute to improving the humanitarian conditions of
the Palestinian refugees.
China has always been committed to promoting
the Middle East peace process and to playing a
positive and constructive role in achieving peace in the
Middle East. In September this year, China appointed
Ambassador Zhai Jun as the special envoy of the
Chinese Government on the Middle East. In future
he will establish close cooperative relations with the
relevant parties, actively promote peace talks and play
a positive and constructive role in advancing a proper
settlement of regional hot-button issues and achieving
regional peace and stability.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We want to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
briefing on the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, and we welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Palestine, Mr. Riad Al-Malki, and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Jordan, Mr. Ayman Safadi.
The Middle East is at the heart of world politics.
The region is plagued by multiple crises, old and new.
Russia is closely following the latest developments, as
we have long-standing relations with the States of the
region, based on mutual respect, mutually beneficial
cooperation and common interests.
It is no accident that I mention common interests.
We believe that the peoples of the Middle East and
North Africa, including all ethnic and religious groups,
are inextricably linked. They had struck a balance
that was upset in the recent past and continues to be
disrupted by geopolitical engineering imposed from
outside, interference in internal affairs, the use of force
and the collapse of entire States.
We note with concern the ongoing tense situation
in the Palestinian-Israeli peace process. It is further
complicated by Israel’s continued settlement activity
and demolition of Palestinian buildings, as well as the
situation in and around the Gaza Strip. Such activity is
not only illegal under international law, but is also one of
the most serious obstacles to the establishment of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
In that connection, we share concerns about recent
statements by the Israeli leadership regarding its
intention to extend Israeli sovereignty to the Jordan
22/24

20/09/2019

Valley. Following through on those intentions will
inevitably escalate tensions in the region and undermine
hopes for the long-awaited peace between Israel and
its Arab neighbours. That also applies to the decision
of the United States Administration on Jerusalem and
the illegitimate recognition of Israel’s sovereignty over
the occupied Syrian Golan Heights, which is a flagrant
violation of international law, particularly resolution
497 (1981).
At the same time, we are seeing persistent
attempts to impose alternative arrangements for
a peace process — arrangements that undermine
long-established and internationally recognized
parameters for resolving the Palestinian problem.
We believe that the intention to drag out the efforts
to find a lasting comprehensive solution to this issue
is counterproductive. Unilateral actions bring us
no closer to resolving the long-standing and newer
problems of the region. It is clear to us, as it is to
most of our colleagues, that the only way forward is
to combine international and regional efforts, with the
key involvement of the United Nations and the Security
Council. That tenet should be the starting point for all
relevant efforts and initiatives.
We support the use of the Middle East Quartet
of international mediators as a unique mechanism to
assist the peace process that has been approved by the
relevant Council resolutions. Russia is doing its utmost
to promote the full spectrum of measures related to
the peace process, including by providing a potential
platform for meetings, without preconditions, between
the leaders of Israel and Palestine. We are also taking
steps to restore intra-Palestinian unity and welcome the
steps taken by our Egyptian colleagues in that regard.
Against that backdrop, it is clear that sending
a Security Council mission to the region is long
overdue. Its goal will be to enhance trust, facilitate the
relaunching of negotiations between the parties and to
prevent the collapse of the international community’s
efforts to ensure conditions for the implementation of
the only viable solution, based on international law.
This basis was developed by the Security Council, and
its revision should be undertaken within the Security
Council, too. No unilateral steps can replace the key
principles of a two-State solution, the Madrid principles
and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We continue to support the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
19-28845

20/09/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

East, whose work has both humanitarian and political
dimensions, as it has an important stabilizing role
in the Palestinian territories and the countries of the
Middle East.
All final status issues, including Jerusalem,
fundamental security issues and refugees, must
be resolved through direct negotiations between
Palestinians and Israelis.
The unresolved Palestinian issue is one of the factors
contributing to the emergence of new challenges in the
Middle East. We are concerned about another flare-up
of tension in the Gulf region. Against the backdrop of
the ongoing exchange of accusations, we are seeing an
increase in the military presence, including on the part
of States outside of the region, which creates the risk
of a military confrontation. Any incident could lead to
a conflict that would have devastating consequences.
We consistently call on all parties concerned to take
steps to de-escalate and resolve the problems in the
subregion through political and diplomatic means.
It is becoming increasingly important to develop
a sustainable mechanism for collective security in
the region on the basis of dialogue among equals. A
Russian initiative to that effect is aimed specifically at
resolving conflict and developing confidence-building
and oversight measures.
Russia will contribute actively to stabilizing the
situation in the Middle East. We are ready to cooperate
with all interested actors and invite everyone to engage
in collective efforts.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
Mr. Safadi (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
the delegation of the Russian Federation for your
outstanding efforts during your presidency of the
Council for this month. I also thank Mr. Mladenov
for his comprehensive briefing. I am grateful for the
opportunity to address the Council today.
The long-standing and strenuous efforts to achieve
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East are
today on the verge of collapse. The two-State solution,
which enjoys the consensus of the international
community as the only means to resolve the conflict
and ensure the rights of the peoples of the region to live

S/PV. 8625

in security and peace, is threatened by unilateral Israeli
measures that violate the resolutions of international
legitimacy and Council resolutions, leading to despair
and stoking the flames of conflict and violence. Silence
is not an option.
Effective action is required to salvage the remnants
of hope for peace. The absence of a clear and strict
position promoting international legitimacy and the
right of the Palestinian people to live in freedom and
establish their own State, as well as the right of the
peoples of the region to live in security and stability,
will only lead to despair, the decline of moderation, the
expansion of extremism and the eruption of conflicts.
That would be an immense threat to regional and
international peace and security that must be prevented.
A lasting and comprehensive peace is an Arab
strategic choice, and the means to achieve it is clear — a
two-State solution that guarantees the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State based on the 4 June
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side by side in peace and security with the State of
Israel, in accordance with international resolutions and
the Arab Peace Initiative.
However, instead of upholding the resolutions of
international legitimacy and interacting positively
with the Arab Peace Initiative for achieving real peace
that would ensure normal relations between all Arab
States and Israel and provide comprehensive security
guarantees for Israel, in the context of a comprehensive
peace ending the occupation that began in 1967, Israel
continues to take unilateral illegal measures that
undermine the two-State solution and disregard the
tenets of the peace process.
Peace and security are a right of all the peoples of
the region and a goal that Jordan continues to seek in
cooperation with the international community and in
accordance with international law. However, peace will
not be achieved by establishing and expanding illegal
settlements, confiscating Palestinian land, demolishing
their homes or displacing their children. Peace will not
be achieved by targeting the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) or depriving more than 500,000 Palestinian
refugee children of their right to education and dignity.
Nor will it be achieved by annexing the Golan Heights,
the Jordan Valley and the area north of the Dead Sea
in the occupied Palestinian territories, which represent

19-2884523/24

S/PV.8625

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

about one-third of the occupied West Bank. Such actions
will kill the two-State solution and not achieve security.
Consecrating the occupation and deepening its
injustice will not achieve peace, guarantee security
or stability or promote development. Similarly,
violations of international legitimacy and the selective
implementation of Security Council resolutions
erode the international order and lead to chaos and
lawlessness. This is a reality that requires effective
and urgent international action in order to start serious
negotiations to save what remains of the chance for
peace based on a two-State solution and to renew
hope in that solution before Israeli violations and new
illegitimate realities dash all remaining faith and make
peace impossible.
The Security Council plays a major role in
implementing international resolutions, including
resolutions 242 (1697), 338 (1973), 478 (1980) and 2334
(2016), and in adhering to international law, which
considers the territories seized forcibly by Israel in
1967 to be occupied. International law requires Israel
to honour its obligations as the occupying Power.
The magnitude of the danger requires immediate
action by the international community to protect
security and peace. The Council and the international
community must act to end illegal settlement and its
disastrous ramifications. The international community
must reject the plan announced by the Prime Minster
of Israel to annex one-third of the occupied West Bank,
in violation of international law and threatening peace
and security. That must be stopped.
The international community must support
UNRWA and allow the Agency to continue its work
and help over 5 million Palestinian refugees to live in
dignity and allow their children to go to school and
live in hope instead of leaving them prisoners of want,
ignorance, oppression and depression.
We have a responsibility to stop Israel from changing
the historic and legal status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif.
His Majesty King Abdullah II, who is the custodian
of the Muslim and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem,
has stressed that Jerusalem is the key to peace. It is the
holy city of Muslims, Christians and Jews. It must be
a city of peace, not the scene of occupation, injustice
and deprivation.
Under international law and Security Council
resolutions, East Jerusalem is an integral part of the

24/24

20/09/2019

Palestinian territories occupied in 1967. Protecting
Jerusalem and its historical status is protecting
international law and peace. The continuous
undermining of that status is a real threat to peace
and security. East Jerusalem is an occupied territory
that, in the context of a two-State solution, must be
liberated as the capital of the Palestinian State. This
is the only way to achieve peace. Sovereignty over the
city’s sanctuaries must be Palestinian. Custodianship
over its Islamic and Christian sanctuaries is Hashemite.
However, preserving Jerusalem’s historical status is a
collective responsibility we all bear, particularly in
the light of Israeli provocations and violations. The
international community must act to save the peace.
The Palestinian question remains the main issue
in our region. The Palestinian-Israeli conflict is at the
root of all the tension and instability in the Middle
East. A two-State solution is the prerequisite for
comprehensive peace and security for all. Occupation,
oppression and depriving Palestinians of their rights
will not lead to peace or security. Security for all the
peoples of the region, Palestinians and Israelis alike,
will be achieved by respecting everyone’s rights arising
from our international law, principles and shared
humanitarian values.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has spared
no effort to achieve comprehensive, lasting and fair
peace and is committed to continuing to work with the
Security Council and with all our friends and partners
in the international community to achieve a genuine
peace that is accepted by all peoples and fulfils their
right to a secure future.
When Jordan speaks, it does so with the credibility
of a peace broker who remains a voice of truth and
moderation and a force for peace. When we warn that
the chances of peace may completely disappear soon,
we do so with the voice of someone firmly committed
to peace. This is a clear call for decisive and effective
action now, before it is too late.
I thank you, Mr. President, and we look forward
to continuing to work with the Security Council in
order to end the deterioration and reclaim the lead by
undertaking urgent and collective international efforts
aimed at putting an end to a conflict that poses a threat
to our security and achieving a comprehensive, fair and
lasting peace which is a right for all of us.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

19-28845
