United Nations

A/RES/56/81

General Assembly

Distr.: General
31 January 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 161

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/56/588 and Corr.1)]

56/81.

United Nations Convention on the Assignment of
Receivables in International Trade

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it
established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law with a
mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of
international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries, in the extensive development of
international trade,
Considering that problems created by uncertainties as to the content and the
choice of the legal regime applicable to the assignment of receivables constitute an
obstacle to international trade,
Convinced that the adoption of a convention on the assignment of receivables
in international trade will enhance transparency, contribute to overcoming the
problems of uncertainties in this field and promote the availability of capital and
credit at more affordable rates, while protecting existing assignment practices and
facilitating the development of new practices, as well as ensuring adequate
protection of the interests of debtors in assignments of receivables,
Recalling that, at its twenty-eighth session in 1995, the Commission decided to
prepare uniform legislation on assignment in receivables financing and entrusted the
Working Group on International Contract Practices with the preparation of a draft, 1
Noting that the Working Group on International Contract Practices devoted
nine sessions, from 1995 to 2000, to the preparation of the draft Convention on the
Assignment of Receivables in International Trade, and that the Commission
considered the draft Convention at its thirty-third session in 2000 2 and at its thirtyfourth session in 2001, 3
Being aware that all States and interested international organizations were
invited to participate in the preparation of the draft Convention at all the sessions of
the Working Group and at the thirty-third and thirty-fourth sessions of the
_______________
1
2

3

01 47767

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fiftieth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/50/17), para. 381.
Ibid., Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17, (A/55/17), chap III.
Ibid., Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 17 and corrigendum, (A/56/17 and Corr. 3), chap III.

A/RES/56/81

Commission, either as members or as observers, with a full opportunity to speak and
make proposals,
Noting with satisfaction that the text of the draft Convention was circulated for
comments once before the thirty-third session of the Commission and a second time
in its revised version before the thirty-fourth session of the Commission to all
Governments and international organizations invited to attend the meetings of the
Commission and the Working Group as observers, and that the comments received
were before the Commission at its thirty-third 4 and thirty-fourth sessions,
Taking note with satisfaction of the decision of the Commission at its thirtyfourth session to submit the draft Convention to the General Assembly for its
consideration, 5
Taking note of the draft Convention adopted by the Commission, 6
1.
Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law for preparing the draft Convention on the Assignment of
Receivables in International Trade; 6
2.
Adopts and opens for signature or accession the United Nations
Convention on the Assignment of Receivables in International Trade, contained in
the annex to the present resolution;
3.
Calls upon all Governments to consider becoming party to the
Convention.
85th plenary meeting
12 December 2001

Annex
United Nations Convention on the Assignment of Receivables in
International Trade
Preamble
The Contracting States,
Reaffirming their conviction that international trade on the basis of equality
and mutual benefit is an important element in the promotion of friendly relations
among States,
Considering that problems created by uncertainties as to the content and the
choice of legal regime applicable to the assignment of receivables constitute an
obstacle to international trade,
Desiring to establish principles and to adopt rules relating to the assignment of
receivables that would create certainty and transparency and promote the
modernization of the law relating to assignments of receivables, while protecting
existing assignment practices and facilitating the development of new practices,
Desiring also to ensure adequate protection of the interests of debtors in
assignments of receivables,
_______________
4

See A/CN.9/472 and Add.1–5.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 17 and corrigendum
(A/56/17 and Corr.3), para. 200.
6
Ibid., annex I.
5

2

A/RES/56/81

Being of the opinion that the adoption of uniform rules governing the
assignment of receivables would promote the availability of capital and credit at
more affordable rates and thus facilitate the development of international trade,
Have agreed as follows:
Chapter I
Scope of application
Article 1
Scope of application
1.

This Convention applies to:

(a) Assignments of international receivables and to international assignments
of receivables as defined in this chapter, if, at the time of conclusion of the contract
of assignment, the assignor is located in a Contracting State; and
(b) Subsequent assignments, provided that any prior assignment is governed
by this Convention.
2.
This Convention applies to subsequent assignments that satisfy the
criteria set forth in paragraph 1 (a) of this article, even if it did not apply to any
prior assignment of the same receivable.
3.
This Convention does not affect the rights and obligations of the debtor
unless, at the time of conclusion of the original contract, the debtor is located in a
Contracting State or the law governing the original contract is the law of a
Contracting State.
4.
The provisions of chapter V apply to assignments of international
receivables and to international assignments of receivables as defined in this chapter
independently of paragraphs 1 to 3 of this article. However, those provisions do not
apply if a State makes a declaration under article 39.
5.
The provisions of the annex to this Convention apply as provided in
article 42.
Article 2
Assignment of receivables
For the purposes of this Convention:
(a) “Assignment” means the transfer by agreement from one person
(“assignor”) to another person (“assignee”) of all or part of or an undivided interest
in the assignor’s contractual right to payment of a monetary sum (“receivable”)
from a third person (“the debtor”). The creation of rights in receivables as security
for indebtedness or other obligation is deemed to be a transfer;
(b) In the case of an assignment by the initial or any other assignee
(“subsequent assignment”), the person who makes that assignment is the assignor
and the person to whom that assignment is made is the assignee.

3

A/RES/56/81

Article 3
Internationality
A receivable is international if, at the time of conclusion of the original
contract, the assignor and the debtor are located in different States. An assignment is
international if, at the time of conclusion of the contract of assignment, the assignor
and the assignee are located in different States.
Article 4
Exclusions and other limitations
1.

This Convention does not apply to assignments made:

(a)

To an individual for his or her personal, family or household purposes;

(b) As part of the sale or change in the ownership or legal status of the
business out of which the assigned receivables arose.
2.
This Convention does not apply to assignments of receivables arising
under or from:
(a)

Transactions on a regulated exchange;

(b) Financial contracts governed by netting agreements, except a receivable
owed on the termination of all outstanding transactions;
(c)

Foreign exchange transactions;

(d) Inter-bank payment systems, inter-bank payment agreements or clearance
and settlement systems relating to securities or other financial assets or instruments;
(e) The transfer of security rights in, sale, loan or holding of or agreement to
repurchase securities or other financial assets or instruments held with an
intermediary;
(f)

Bank deposits;

(g)

A letter of credit or independent guarantee.

3.
Nothing in this Convention affects the rights and obligations of any
person under the law governing negotiable instruments.
4.
Nothing in this Convention affects the rights and obligations of the
assignor and the debtor under special laws governing the protection of parties to
transactions made for personal, family or household purposes.
5.

Nothing in this Convention:

(a) Affects the application of the law of a State in which real property is
situated to either:
(i) An interest in that real property to the extent that under that law the
assignment of a receivable confers such an interest; or
(ii) The priority of a right in a receivable to the extent that under that law an
interest in the real property confers such a right; or
(b) Makes lawful the acquisition of an interest in real property not permitted
under the law of the State in which the real property is situated.

4

A/RES/56/81

Chapter II
General provisions
Article 5
Definitions and rules of interpretation
For the purposes of this Convention:
(a) “Original contract” means the contract between the assignor and the
debtor from which the assigned receivable arises;
(b) “Existing receivable” means a receivable that arises upon or before
conclusion of the contract of assignment and “future receivable” means a receivable
that arises after conclusion of the contract of assignment;
(c) “Writing” means any form of information that is accessible so as to be
usable for subsequent reference. Where this Convention requires a writing to be
signed, that requirement is met if, by generally accepted means or a procedure
agreed to by the person whose signature is required, the writing identifies that
person and indicates that person’s approval of the information contained in the
writing;
(d) “Notification of the assignment” means a communication in writing that
reasonably identifies the assigned receivables and the assignee;
(e) “Insolvency administrator” means a person or body, including one
appointed on an interim basis, authorized in an insolvency proceeding to administer
the reorganization or liquidation of the assignor’s assets or affairs;
(f) “Insolvency proceeding” means a collective judicial or administrative
proceeding, including an interim proceeding, in which the assets and affairs of the
assignor are subject to control or supervision by a court or other competent authority
for the purpose of reorganization or liquidation;
(g) “Priority” means the right of a person in preference to the right of
another person and, to the extent relevant for such purpose, includes the
determination whether the right is a personal or a property right, whether or not it is
a security right for indebtedness or other obligation and whether any requirements
necessary to render the right effective against a competing claimant have been
satisfied;
(h) A person is located in the State in which it has its place of business. If the
assignor or the assignee has a place of business in more than one State, the place of
business is that place where the central administration of the assignor or the
assignee is exercised. If the debtor has a place of business in more than one State,
the place of business is that which has the closest relationship to the original
contract. If a person does not have a place of business, reference is to be made to the
habitual residence of that person;
(i) “Law” means the law in force in a State other than its rules of private
international law;
(j) “Proceeds” means whatever is received in respect of an assigned
receivable, whether in total or partial payment or other satisfaction of the receivable.
The term includes whatever is received in respect of proceeds. The term does not
include returned goods;

5

A/RES/56/81

(k) “Financial contract” means any spot, forward, future, option or swap
transaction involving interest rates, commodities, currencies, equities, bonds,
indices or any other financial instrument, any repurchase or securities lending
transaction, and any other transaction similar to any transaction referred to above
entered into in financial markets and any combination of the transactions mentioned
above;
(l) “Netting agreement” means an agreement between two or more parties
that provides for one or more of the following:
(i) The net settlement of payments due in the same currency on the same
date whether by notation or otherwise;
(ii) Upon the insolvency or other default by a party, the termination of all
outstanding transactions at their replacement or fair market values, conversion
of such sums into a single currency and netting into a single payment by one
party to the other; or
(iii) The set-off of amounts calculated as set forth in subparagraph (l) (ii) of
this article under two or more netting agreements;
(m) “Competing claimant” means:
(i) Another assignee of the same receivable from the same assignor,
including a person who, by operation of law, claims a right in the assigned
receivable as a result of its right in other property of the assignor, even if that
receivable is not an international receivable and the assignment to that
assignee is not an international assignment;
(ii)

A creditor of the assignor; or

(iii) The insolvency administrator.
Article 6
Party autonomy
Subject to article 19, the assignor, the assignee and the debtor may derogate
from or vary by agreement provisions of this Convention relating to their respective
rights and obligations. Such an agreement does not affect the rights of any person
who is not a party to the agreement.
Article 7
Principles of interpretation
1.
In the interpretation of this Convention, regard is to be had to its object
and purpose as set forth in the preamble, to its international character and to the
need to promote uniformity in its application and the observance of good faith in
international trade.
2.
Questions concerning matters governed by this Convention that are not
expressly settled in it are to be settled in conformity with the general principles on
which it is based or, in the absence of such principles, in conformity with the law
applicable by virtue of the rules of private international law.

6

A/RES/56/81

Chapter III
Effects of assignment
Article 8
Effectiveness of assignments
1.
An assignment is not ineffective as between the assignor and the assignee
or as against the debtor or as against a competing claimant, and the right of an
assignee may not be denied priority, on the ground that it is an assignment of more
than one receivable, future receivables or parts of or undivided interests in
receivables, provided that the receivables are described:
(a)

Individually as receivables to which the assignment relates; or

(b) In any other manner, provided that they can, at the time of the
assignment or, in the case of future receivables, at the time of conclusion of the
original contract, be identified as receivables to which the assignment relates.
2.
Unless otherwise agreed, an assignment of one or more future receivables
is effective without a new act of transfer being required to assign each receivable.
3.
Except as provided in paragraph 1 of this article, article 9 and article 10,
paragraphs 2 and 3, this Convention does not affect any limitations on assignments
arising from law.
Article 9
Contractual limitations on assignments
1.
An assignment of a receivable is effective notwithstanding any
agreement between the initial or any subsequent assignor and the debtor or any
subsequent assignee limiting in any way the assignor’s right to assign its
receivables.
2.
Nothing in this article affects any obligation or liability of the assignor
for breach of such an agreement, but the other party to such agreement may not
avoid the original contract or the assignment contract on the sole ground of that
breach. A person who is not party to such an agreement is not liable on the sole
ground that it had knowledge of the agreement.
3.

This article applies only to assignments of receivables:

(a) Arising from an original contract that is a contract for the supply or lease
of goods or services other than financial services, a construction contract or a
contract for the sale or lease of real property;
(b) Arising from an original contract for the sale, lease or licence of
industrial or other intellectual property or of proprietary information;
(c)

Representing the payment obligation for a credit card transaction; or

(d) Owed to the assignor upon net settlement of payments due pursuant to a
netting agreement involving more than two parties.
Article 10
Transfer of security rights
1.
A personal or property right securing payment of the assigned receivable
is transferred to the assignee without a new act of transfer. If such a right, under the
law governing it, is transferable only with a new act of transfer, the assignor is
obliged to transfer such right and any proceeds to the assignee.
7

A/RES/56/81

2.
A right securing payment of the assigned receivable is transferred under
paragraph 1 of this article notwithstanding any agreement between the assignor and
the debtor or other person granting that right, limiting in any way the assignor’s
right to assign the receivable or the right securing payment of the assigned
receivable.
3.
Nothing in this article affects any obligation or liability of the assignor
for breach of any agreement under paragraph 2 of this article, but the other party to
that agreement may not avoid the original contract or the assignment contract on the
sole ground of that breach. A person who is not a party to such an agreement is not
liable on the sole ground that it had knowledge of the agreement.
4.
Paragraphs 2 and 3 of this article apply only to assignments of
receivables:
(a) Arising from an original contract that is a contract for the supply or lease
of goods or services other than financial services, a construction contract or a
contract for the sale or lease of real property;
(b) Arising from an original contract for the sale, lease or licence of
industrial or other intellectual property or of proprietary information;
(c)

Representing the payment obligation for a credit card transaction; or

(d) Owed to the assignor upon net settlement of payments due pursuant to a
netting agreement involving more than two parties.
5.
The transfer of a possessory property right under paragraph 1 of this
article does not affect any obligations of the assignor to the debtor or the person
granting the property right with respect to the property transferred existing under the
law governing that property right.
6.
Paragraph 1 of this article does not affect any requirement under rules of
law other than this Convention relating to the form or registration of the transfer of
any rights securing payment of the assigned receivable.
Chapter IV
Rights, obligations and defences
Section I
Assignor and assignee
Article 11
Rights and obligations of the assignor and the assignee
1.
The mutual rights and obligations of the assignor and the assignee arising
from their agreement are determined by the terms and conditions set forth in that
agreement, including any rules or general conditions referred to therein.
2.
The assignor and the assignee are bound by any usage to which they have
agreed and, unless otherwise agreed, by any practices they have established between
themselves.
3.
In an international assignment, the assignor and the assignee are
considered, unless otherwise agreed, implicitly to have made applicable to the
assignment a usage that in international trade is widely known to, and regularly
observed by, parties to the particular type of assignment or to the assignment of the
particular category of receivables.
8

A/RES/56/81

Article 12
Representations of the assignor
1.
Unless otherwise agreed between the assignor and the assignee, the
assignor represents at the time of conclusion of the contract of assignment that:
(a)

The assignor has the right to assign the receivable;

(b) The assignor has not previously assigned the receivable to another
assignee; and
(c)

The debtor does not and will not have any defences or rights of set-off.

2.
Unless otherwise agreed between the assignor and the assignee, the
assignor does not represent that the debtor has, or will have, the ability to pay.
Article 13
Right to notify the debtor
1.
Unless otherwise agreed between the assignor and the assignee, the
assignor or the assignee or both may send the debtor notification of the assignment
and a payment instruction, but after notification has been sent only the assignee may
send such an instruction.
2.
Notification of the assignment or a payment instruction sent in breach of
any agreement referred to in paragraph 1 of this article is not ineffective for the
purposes of article 17 by reason of such breach. However, nothing in this article
affects any obligation or liability of the party in breach of such an agreement for any
damages arising as a result of the breach.
Article 14
Right to payment
1.
As between the assignor and the assignee, unless otherwise agreed and
whether or not notification of the assignment has been sent:
(a) If payment in respect of the assigned receivable is made to the assignee,
the assignee is entitled to retain the proceeds and goods returned in respect of the
assigned receivable;
(b) If payment in respect of the assigned receivable is made to the assignor,
the assignee is entitled to payment of the proceeds and also to goods returned to the
assignor in respect of the assigned receivable; and
(c) If payment in respect of the assigned receivable is made to another
person over whom the assignee has priority, the assignee is entitled to payment of
the proceeds and also to goods returned to such person in respect of the assigned
receivable.
2.
The assignee may not retain more than the value of its right in the
receivable.

9

A/RES/56/81

Section II
Debtor
Article 15
Principle of debtor protection
1.
Except as otherwise provided in this Convention, an assignment does not,
without the consent of the debtor, affect the rights and obligations of the debtor,
including the payment terms contained in the original contract.
2.
A payment instruction may change the person, address or account to
which the debtor is required to make payment, but may not change:
(a)

The currency of payment specified in the original contract; or

(b) The State specified in the original contract in which payment is to be
made to a State other than that in which the debtor is located.
Article 16
Notification of the debtor
1.
Notification of the assignment or a payment instruction is effective when
received by the debtor if it is in a language that is reasonably expected to inform the
debtor about its contents. It is sufficient if notification of the assignment or a
payment instruction is in the language of the original contract.
2.
Notification of the assignment or a payment instruction may relate to
receivables arising after notification.
3.
Notification of a subsequent assignment constitutes notification of all
prior assignments.
Article 17
Debtor’s discharge by payment
1.
Until the debtor receives notification of the assignment, the debtor is
entitled to be discharged by paying in accordance with the original contract.
2.
After the debtor receives notification of the assignment, subject to
paragraphs 3 to 8 of this article, the debtor is discharged only by paying the assignee
or, if otherwise instructed in the notification of the assignment or subsequently by
the assignee in a writing received by the debtor, in accordance with such payment
instruction.
3.
If the debtor receives more than one payment instruction relating to a
single assignment of the same receivable by the same assignor, the debtor is
discharged by paying in accordance with the last payment instruction received from
the assignee before payment.
4.
If the debtor receives notification of more than one assignment of the
same receivable made by the same assignor, the debtor is discharged by paying in
accordance with the first notification received.
5.
If the debtor receives notification of one or more subsequent
assignments, the debtor is discharged by paying in accordance with the notification
of the last of such subsequent assignments.
6.
If the debtor receives notification of the assignment of a part of or an
undivided interest in one or more receivables, the debtor is discharged by paying in
accordance with the notification or in accordance with this article as if the debtor
10

A/RES/56/81

had not received the notification. If the debtor pays in accordance with the
notification, the debtor is discharged only to the extent of the part or undivided
interest paid.
7.
If the debtor receives notification of the assignment from the assignee,
the debtor is entitled to request the assignee to provide within a reasonable period of
time adequate proof that the assignment from the initial assignor to the initial
assignee and any intermediate assignment have been made and, unless the assignee
does so, the debtor is discharged by paying in accordance with this article as if the
notification from the assignee had not been received. Adequate proof of an
assignment includes but is not limited to any writing emanating from the assignor
and indicating that the assignment has taken place.
8.
This article does not affect any other ground on which payment by the
debtor to the person entitled to payment, to a competent judicial or other authority,
or to a public deposit fund discharges the debtor.
Article 18
Defences and rights of set-off of the debtor
1.
In a claim by the assignee against the debtor for payment of the assigned
receivable, the debtor may raise against the assignee all defences and rights of setoff arising from the original contract, or any other contract that was part of the same
transaction, of which the debtor could avail itself as if the assignment had not been
made and such claim were made by the assignor.
2.
The debtor may raise against the assignee any other right of set-off,
provided that it was available to the debtor at the time notification of the assignment
was received by the debtor.
3.
Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article, defences and rights of
set-off that the debtor may raise pursuant to article 9 or 10 against the assignor for
breach of an agreement limiting in any way the assignor’s right to make the
assignment are not available to the debtor against the assignee.
Article 19
Agreement not to raise defences or rights of set-off
1.
The debtor may agree with the assignor in a writing signed by the debtor
not to raise against the assignee the defences and rights of set-off that it could raise
pursuant to article 18. Such an agreement precludes the debtor from raising against
the assignee those defences and rights of set-off.
2.

The debtor may not waive defences:

(a)

Arising from fraudulent acts on the part of the assignee; or

(b)

Based on the debtor’s incapacity.

3.
Such an agreement may be modified only by an agreement in a writing
signed by the debtor. The effect of such a modification as against the assignee is
determined by article 20, paragraph 2.

11

A/RES/56/81

Article 20
Modification of the original contract
1.
An agreement concluded before notification of the assignment between
the assignor and the debtor that affects the assignee’s rights is effective as against
the assignee, and the assignee acquires corresponding rights.
2.
An agreement concluded after notification of the assignment between the
assignor and the debtor that affects the assignee’s rights is ineffective as against the
assignee unless:
(a)

The assignee consents to it; or

(b) The receivable is not fully earned by performance and either the
modification is provided for in the original contract or, in the context of the original
contract, a reasonable assignee would consent to the modification.
3.
Paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article do not affect any right of the assignor
or the assignee arising from breach of an agreement between them.
Article 21
Recovery of payments
Failure of the assignor to perform the original contract does not entitle the
debtor to recover from the assignee a sum paid by the debtor to the assignor or the
assignee.
Section III
Third parties
Article 22
Law applicable to competing rights
With the exception of matters that are settled elsewhere in this Convention and
subject to articles 23 and 24, the law of the State in which the assignor is located
governs the priority of the right of an assignee in the assigned receivable over the
right of a competing claimant.
Article 23
Public policy and mandatory rules
1.
The application of a provision of the law of the State in which the
assignor is located may be refused only if the application of that provision is
manifestly contrary to the public policy of the forum State.
2.
The rules of the law of either the forum State or any other State that are
mandatory irrespective of the law otherwise applicable may not prevent the
application of a provision of the law of the State in which the assignor is located.
3.
Notwithstanding paragraph 2 of this article, in an insolvency proceeding
commenced in a State other than the State in which the assignor is located, any
preferential right that arises, by operation of law, under the law of the forum State
and is given priority over the rights of an assignee in insolvency proceedings under
the law of that State may be given priority notwithstanding article 22. A State may
deposit at any time a declaration identifying any such preferential right.

12

A/RES/56/81

Article 24
Special rules on proceeds
1.
If proceeds are received by the assignee, the assignee is entitled to retain
those proceeds to the extent that the assignee’s right in the assigned receivable had
priority over the right of a competing claimant in the assigned receivable.
2.
If proceeds are received by the assignor, the right of the assignee in those
proceeds has priority over the right of a competing claimant in those proceeds to the
same extent as the assignee’s right had priority over the right in the assigned
receivable of that claimant if:
(a) The assignor has received the proceeds under instructions from the
assignee to hold the proceeds for the benefit of the assignee; and
(b) The proceeds are held by the assignor for the benefit of the assignee
separately and are reasonably identifiable from the assets of the assignor, such as in
the case of a separate deposit or securities account containing only proceeds
consisting of cash or securities.
3.
Nothing in paragraph 2 of this article affects the priority of a person
having against the proceeds a right of set-off or a right created by agreement and not
derived from a right in the receivable.
Article 25
Subordination
An assignee entitled to priority may at any time subordinate its priority
unilaterally or by agreement in favour of any existing or future assignees.
Chapter V
Autonomous conflict-of-laws rules
Article 26
Application of chapter V
The provisions of this chapter apply to matters that are:
(a)

Within the scope of this Convention as provided in article 1, paragraph 4;

(b)

Otherwise within the scope of this Convention but not settled elsewhere

and
in it.
Article 27
Form of a contract of assignment
1.
A contract of assignment concluded between persons who are located in
the same State is formally valid as between them if it satisfies the requirements of
either the law which governs it or the law of the State in which it is concluded.
2.
A contract of assignment concluded between persons who are located in
different States is formally valid as between them if it satisfies the requirements of
either the law which governs it or the law of one of those States.

13

A/RES/56/81

Article 28
Law applicable to the mutual rights and obligations of the assignor and
the assignee
1.
The mutual rights and obligations of the assignor and the assignee arising
from their agreement are governed by the law chosen by them.
2.
In the absence of a choice of law by the assignor and the assignee, their
mutual rights and obligations arising from their agreement are governed by the law
of the State with which the contract of assignment is most closely connected.
Article 29
Law applicable to the rights and obligations of the assignee and the debtor
The law governing the original contract determines the effectiveness of
contractual limitations on assignment as between the assignee and the debtor, the
relationship between the assignee and the debtor, the conditions under which the
assignment can be invoked against the debtor and whether the debtor’s obligations
have been discharged.
Article 30
Law applicable to priority
1.
The law of the State in which the assignor is located governs the priority
of the right of an assignee in the assigned receivable over the right of a competing
claimant.
2.
The rules of the law of either the forum State or any other State that are
mandatory irrespective of the law otherwise applicable may not prevent the
application of a provision of the law of the State in which the assignor is located.
3.
Notwithstanding paragraph 2 of this article, in an insolvency proceeding
commenced in a State other than the State in which the assignor is located, any
preferential right that arises, by operation of law, under the law of the forum State
and is given priority over the rights of an assignee in insolvency proceedings under
the law of that State may be given priority notwithstanding paragraph 1 of this
article.
Article 31
Mandatory rules
1.
Nothing in articles 27 to 29 restricts the application of the rules of the
law of the forum State in a situation where they are mandatory irrespective of the
law otherwise applicable.
2.
Nothing in articles 27 to 29 restricts the application of the mandatory
rules of the law of another State with which the matters settled in those articles have
a close connection if and insofar as, under the law of that other State, those rules
must be applied irrespective of the law otherwise applicable.
Article 32
Public policy
With regard to matters settled in this chapter, the application of a provision of
the law specified in this chapter may be refused only if the application of that
provision is manifestly contrary to the public policy of the forum State.

14

A/RES/56/81

Chapter VI
Final provisions
Article 33
Depositary
The Secretary-General of the United Nations is the depositary of this
Convention.
Article 34
Signature, ratification, acceptance, approval, accession
1.
This Convention is open for signature by all States at the Headquarters of
the United Nations in New York until 31 December 2003.
2.
This Convention is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval by the
signatory States.
3.
This Convention is open to accession by all States that are not signatory
States as from the date it is open for signature.
4.
Instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval and accession are to be
deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Article 35
Application to territorial units
1.
If a State has two or more territorial units in which different systems of
law are applicable in relation to the matters dealt with in this Convention, it may at
any time declare that this Convention is to extend to all its territorial units or only
one or more of them, and may at any time substitute another declaration for its
earlier declaration.
2.
Such declarations are to state expressly the territorial units to which this
Convention extends.
3.
If, by virtue of a declaration under this article, this Convention does not
extend to all territorial units of a State and the assignor or the debtor is located in a
territorial unit to which this Convention does not extend, this location is considered
not to be in a Contracting State.
4.
If, by virtue of a declaration under this article, this Convention does not
extend to all territorial units of a State and the law governing the original contract is
the law in force in a territorial unit to which this Convention does not extend, the
law governing the original contract is considered not to be the law of a Contracting
State.
5.
If a State makes no declaration under paragraph 1 of this article, the
Convention is to extend to all territorial units of that State.
Article 36
Location in a territorial unit
If a person is located in a State which has two or more territorial units, that
person is located in the territorial unit in which it has its place of business. If the
assignor or the assignee has a place of business in more than one territorial unit, the
place of business is that place where the central administration of the assignor or the
assignee is exercised. If the debtor has a place of business in more than one
territorial unit, the place of business is that which has the closest relationship to the
15

A/RES/56/81

original contract. If a person does not have a place of business, reference is to be
made to the habitual residence of that person. A State with two or more territorial
units may specify by declaration at any time other rules for determining the location
of a person within that State.
Article 37
Applicable law in territorial units
Any reference in this Convention to the law of a State means, in the case of a
State which has two or more territorial units, the law in force in the territorial unit.
Such a State may specify by declaration at any time other rules for determining the
applicable law, including rules that render applicable the law of another territorial
unit of that State.
Article 38
Conflicts with other international agreements
1.
This Convention does not prevail over any international agreement that
has already been or may be entered into and that specifically governs a transaction
otherwise governed by this Convention.
2.
Notwithstanding paragraph 1 of this article, this Convention prevails
over the Unidroit Convention on International Factoring (“the Ottawa Convention”).
To the extent that this Convention does not apply to the rights and obligations of a
debtor, it does not preclude the application of the Ottawa Convention with respect to
the rights and obligations of that debtor.
Article 39
Declaration on application of chapter V
A State may declare at any time that it will not be bound by chapter V.
Article 40
Limitations relating to Governments and other public entities
A State may declare at any time that it will not be bound or the extent to which
it will not be bound by articles 9 and 10 if the debtor or any person granting a
personal or property right securing payment of the assigned receivable is located in
that State at the time of conclusion of the original contract and is a Government,
central or local, any subdivision thereof, or an entity constituted for a public
purpose. If a State has made such a declaration, articles 9 and 10 do not affect the
rights and obligations of that debtor or person. A State may list in a declaration the
types of entity that are the subject of a declaration.
Article 41
Other exclusions
1.
A State may declare at any time that it will not apply this Convention to
specific types of assignment or to the assignment of specific categories of
receivables clearly described in a declaration.
2.

After a declaration under paragraph 1 of this article takes effect:

(a) This Convention does not apply to such types of assignment or to the
assignment of such categories of receivables if the assignor is located at the time of
conclusion of the contract of assignment in such a State; and

16

A/RES/56/81

(b) The provisions of this Convention that affect the rights and obligations of
the debtor do not apply if, at the time of conclusion of the original contract, the
debtor is located in such a State or the law governing the original contract is the law
of such a State.
3.
This article does not apply to assignments of receivables listed in
article 9, paragraph 3.
Article 42
Application of the annex
1.

A State may at any time declare that it will be bound by:

(a) The priority rules set forth in section I of the annex and will participate
in the international registration system established pursuant to section II of the
annex;
(b) The priority rules set forth in section I of the annex and will effectuate
such rules by use of a registration system that fulfils the purposes of such rules, in
which case, for the purposes of section I of the annex, registration pursuant to such
a system has the same effect as registration pursuant to section II of the annex;
(c)

The priority rules set forth in section III of the annex;

(d)

The priority rules set forth in section IV of the annex; or

(e)

The priority rules set forth in articles 7 and 9 of the annex.

2.

For the purposes of article 22:

(a) The law of a State that has made a declaration pursuant to
paragraph 1 (a) or (b) of this article is the set of rules set forth in section I of the
annex, as affected by any declaration made pursuant to paragraph 5 of this article;
(b) The law of a State that has made a declaration pursuant to paragraph 1 (c)
of this article is the set of rules set forth in section III of the annex, as affected by
any declaration made pursuant to paragraph 5 of this article;
(c) The law of a State that has made a declaration pursuant to
paragraph 1 (d) of this article is the set of rules set forth in section IV of the annex,
as affected by any declaration made pursuant to paragraph 5 of this article; and
(d) The law of a State that has made a declaration pursuant to paragraph 1 (e)
of this article is the set of rules set forth in articles 7 and 9 of the annex, as affected
by any declaration made pursuant to paragraph 5 of this article.
3.
A State that has made a declaration pursuant to paragraph 1 of this article
may establish rules pursuant to which contracts of assignment concluded before the
declaration takes effect become subject to those rules within a reasonable time.
4.
A State that has not made a declaration pursuant to paragraph 1 of this
article may, in accordance with priority rules in force in that State, utilize the
registration system established pursuant to section II of the annex.
5.
At the time a State makes a declaration pursuant to paragraph 1 of this
article or thereafter, it may declare that:
(a) It will not apply the priority rules chosen under paragraph 1 of this article
to certain types of assignment or to the assignment of certain categories of
receivables; or

17

A/RES/56/81

(b) It will apply those priority rules with modifications specified in that
declaration.
6.
At the request of Contracting or Signatory States to this Convention
comprising not less than one third of the Contracting and Signatory States, the
depositary shall convene a conference of the Contracting and Signatory States to
designate the supervising authority and the first registrar and to prepare or revise the
regulations referred to in section II of the annex.
Article 43
Effect of declaration
1.
Declarations made under articles 35, paragraph 1, 36, 37 or 39 to 42 at
the time of signature are subject to confirmation upon ratification, acceptance or
approval.
2.
Declarations and confirmations of declarations are to be in writing and to
be formally notified to the depositary.
3.
A declaration takes effect simultaneously with the entry into force of this
Convention in respect of the State concerned. However, a declaration of which the
depositary receives formal notification after such entry into force takes effect on the
first day of the month following the expiration of six months after the date of its
receipt by the depositary.
4.
A State that makes a declaration under articles 35, paragraph 1, 36, 37 or
39 to 42 may withdraw it at any time by a formal notification in writing addressed to
the depositary. Such withdrawal takes effect on the first day of the month following
the expiration of six months after the date of the receipt of the notification by the
depositary.
5.
In the case of a declaration under articles 35, paragraph 1, 36, 37 or 39 to
42 that takes effect after the entry into force of this Convention in respect of the
State concerned or in the case of a withdrawal of any such declaration, the effect of
which in either case is to cause a rule in this Convention, including any annex, to
become applicable:
(a) Except as provided in paragraph 5 (b) of this article, that rule is
applicable only to assignments for which the contract of assignment is concluded on
or after the date when the declaration or withdrawal takes effect in respect of the
Contracting State referred to in article 1, paragraph 1 (a);
(b) A rule that deals with the rights and obligations of the debtor applies only
in respect of original contracts concluded on or after the date when the declaration
or withdrawal takes effect in respect of the Contracting State referred to in article 1,
paragraph 3.
6.
In the case of a declaration under articles 35, paragraph 1, 36, 37 or 39 to
42 that takes effect after the entry into force of this Convention in respect of the
State concerned or in the case of a withdrawal of any such declaration, the effect of
which in either case is to cause a rule in this Convention, including any annex, to
become inapplicable:
(a) Except as provided in paragraph 6 (b) of this article, that rule is
inapplicable to assignments for which the contract of assignment is concluded on or
after the date when the declaration or withdrawal takes effect in respect of the
Contracting State referred to in article 1, paragraph 1 (a);

18

A/RES/56/81

(b) A rule that deals with the rights and obligations of the debtor is
inapplicable in respect of original contracts concluded on or after the date when the
declaration or withdrawal takes effect in respect of the Contracting State referred to
in article 1, paragraph 3.
7.
If a rule rendered applicable or inapplicable as a result of a declaration or
withdrawal referred to in paragraph 5 or 6 of this article is relevant to the
determination of priority with respect to a receivable for which the contract of
assignment is concluded before such declaration or withdrawal takes effect or with
respect to its proceeds, the right of the assignee has priority over the right of a
competing claimant to the extent that, under the law that would determine priority
before such declaration or withdrawal takes effect, the right of the assignee would
have priority.
Article 44
Reservations
No reservations are permitted except those expressly authorized in this
Convention.
Article 45
Entry into force
1.
This Convention enters into force on the first day of the month following
the expiration of six months from the date of deposit of the fifth instrument of
ratification, acceptance, approval or accession with the depositary.
2.
For each State that becomes a Contracting State to this Convention after
the date of deposit of the fifth instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or
accession, this Convention enters into force on the first day of the month following
the expiration of six months after the date of deposit of the appropriate instrument
on behalf of that State.
3.
This Convention applies only to assignments if the contract of
assignment is concluded on or after the date when this Convention enters into force
in respect of the Contracting State referred to in article 1, paragraph 1 (a), provided
that the provisions of this Convention that deal with the rights and obligations of the
debtor apply only to assignments of receivables arising from original contracts
concluded on or after the date when this Convention enters into force in respect of
the Contracting State referred to in article 1, paragraph 3.
4.
If a receivable is assigned pursuant to a contract of assignment concluded
before the date when this Convention enters into force in respect of the Contracting
State referred to in article 1, paragraph 1 (a), the right of the assignee has priority
over the right of a competing claimant with respect to the receivable to the extent
that, under the law that would determine priority in the absence of this Convention,
the right of the assignee would have priority.
Article 46
Denunciation
1.
A Contracting State may denounce this Convention at any time by
written notification addressed to the depositary.
2.
The denunciation takes effect on the first day of the month following the
expiration of one year after the notification is received by the depositary. Where a

19

A/RES/56/81

longer period is specified in the notification, the denunciation takes effect upon the
expiration of such longer period after the notification is received by the depositary.
3.
This Convention remains applicable to assignments if the contract of
assignment is concluded before the date when the denunciation takes effect in
respect of the Contracting State referred to in article 1, paragraph 1 (a), provided
that the provisions of this Convention that deal with the rights and obligations of the
debtor remain applicable only to assignments of receivables arising from original
contracts concluded before the date when the denunciation takes effect in respect of
the Contracting State referred to in article 1, paragraph 3.
4.
If a receivable is assigned pursuant to a contract of assignment concluded
before the date when the denunciation takes effect in respect of the Contracting
State referred to in article 1, paragraph 1 (a), the right of the assignee has priority
over the right of a competing claimant with respect to the receivable to the extent
that, under the law that would determine priority under this Convention, the right of
the assignee would have priority.
Article 47
Revision and amendment
1.
At the request of not less than one third of the Contracting States to this
Convention, the depositary shall convene a conference of the Contracting States to
revise or amend it.
2.
Any instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession
deposited after the entry into force of an amendment to this Convention is deemed
to apply to the Convention as amended.

Annex to the Convention
Section I
Priority rules based on registration
Article 1
Priority among several assignees
As between assignees of the same receivable from the same assignor, the
priority of the right of an assignee in the assigned receivable is determined by the
order in which data about the assignment are registered under section II of this
annex, regardless of the time of transfer of the receivable. If no such data are
registered, priority is determined by the order of conclusion of the respective
contracts of assignment.
Article 2
Priority between the assignee and the insolvency administrator or creditors of the
assignor
The right of an assignee in an assigned receivable has priority over the right of
an insolvency administrator and creditors who obtain a right in the assigned
receivable by attachment, judicial act or similar act of a competent authority that
gives rise to such right, if the receivable was assigned, and data about the
assignment were registered under section II of this annex, before the commencement
of such insolvency proceeding, attachment, judicial act or similar act.

20

A/RES/56/81

Section II
Registration
Article 3
Establishment of a registration system
A registration system will be established for the registration of data about
assignments, even if the relevant assignment or receivable is not international,
pursuant to the regulations to be promulgated by the registrar and the supervising
authority. Regulations promulgated by the registrar and the supervising authority
under this annex shall be consistent with this annex. The regulations will prescribe
in detail the manner in which the registration system will operate, as well as the
procedure for resolving disputes relating to that operation.
Article 4
Registration
1.
Any person may register data with regard to an assignment at the registry
in accordance with this annex and the regulations. As provided in the regulations,
the data registered shall be the identification of the assignor and the assignee and a
brief description of the assigned receivables.
2.
A single registration may cover one or more assignments by the assignor
to the assignee of one or more existing or future receivables, irrespective of whether
the receivables exist at the time of registration.
3.
A registration may be made in advance of the assignment to which it
relates. The regulations will establish the procedure for the cancellation of a
registration in the event that the assignment is not made.
4.
Registration or its amendment is effective from the time when the data
set forth in paragraph 1 of this article are available to searchers. The registering
party may specify, from options set forth in the regulations, a period of effectiveness
for the registration. In the absence of such a specification, a registration is effective
for a period of five years.
5.
Regulations will specify the manner in which registration may be
renewed, amended or cancelled and regulate such other matters as are necessary for
the operation of the registration system.
6.
Any defect, irregularity, omission or error with regard to the
identification of the assignor that would result in data registered not being found
upon a search based on a proper identification of the assignor renders the
registration ineffective.
Article 5
Registry searches
1.
Any person may search the records of the registry according to
identification of the assignor, as set forth in the regulations, and obtain a search
result in writing.
2.
A search result in writing that purports to be issued by the registry is
admissible as evidence and is, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, proof of
the registration of the data to which the search relates, including the date and hour
of registration.

21

A/RES/56/81

Section III
Priority rules based on the time of the contract of assignment
Article 6
Priority among several assignees
As between assignees of the same receivable from the same assignor, the
priority of the right of an assignee in the assigned receivable is determined by the
order of conclusion of the respective contracts of assignment.
Article 7
Priority between the assignee and the insolvency administrator or creditors of the
assignor
The right of an assignee in an assigned receivable has priority over the right of
an insolvency administrator and creditors who obtain a right in the assigned
receivable by attachment, judicial act or similar act of a competent authority that
gives rise to such right, if the receivable was assigned before the commencement of
such insolvency proceeding, attachment, judicial act or similar act.
Article 8
Proof of time of contract of assignment
The time of conclusion of a contract of assignment in respect of articles 6 and
7 of this annex may be proved by any means, including witnesses.
Section IV
Priority rules based on the time of notification of assignment
Article 9
Priority among several assignees
As between assignees of the same receivable from the same assignor, the
priority of the right of an assignee in the assigned receivable is determined by the
order in which notification of the respective assignments is received by the debtor.
However, an assignee may not obtain priority over a prior assignment of which the
assignee had knowledge at the time of conclusion of the contract of assignment to
that assignee by notifying the debtor.
Article 10
Priority between the assignee and the insolvency administrator or creditors of the
assignor
The right of an assignee in an assigned receivable has priority over the right of
an insolvency administrator and creditors who obtain a right in the assigned
receivable by attachment, judicial act or similar act of a competent authority that
gives rise to such right, if the receivable was assigned and notification was received
by the debtor before the commencement of such insolvency proceeding, attachment,
judicial act or similar act.
DONE at ..., this ... day of ... two thousand one, in a single original, of which
the Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally
authentic.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly
authorized by their respective Governments, have signed the present Convention.

22
