UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

15 DECEMBER

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
, . . , , . . . . . . . . . . , . +. . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . .

I

Adoption of the agenda , . . . , , . . . , . . , . . . , . . . , . . , , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . I . .

1

Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa:
Letter dated 9 December 1982 from the Charge d’ Affaires a,i. of the Permanent Mission of Lesotho to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15515) . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . I . . . I . , . a. . . I

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2407)

SIPV .2407

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2407th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 15 December 1982, at 3 p.m.
Prrsidc>lzt:

Mr. Wlodzimierz

NATORF

(Poland).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China,
France, Guyana. Ireland, Japan. Jordan,
Panama,
Poland, Spain. Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of Amcrica, Zaire.
Provisional

agenda (SlAgendal2407)

I.

Adoption

2.

Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa:
Letter dated 9 December 1982 from the Charge
d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Lesotho to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council
(Sll55lS)

of the agenda

Adoption

of the agenda

Complaint
by Lesotho against South Africa:
Letter
dated 9 December 1982 from the Char@
d’Affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Lesotho
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/15515)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision taken at the preceding meeting on this item
[240&k tncllJtitz,r:], I invite the representative of Lesotho
to take a place at the Council table: I invite the representatives of Algeria. Angola, Botswana, India and
Zimbabwe to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

At ti?cJ irwitrrriorz
of the President, Mr. Molapo
(Lesotho)
took a place at the Council table; Mr.
ScIhrzoulz (Algeria), Mr. de Figueiredo (Angola), Mr.
Legwaila
(Botswana), Mr. Krishnan (India) arzd Mr.
Mushingaidze
(Zimbabwe) took the places reserved
for them at he side qf the Council chamber.
2.

on the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice. I propose. with the consent
of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote.
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

The PRESIDENT:

I should like to inform

mem-

bers of the Council that I have received letters from

the representatives of Egypt, Guinea, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone. South Africa,
Swaziland,
Yugoslavia and Zambia in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion

3 The PRESIDENT:
_.
Members of the Council have
before them document S/15524. which contains the
tclxt of a draft resolution prepared in the course of the
Council’s consultations.
It is my understanding that
the Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution before it. Unless I hear any objection I shall
put the draft resolution to the vote now.

4. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. who wishes
to make a statement in his capacity as Chairman of the
Group of African States at the United Nations for the
month of December. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
5. Mr. TRElK.1 (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): In my
capacity as Chairman of the Group of African States.
I should like to congratulate you. Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month
and express my delegation’s firm beIief in your dedication and leadership.
6. Once again the Council is meeting to discuss
a serious matter in southern Africa caused by irresponsible action committed
by the racist minority
regime of South Africa against the Kingdom of Lesotho. On 9 December
1982, South Africa invaded
Lesotho, an action which resulted in the loss of many
innocent lives and caused the destruction of property.
7. Yesterday
the King of Lesotho eloquently
elaborated on the events which took place on 9 De-

each regime with an additional source of arms supphes
and technological know-how. The two regimes have
found no alternative, after their isolation by the international community,
but to strengthen their cuoperation and thus to challenge the will of the international community,
The examples are numerous.
To mention a few, there are the latest aggression
against Mozambique;
the continuation
of the policy
of oprrrthl>id: the flagrant violation
of human rights
in occupied Palestine: the continued occupation of
Arab territories and the establishment
of illegal settlcmerits: the aggression against the Iraqi reactor: the
occupation of southern Lebanon,
the massacre of
Sabra and Shatila: and the continued defiance by the
regime of South Africa of the United Nations calls
for the early independence of Namibia. The continued
support by the imperialist Powers of the racist regime
of South Africa contributes to the suffering and deprevation experienced by the indigenous Namibian
people.

cember [ihid.], so I shall not go into the details of what
happened during that unprecedented
aggression,
but I would like to make some brief remarks on the
critical situation in an important part of our world.
As Chairman of the Group of African States, I would
like first of all to express our full support for and our
solidarity with the Government and people of Lesotho
during these critical days in their just struggle against
the colonial and racist aggression of the oparth4d
regime of the South African white minority.
8. This kind of naked aggression is not the first,
nor will it be the last. In past years the South African
regime has committed many acts of aggression against
front-line States. particularly Lesotho and Mozambique, and has occupied a part of Angolan territory,
causing loss of life and damage and destruction of
property in these brotherly States. This situation
has created an economic and social problem which has
resulted in obstacles being placed before development plans. This action not only poses a serious
economic problem for the people and Government
of Lesotho and the other front-line States but also
constitutes a flagrant violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and the basic principles of international
law. It is a threat to peace and security, not only in
that area, but also in the African continent and the
whole world. The main purpose of the racist regime of
Pretoria in its criminal acts against Lesotho and other
front-line States is to sway them away from their solid
stand against the npartheid policy of the South African
regime, its policy of continuing occupation of Namibia
and t,he exploitation of its human and natural resources. Moreover, its aim is to prevent those countries from giving refuge to South African refugees.

I I. It is high time for the United Nations. especially
for the Council, to take concrete measures to guarantee to the Namibian people their legitimate right
to self-determination
and independence.
Moreover.
the United Nations. and particularly
the Council.
should take effective measures to put an end to aggression perpetrated by the racist regime of South Africa
against Lesotho and other front-line States.
12. The General Assembly
has repeatedly condemned such unprovoked
invasions, which have
caused damage, loss of innocent lives and destruction
of property. Only yesterday, the General Assembly
adopted without a vote a resolution [wsolution .?7//0/].
in which it condemned the South African regime for its
unprovoked invasion of Lesotho and commended the
Government of Lesotho for its opposition to the
trparth&~ policy of the South African racist regime
and for the refuge it is giving to South African refugees and freedom fighters, The Assembly has urged
the Council to take immediate
steps to deter South
Africa from repeating its acts of aggression and destabilization against Lesotho and other neighbouring
independent African States.

9. It is sad to note that the international community
is witnessing and accepting these continued acts of
aggression without giving the full and essential assistance necessary to prevent such criminal acts. It is
our conviction that the main reason for this failure of
the international community to put an end to this
aggression is the fact that the imperialist Powers
extend their full support financially, militarily and
politically to the racist regime in Pretoria in order to
protect their imperialist and colonialist interests in
that part of the world. On such a pretext, we are
faced with another situation of similarity of interests,
namely the occupation by the Zionist regime of Palestine and other Arab territories. It is in the common
interests of those two regimes to deprive the native
inhabitants of the exercise of their inalienable rights,
Indeed, they are bound by the hideous links of colonialism and racism, and constitute a racist axis whose
purpose is to silence any voices opposed to their
racist policy.

13. It is the conviction of the African States Members that, under the Charter. it is the duty and responsibility of the Council to invoke Chapter VII on such
clear violations of the Charter and of international
law as in the case we are facing now. III particular,
the permanent members of the Council should beal
in mind these responsibilities
and should not misuse
the right of veto in an act directed against the wishes
and ambitions of the peoples of southern Africa and
the Middle East.
14. The Council should strongly condemn the racist
regime of South Africa for its aggression against
Lesotho and other African countries.

10. The two racist regimes, in Africa and the Middle
East, have resorted to a closer co-operation, the main
objective of which is to make southern Africa and the
Middle East a common strategic concern of the Western Powers. This growing collaboration has provided

15. The Council should fully support the rights of
the peoples who have suffered and continue to suffer
2

/
,i

from injustice and subjugation under the yoke of the
Fascist and racist minority rkgimes in Africa and the
Middle East.

and resolutions which are in keeping with the principles and purposes of the United Nations are binding
on all States Members, whatever position they may
have taken on a particular resolution. If that were not
recognized, then it would mean that any Member
State could disown the mission, the goals and the
objectives of the universal Organization.

16. Any failure on the part of the Council to ensure
such support will no dou’bt reinforce the dangerous
pattern, which could prove to have extremely harmful
repercussions for world peace and security.

24. This. as I see it, is the conclusion reached by
Lesotho, a loyal Member of the United Nations, which
has always had the courage to lend its support to the
African liberation
movements
in southern Africa,
regardless of its proximity to South Africa. Lesotho
only did its duty to the international community, the
United Nations and the peoples which are struggling to
regain their most elementary rights.

17. Finally. I should like, on behalf of the Group
of African States, to reaffirm again our full support
and our pledge to the brotherly State of Lesotho in its
right to confront aggression and to any effective and
relevant action that may be taken by the Council
against the racist rigime of South Africa. The Council has now adopted resolution 527 (1982). but we
should not confine ourselves to a resolution.
We
feel that this aggression of South Africa will be repeated
against Lesotho and the front-line States. This is
why I feel that the Council should assume its responsibility to adopt concrete sanctions against South
Africa.

25. This is why we feel that the Council must condemn South Africa for its unprovoked acts of aggression and make it liable for the damages caused and
for the loss of human life and destruction to property.
At the same time we feel that the Council should
congratulate Lesotho for its justified and legitimate
opposition to the policy of crparthcid and reaffirm its
right to harbour within its territory refugees and other
victims of rrpclrtheid,
in accordance with its humanitarian principles and its international obligations.

18. Mr.
KAMANDA
wa KAMANDA
(Zaire)
litrfer.pi.Pttrtiotl.fr.oln
F,-cnch): First of all, Sir, I should
like to congratulate you warmly on your accession to
the presidency for the month of December. I should
like also to express our great appreciation to your
predecessor for the excellent leadership he provided
the Council during the month of November.

26. The Council should also take the necessary
measures to deter South Africa from continuing OI
resuming acts of aggression and destabilization against
Lesotho and other independent neighbouring African
States. The Republic of Zaire fully endorses the idea
that Member States should be invited to give to Lesotho, in so far as they are able, the necessary economic
assistance to enable it to strengthen its capacity to
receive refugees and rebuild its economy.

19. The unprovoked invasion of Lesotho on 9 December by the South African Defence Force (SADF),
which caused great damage to property and loss of
human life, including the lives of innocent women.
children
and old people, aroused great indignation
among the people of Zaire.
20.

King

Moshoeshoe II of Lesotho has expressed
possible way the seriousness of the
action to which his peaceful country was subjected on
9 December by coming to New York himself.

27. This aggression by South Africa against LeSOtho is not only a violation of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and of international
law, but is also a violation of the specific provisions
of General Assembly resolution 33/73 of I5 December
1978, entitled Declaration
on the Preparation
of
Societies for Life in Peace. This declaration calls on
all States to guide themselves in their activities by the
recognition of the necessity of establishing. maintaining and strengthening a just and durable peace.
and to observe the following principles, interalia; that:
every nation and every human being has the inherent
right to life in peace: wars of aggression are crimes
against peace and are prohibited
by international
law: and States have the duty to refrain from propaganda for wars of aggression, States also have the
duty to promote co-operation
with other States in
order to further the ideals of peace, humanism and
freedom; to respect the right to self-determination,
independence.
equality,
sovereignty, the territorial
integrity of States and the inviolability
of their frontiers.
including the right to determine the road of their
development, without interference; and to discourage
all incitement to hatred and prejudice. as well as all

in the clearest

Apurthcid
has been proclaimed by the United
Nations
to be a crime against humanity. The legitimacy of the liberation struggle waged by the liberation
movement
of South Africa has been recognized by
the United Nations and by the international community
as a whole. The liberation movements of South Africa
are. as far as the Organization is concerned, the sole
authentic
representatives of the black populations of
South Africa.
2 1.

22.

There

is not the shadow of a doubt that all
of the United Nations, through the General
Assembly.
the Security Council and all other bodies
which, in one way or another, deal with the situation
in South Africa in particular and in southern Africa
in general are binding on all Member States.
decisions

23. Under
opportunity

o’ther circumstances,
I have had the
of recalling that United Nations decisions
3

manifestations of colonialism,
nation and apcrrtheid.

racism, racial discrimi-

Panama. Mr. Carlos Ozores Typaldos, whose common sense and great open-mindedness are well known
in international
affairs. He demonstrated
those
qualities when he presided over the Council last
month.

28. The aggression against Lesotho is also a violation of General Assembly resolution 36/103 of 9 December 1981. entitled Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention and Interference in the Internal
Affairs of States. which sets forth. inter rrlifr. the rights
and duties flowing from the principle of non-intervention and non-interference in the internal and external
affairs of States and also recalls that the establishment.
maintenance and strengthening of international
peace
and security are based on freedom. equality, selfdetermination,
independence and respect for the
sovereignty of States.

35. Once again. South Africa has committed aggrcssion against a sovereign State. Lesotho. Once agsin.
South Africa is defying the international
community. Once again. the international
community is
witnessing a flagrant violation of the fundamental right5
of a people and of a State.
36. During the night of Wednesday. 8 December.
to Thursday, 9 December. South Africa, disregarding
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
of international
positive law and resolutions of the
General Assembly, launched a raicl against Lesotho
which claimed about 40 innocent victims. The raid
was launched on the pretext that the operation was
directed against so-called terrorists of the ANC who
had intended to intensify their liberatian activities in
South Africa. This is not the first time that South
Africa has committed
aggression against States in
the region on various pretexts. The cases of Mozambique and Angola-particularly
operation Protea of
September 1981 in the latter country-are
still fresh
in our minds. These violations are constant threats to
international
peace and security. The presence of
ANC freedom fighters in Lesotho, if it can in fact be
proved. is a matter within the exclusive sovereignty
of that country, which has the right to shelter in its
territory whomever it wishes, South Africa claims.
as usual. that in striking at the ANC fighters in the
territory of Lesotho it was exercising a right of hot
pursuit. That is a false argument. because the right
of hot pursuit exists only on the high seas. and does
not apply on land.

29. Are we to believe, then, that the Pretoria rCgime
has firmly declared itself to be opposed to the principles and purposes of the Charter, to the principles of
international
law relating to friendly relations and cooperation among States, to preparing societies to live
in peace, and to the inadmissibility of intervention and
interference in the internal affairs of States?
30. Such a prospect is in itself so serious in its
implications for international peace and security, and is
in itself such a denial of the vocation of the United
Nations and of its work as a whole. that the Council
cannot remain unconcerned about it.
31. We therefore believe that it is the Council’s
duty to take measures to ensure that in future South
Africa complies with the provisions of the Charter,
the principles of international law and the many resolutions of the United Nations, and undertakes not to
repeat its acts of aggression against neighbouring
independent African States which are more than sufficiently aware of their international obligations.
32. For all those reasons the Republic
in favour of resolution 527 (1982).

of Zaire voted

should assume the presidency of the Council when it
has to discuss disturbing questions of the violation of
the inalienable
rights and fundamental
freedoms of
a people and the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of a State. Your country, Poland, has a long history
marked by events which give the word “freedom”
its
full meaning and scope, and this helps you to understand the struggle being waged throughout the world
by the national liberation movements-in
this case,
the African National Congress of South Africa (ANC).
You belong, Mr. President, to a heroic people open
to various currents of world political and philosophical
thought, a people with a great understanding
of the
major national and international problems. This background means that you assume the presidency with
competence, efficiency and sound judgement.

37. Moreover, how can one reproach the ANC fol
existing, and how can one reproach Lesotho for SUPporting that movement, which is defending the nobtr
cause of the freedom of the overwhelming
majority
of the South African people who are now subjected
to the inhuman yoke of apartheid? As long as oprrr’fkid
exists, the ANC or some form of liberation
movement will have to exist. It is South Africa itself
which, through its policy of qrrrthrid.
has called
into existence the ANC and its armed struggle. BY
its ignoble policy of apartheid, which denies coloured
peoples the most elementary rights and tramples them
underfoot, South Africa has elicited a natural reaction
of revolt on the part of those peoples. No individual.
no people, can indefinitely tolerate tyrannical ha~%sment by another people that denies its right to exist.
No people can stand by passively and witness its own
destruction. We can therefore understand the actions
of the ANC, whose sole aim is to free the oppressed
peoples and enable them to enjoy the legitimate rights
of which they are now deprived.

34. I should like to take this opportunity,
Sir, to
congratulate your predecessor, the representative
of

38. Here I would recall that the ANC has not always
had recourse to armed struggle. It was forced to do so

33. Mr.
AMEGA
(Togo) (it?tLJI’pI.C’t(1ti(~/z s,-om
Fr~~nch): Fate has decreed, Mr. President, that you

4

--.-

I-

-.

.”

LIBRAR

out of despair. When it made legitimate claims in
peaceful demonstrations
and demanded respect for its
people’s dignity and value as human beings, South
Africa responded-and
still responds-with
inhupan,
barbarous
repression. Using its so-called security
laws. it has increased the number of those in prison,
of those tortured and of those sentenced to death,
particularly
among the ANC freedom fighters. Therefore, the movement
had no option but recourse to
arms.

“Togo cannot tolerate the situation of injustice
and oppression that currently prevails in this region,
where a r@gime unworthy of our species and OUI
age. contrary to all morality, is maintained at the
price of indescribable
violence against a population whose crime is the colour of their skin.”
43. I invite the international
community
to look
inwards collectively, and I appeal to all the States concerned, all the agencies and corporations concerned,
to think about the imminent danger towards which the
human race is rushing if no action is taken to bring
the racist rigime of Pretoria to take the necessary
measures to abolish this criminal,
vile policy of

39. The
international
community
has
often
expressed its outrage over the attitude adopted by
South Africa and has adopted resolutions designed to
impose on that country penalties meaningful enough to
force it to wake up to the inhumanity of its policy of
apurfhid
and to give it up. But those resolutions
have never achieved their aim, because certain States
continue to co-operate with South Africa in the economic and military spheres, thus indirectly supporting
the racist rtgime of Pretoria.
40. The Afrikaaner
poet,
was right when he wrote:

Breyten

uprrrtheid.

44. On 15 November
last, when I spoke at the
68th meeting of the General Assembly on agenda
item 33, I said that paradoxically
it was the racist
minority of South Africa which denies the equality of
races and the intermingling
of cultures. The black
mqiority, for its part, is quite willing to accept this,
because it believes that the civilization of the future is
one in which races and cultures will indeed intermingle.

Breytenbach,

“This regime [rrprrrrhcidj
exists only because the
world wants it to, It flourishes, is accepted, encouraged. nourished, armed, saved if necessary, because
it works to the advantage of South Africa’s trading
partner-s and investors.”

45. Therefore
my delegation
congratulates
the
Council for firmly condemning
the South African
aggression against Lesotho.
My delegation feels
moreover that that country, whose sovereign rights
have been violated and flouted and which has suffered
material damage and the loss of human lives because
of South Africa’s act of piracy, is entitled to compensation, Thus I welcome the decision that has just been
adopted.

41. The most elementary rights of the great majority of the South .4frican people are being trampled
under foot. They are denied the right to live, and yet
mitigating
circumstances are still being found for the
ignoble crpnrthtiid rCgime. Even worse, it is being
provided with the means necessary to carry on that
policy.
That is most deplorable.
No account is
taken even of the injunctions oflhe General Assembly,
which. on 21 October last, by a large majority called
on the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) to refrain
from granting
any loan to South Africa [~snlrrfiofl .57/2]. In an attempt to explain this insult to the
international
Organization, the Special Representative
of IMF to the United Nations said that the actions of
the Fund must be in conformity with its ArticIes of
Agreement
and could not be based on considerations
that did not derive from the Articles. But did the
same considerations
lead the IMF to refuse loans to
other States? This is a sign of the times. As Claude
Julien pointed out in the monthly magazine LCJ Mode
DiplmmI-rfiyrre this month. everything is political,
and the agreement between the IMF and South Africa
is no exception.

46. My delegation remains convinced that, faced
with the gravity of this situation and the permanent
threat posed by South Africa to its neighbours, the
Council will always shoulder its responsibilities.
47. Sir John THOMSON
(United
Kingdom):
It
gives my delegation and me personally much pleasure,
Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of this important body.
48. It is in the light of a job well done that I express
thanks to the delegation of Panama for what the Permanent Representative
of Panama did with so much
distinction last month.
49. I think that we should also note the outstanding
achievements of our colleague, the former Permanent
Representative of Zaire, now the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of his country. I am delighted to pay a tribute
to him for his achievements here as the Permanent
Representative and for what I know he will achieve
as Foreign Minister of his great country.

42. How can one support a country which has become notorious for its flagrant and repeated violations
of the fundamental
freedoms of an entire people? As
General Gnassingbe Eyadema, founding President of
the Rally of the Togolese People, President of the
Togolese Republic, said:

50, The Council has been privileged to hear from
King Moshoeshoe II a statement of great dignity and
clarity [2406t1z mccti/zg]. His presence here at a
5

lllllllll

critical time for his country is a measure of the importance which Lesotho attaches to the Council’s consideration of the matter before us.

to do this is through the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (HCR).
Accordingly,
we
welcome the news given by the Secretary-General that
the High Commissioner has already initiated action.

51. On behalf of the United Kingdom,
I express
once again our deep sympathy to the Government and
the people of Lesotho and to the relatives of all those
who were callously struck down on 9 December.
Lesotho has been the victim of an unwarranted attack.
In the face of this grave situation, Lesotho has acted
with statesmanship
and restraint and deserves the
support of every member of the Council. I am glad
that it is receiving that,

58. South Africa should make
caused by its attack by paying
compensation to Lesotho.

59. With regard to the future and to the grave situation which this attack has demonstrated,
we must
insist that South Africa should henceforth comply
scrupulously with the provisions of the Charter. This
indeed would be in South Africa’s own best interests.
South Africa is taking a foolish risk if it sets an example
by breaching the principles of international law and of
respect for the Organization to which we all belong.

52. We have only to look at a map to appreciate
the difficult, indeed vulnerable situation of Lesotho,
as a small, land-locked country surrounded on all sides
by a much more powerful neighbour, South Africa.
As a result of our long and very friendly association
with Lesotho, a fellow member of the Commonwealth,
we are closely aware of the problems, both political
and economic, which that country faces. We have
at all times supported and assisted Lesotho to the best
of our ability, and it goes without saying that we wish
to help the Government of Lesotho deal with the consequences of this unwarranted attack.

60. I hope very much that we shall hear during the
course of this debate from the representative of South
Africa that his Government will in the future abide by
the Charter and will desist from further violence of this
kind. Such a step would assist greatly in the search
for peaceful solutions in the region, solutions which
South Africa professes to desire.
61. South Africa should show the respect for its
international
obligations which the King of Lesotho
demonstrated yesterday with regard to his own country. Members of the Council will have noted the
considerable emphasis which the King placed on these
obligations and will wish to assist Lesotho in fulfilling them. Above all, the inadmissibility
of acts of
this kind must be brought home to South Africa. This
is a point on which I wish to expand briefly.

53. The issue we are considering here today is
clear-cut. We have no need of further inquiries, for
the facts arc not in dispute. This flagrant violation of
Lesotho’s sovereignty not only was attested to by a
host of witnesses in Maseru, but was brazenly described in a statement issued on 9 December by the
Chief of SADF, Genera1 Viljoen.
54. It follows that my Government
can see no
justification
for the action undertaken by SADF.
South Africa has wilfully breached the principles of
international law, of the Charter of the United Nations
and of civilized behaviour between nations. Lesotho
poses no threat to South Africa. As the King of Lesotho has reminded the Council, his country has followed
a policy of peaceful coexistence and good-neighbourliness, a policy which is far from easy in the circumstances of southern Africa and which is therefore all
the more commendable.
South Africa’s coldly premeditated attack is thereby all the more reprehensible.
It justly drew immediate condemnation from my own
Government and from other Governments, and from
the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the
Secretary General of the Commonwealth.

62. We all have a responsibility to try to reverse
the escalation of violence and confrontation in southern Africa. My Government, as the Council knows,
is continuing to play a very active part in the search
for peaceful solutions to the problems of the region,
in close contact with the countries of the region and
with other Western countries.
63. I therefore much regret the preposterous
and intemperate statements made by one representative, both in the General Assembly yesterday at its
103rd meeting and in the Council today, in marked
contrast to the statesmanship shown by Lesotho.
I was left in some doubt as I listened whether the
representative was, as he said at one time, speaking
on his own behalf, or whether he was, as he appeared
to be saying at another time, speaking on behalf of a
whole continent, of all the African States. I could
hardly believe as I listened to him that it could be
the latter. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zaire
and the representative of Togo spoke in different
accents: they spoke in a measured and far more persuasive way. If we are really concerned with promoting peace, if we are really concerned with the security of Lesotho itself, which is the very reason why
we are meeting here today, we should not try to stir
up strife, we should not try to provoke violence.

55. Condemnation
is not enough. Lesotho must be
given all possible support. There are a number of
steps which should be taken in response to this
tragedy.
56. Lesotho’s
friends
will obviously
wish
consider what action they can take individually.

good the damage
full and adequate

to

57. There is a clear need to assess the implications
for the many refugees in that country. The right way
6

64. We must ask what the motives are of those
who make such far-fetched allegations--allegations
which I believe every member of the Council knows
in his heart to be without foundation. Are they genuinely trying to promote peace and stability among the
nations of southern Africa, or are they among those
who hope to exploit the region’s problems, and this
Iatest tragedy, precisely in order to complicate those
problems,
even to the extent of frustrating peaceful
negotiated solutions to them? We cannot help wondering whether some people do not actually welcome
and encourage violence.

1 trust and believe that in adopting this present resolution the Council has signified its support in clear and
unmistakable
terms,

65. Those who, from whatever quarter, preach
violence and use the jargon of blind extremism can
only help to accelerate the cycle of violence and to
create divisions within our ranks. Violence begets
violence.
The most likely consequence of their
destructive
attitude is further destructive behaviour
by South Africa. Is this the way to help land-locked
Lesotho?

70. I should also like to pay a tribute to the representative of Panama, who presided over our work last
month with a great deal of competence and skil1.

69.

Mr.

de La BARRE

de NANTEUIL
(France)
I should like first of all,
Sir, to express to you my warmest congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council.
My delegation
is convinced that under your wise
guidance our work will be successfully completed.
Proof of this is the unanimous adoption of resoiution 527 ( 1982).

(interpwtrrtiorz fio~n Z+n&):

71. Once again, the Council is meeting to consider
the complaint of an African State against the Republic
of South Africa.
72. My delegation listened with the greatest attention to the particularly
eloquent statement made by
King Moshoeshoe II [2406th meeting]. When the raid
was reported, the French Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Claude Cheysson, said that he was “astounded
that South Africa could show such disdain for international law”. He then addressed to the Prime Minister of Lesotho, Mr. Jonathan, a message of solidarity
and support. I in turn would like to assure the representatives of Lesotho of our deepest sympathy and to
ask them to transmit to the families of the victims the
condolences of the French Government.

66. If. on the other hand, we want to make the
most positive impact, we can do no better than to
follow the example set by Lesotho, to let the facts speak
for themselves and to repudiate violence. My Government has always deplored the use of violence from
any quarter in the search for solutions to the problems
of southern Africa, We have repeatedly appealed for
restraint to be shown by all in the region. We have
consistently
urged that those problems be resolved
peacefully and have expressed our deep regret at any
acts which contribdte to a cycle of violence.
67. These are the views we shall continue to press
strongly
on the Government
of South Africa. We
earnestly hope that, before it is too late, the South
African Government will see the error of its ways and
will desist from adding further twists to the menacing
spiral of violence in southern Africa. We are committed to working for peaceful change within South
Africa. We do not believe that South Africa can in
any sense resolve its own problems by inflicting force
upon its neighbours. We believe that it is only through
peaceful change, and not through force of repression,
that we can hope to see the unhappy situation within
that country and between it and its neighbours
improve.

73. In this ordeal, France stands unhesitatingly
at
the side of Lesotho. We pay a tribute to its courageous’
and worthy people, which, in a threatenitig atmosphere, is endeavouring to preserve its independence
and chart a course of economic and social progress
for the country. As a peace-loving country, Lesotho
also prides itself on being a land of asylum. Those
whom lrpnr’theili makes pariahs in their own country
can find refuge in Lesotho, where there is respect for
national laws and international
agreements,
74. It is precisely that policy of welcoming political refugees, which is completely consistent with the
generous traditions of African hospitality and with
international law, that according to the Pretoria authorities justified the murderous raid of 9 December, which
was described as a “preventive”
action.

68. In conclusion,
I should like to express my
delegation’s
pleasure that this resolution has been
adopted promptly and unanimously.
In the eloquent
speech which he made to us yesterday afternoon, the
King of Lesotho said this:

75. My Government
rejects that reasoning and
strongly condemns the unprovoked attack perpetrated
by South Africa against Lesotho. It denounces this
flagrant violation of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Kingdom. It deplores the many victims, including women and children, of that unjustifiable commando action.

“We appeal to the Council, which has set itself
the noble task of maintaining world peace, to restrain
South Africa from flouting the Charter of the United
Nations,
from violating the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Member States of the Organization
and from pursuing a strategy of naked terrorism
against a whole subcontinent.”
[2240&h mming,
pc11*r1*
37. ]

76. Not only the events but their causes must be
denounced.
7

77. 4pur//7~id
inevitably leads to repression. for no
one can stand idly by while his dignity is constantly
and institutionally
insulted.
Moreover,
internal
repression inevitably leads to external aggression,
for a State always tends to blame others when the
responsibility
lies mainly with itself.

84. On 9 December, the South African Mission here
circulated a statement on behalf of the Chief of SADF
seeking to justify the attack on Maseru. The statement
is a masterpiece of unconscious irony. It speaks of
information
that the ANC was planning “deeds of
terror in South Africa. Transkei and Ciskei during the
festive season”. It refers to the danger that what it
calls *‘the ANC’s terror activities from Lesotho” could
“increasingly
follow the pattern of brutal violence
and disregard for human life”. It mentions the Palestine Liberation Organization for good measure. And it
emphasizes that “SADF’s sole aim was to prevent
deeds such as bloodshed of the innocent, bombings,
sabotage and other acts of terror”.

78. It is high time for the Government
of South
Africa to understand that it has embarked on a deadend course, or rather a course whose outcome can
only be bloody confrontation. We would like to think
that it is not yet too late. We would have liked to take
some encouragement from two recent and undeniably
positive events. I refer to the release of the great poet
Breytcn Breytenbach, who is now living in Paris,
and the talks in Praia between two high-level delegations, one South African and the other Angolan.

85. The irony is that many of these phrases describing activities vaguely attributed to the ANC as
a matter of future intention are an exact description
of South Africa’s own activities on the night of 9 December. An attack by South Africa’s powerful forces
on a weak and defenceless neighbouring
State in
which about 40 people were killed is indeed very well
described in the phrase “a pattern of brutal violence
and disregard for human life”; and the “deeds such as
bloodshed of the innocent, bombings, sabotage and
other acts of terror”, which the South African statement claims it was the sole aim of SADF to prevent,
are precisely those which the South African forces
themselves engaged in when they struck at Maseru.

79. We are convinced that South Africa would have
everything to gain if it were resolutely to embark on
that course of action. It has a great deal to lose by
indulging in actions as inexcusable RS the Maseru
raid. An end must be put without delay to such armed
incursions across borders, which dangerously heighten
tension in southern Africa without in any way reducing
the tension caused within South Africa by the upcrrthcid
policy of the South African Government.
80. France. which took the initiative of proposing
a protest by the IO members of the European Community addressed to the Pretoria authorities. is pleased
that the Council was able unanimously to condemn the
unjustifiable attack committed by South Africa against
Lesotho.

86. The statement acknowledges that five women
and two children were killed. As it puts it, they “died
in the cross-fire”. There is even a kind of apology.
The statement says “it is regretted that the innocent
also had to suffer because they were housed by terrorists to discourage action against them”‘.

XI. Mr. DORR (Ireland): Sir, I begin by extending
my good wishes to you on your assumption of the
office of President, and indeed my congratulations
on
your conduct of the office so far. I should also like to
thank your predecessor. Mr. Carlos Ozores Typaldos.
and the delegation of Panama, for the conduct of the
presidency during November. I should also like to
join in welcoming the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Lesotho to the Council table and to offer good wishes
also to our own former colleague, the new Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Zaire, who has taken part in our
proceedings today.

87. Notice the terms of that expression of regret.
First, it is impersonal-“it
is regretted”-as
if to
detach the South African attackers from the event.
Second. it is made to appear unavoidable-“the
innocent also had to suffer”-as
if further to remove
responsibility from those who attacked Maseru and as
if to make the death of the innocent unavoidable or
somehow their own fault.
88. But, it may be said, this particular attack should
be seen as part of a pattern of growing violence in the
region. The ANC, indeed, has struck at times at
targets within South Africa, and perhaps South Africa
may now claim to be striking at the ANC where it
can. Perhaps there are some who deplore the particular attack but still think a kind of rough justice was
served by it.

82. For once the facts of an issue before the Council are not really in dispute. All accounts, including
that given by South Africa itself, agree that SADF
forces. numbering
apparently about 100, struck
across the border at Maseru, capital of the independent State of Lesotho. during the night of 8/9 Decembe r. ,4 number of houses in the capital were
attacked. About forty people were killed. A number
of women and children-five
women and two children,
according to South Africa’s own account-died
in the
attack.

89. To refute this suggestion it is important
to
record the fact that there is no evidence, I repeat,
no evidence, of any attack on South Africa from
Lesotho, by the ANC or otherwise, in the past. We
were already aware of this-and
in his moving and
eloquent statement here yesterday, King Moshoe-

83. What was the reason for this brutal attack on an
independent State‘? South Africa itself has given its own
explanation.
8

shoe II was again quite categorical
He said:

on this point.

is talk of confidence-building
measures and of negotiation behind the scenes with certain other States. How
can this kind of attack on a defenceless neighbour,
totally surrounded by South Africa, contribute to
confidence? How can it be seen as other than part of
a pattern of intimidation
and violence by South Africa
directed at other countries of the region? Surely
Tlzr Wnslzington Past was right to describe it in its
editorial of 11 December as “an inexcusable act of
bullying”.

“Not a single obvious across-the-border incident
has been alleged, let alone proved, against us, in
contrast with numerous occasions when mortars
have been launched from South African territory
into Lesotho.
“In numerous political trials held in South Africa
involving ANC freedom fighters, not once has it been
alleged that any were based in or operated from
Lesotho.”
[Ihid., pcrrrrx. 25 rrd 26.1

95. Ireland has close and friendly relations with
Lesotho and we have concentrated a good part of
our modest bilateral aid programme in that country.
We have, therefore, all the more reason to know the
situation there at first hand and to know that the South
African attack was simply designed to intimidate a
weak and defenceless neighbour.

90. So there is not even the kind of crude balance.
the tit-for-tat retaliation that sometimes exists in cases
which come before the Council. Even South Africa’s
own statement,
to which 1 have referred earlier,
makes no clear allegation about anything that happened in the past. The focus is on the supposed
plans of the ANC, and on “the danger” that its activities, as the statement says, “could increasingly follow
the pattern of brutal violence”.

96. The
Government
of Ireland
unreservedly
condemns this attack by South Africa, which violates
the sovereignty of a peaceful, independent country
and is in direct violation of the Charter of the United
Nations. We are deeply disturbed by the implications
for the future of southern Africa as a whole of this and
other similar attacks on Angola and Mozambique,
and we express our deep sympathy to the Government
and people of Lesotho and to the relatives of those
who died at the hands of the invading South African
forces.

91. So it appears that even by its own admission,
South Africa carried out this ruthless attack on a
small and defenceless neighbour with an eye to the
future. For that reason, I do not think it an exaggeration to say, and I weigh the words, that it was in the
strict sense a terrorist attack-if
not in the sense of
indiscriminate
terrorism, then at least terrorism in
the sense of an attack designed to spread fear among a
particular
group-the
South African refugees in
Lesotho. It was no doubt also intended to frighten the
Government
of Lesotho, the country where they
have found refuge.

considered
it necessary
97. Ireland
therefore
for the Council to respond both firmly and urgently to
this clear breach of the Charter. We were glad, for
this reason, to vote in favour of the draft resolution,
and we are very glad indeed that it was adopted unanimously by the Council.

92. We learn from the statement yesterday by King
Moshoeshoe
that 12 of those who were aroused from
their beds in Maseru during the night and coldly shot
down with machine-guns, hand grenades and bazookas
by South African forces were citizens of Lesotho.
It appea.rs that many of the others were refugees from
South Africa, that is to say, they were black South
Africans, excluded by the minority white population
from virtually all rights in their own country. Like
many others, they have found the situation intolerable
and fled across the border into Lesotho.

98. Mr. NISIBORI
(Japan): Mr. President, first
of all, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the Presidency for the month of December.
I am confident that our work will greatly benefit
from your rich diplomatic experience and keen insight,
and that under your able guidance the Council will
successfully discharge its duties. Also, I am pleased
to have this opportunity
to express my delegation’s
appreciation
to Mr. Ozores Typaldos of Panama,
President for the month of November, for the effective and efficient manner in which he handled the
matters before the Council 1as.t month.

93. Ireland has argued before that peaceful change
in South Africa is preferable to violence which brings
bloodshed
and suffering in its wake. Rut it is that
much more difficult to sustain this kind of argument
when white South African forces carry out a brutal
attack which amounts, in the literal sense, to an act
of terrorism by a Government and which seems almost
deliberately
designed to give the spiral of violence in
the region a new upward twist.

99. My delegation has listened carefully and with
deep sympathy as King Moshoeshoe II of Lesotho
described to the Council [2#06th rncctin,y] the tragedy
his Kingdom has recently experienced. We are profoundly moved by the fact that he has left his country
at a critical time in order to present to the Council a
first-hand account of the situation there. In so doing,
he has demonstrated his trust in the Council. It is now
up to the members of the Council to prove that his
trust is not misplaced.

94. This point has wider application to the problems
of the whole region, South Africa claims to be interested in a settlement of the Namibia problem. There
9

100. As the King of Lesotho has so forcefully
stated. it is clear that South Africa, in its recent raid,
violated the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of
Lesotho. Kndeed, the attack is a flagrant violation of
the Charter of the United Nations, and it contravenes
established norms of international law, the Declaration
on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,’
and
other relevant resolutions of the United Nations.

106. My Government strongly believes, therefore,
that it is now incumbent upon the Council to work
expeditiously to resolve this situation. The Council
must first of all impress upon the leaders of South
Africa that its villainous attack on Lesotho has gained
universal condemnation.
Further, the Council should
demand that South Africa redress the terrible wrongs
it has perpetrated against its neighbour. And finally,
it must insist that South Africa refrain from the use of
force and settle this dispute peacefully, in accordance with the Charter.

101. The Commander
of SADF reportedly
announced that the raid was a pre-emptive measure to
prevent terrorists from committing
terrorist acts in
the Republic of South Africa during the Christmas
season. My Government re.jects this justification
of
South Africa’s hostile act against its neighbour.

107. Thus my delegation is pleased that the resolution which set forth these ideas was adopted unanimously by the Council. We earnestly hope that it will
be fully implemented so that the stability of the region
will be ensured, for regional stability is essential if
international efforts to resolve the two fundamental
sources of difficulty in the region are to continue in
a realistic manner.

102. As a country which firmly upholds the principle of settling all international disputes by strictly
peaceful means and of refraining from the threat or use
of force in international
relations, Japar. strongly
condemns South Africa’s commando attack on Lesotho. In the view of my delegation. such actions, fat
whatever reason, cannot be tolerated. Japan deeply
deplores the loss of more than 40 lives-including
innocent women and children-in
the raid. The
responsibility
for this villainous killing lies solely with
South Africa.

108. Mr. OTUNNU
(Uganda): My delegation is
very pleased, Sir, to see you presiding over the Council for the month of December. Our pleasure is all the
greater because you represent the Polish People’s
Republic, a country with which- Uganda enjoys cordial
and fruitful relations. We are confident that under
your able and wise leadership, the Council will discharge its responsibilities
with speed and effectiveness;

103. The Government of Japan is of the view that
South Africa’s recent violation of the sovereignty
and territorial
integrity of Lesotho cannot be considered apart from the general political
situation
prevailing throughout southern Africa. Indeed, States
Members of the United Nations have long been
endeavouring to resolve two major problems in that
region, namely, the question of Namibia and that of
the rrpor.tlwicl policies of South A’frica. It is from this
latter problem that the incident now under consideration stems. Thus, because the attack against Lesotho is not an isolated incident, my Government is concerned that it could have dangerous consequences for
peace and stability throughout southern Africa.

109, I also wish to express our deep gratitude to
our President for the month of November, the representative of Panama, Mr. Carlos Ozores Typaldos.
Through his skilful and patient leadership, the Council was able to accomplish its tasks smoothly and
successfully during the month of November.
110. We are honoured to have in the Council today
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho, Mr,
Charles Dube Malapo.
1I I. The Council is meeting today because early
on the morning of 9 December South Africa struck
anot.her deadly blow to the heart of independent
Africa. The victim of this latest aggression by the
aparrhc~id rkgime is Lesotho. I shall not dwell on the
details surrounding this grim episode, since yesterday
King Moshoeshoe II presented to the Council in
moving and eloquent terms [ihid.] the complete facts
of this case. It is sufficient for me to underline the fact
that by the time the invading force departed from
Maseru it had massacred 42 people, including women
and children. and caused extensive damage to property.

104. In this context. the Government
of Japan
must also point out that this is not the first instance
of South African military operations against its neighbours. Indeed, in just the past two years alone, South
African attacks have been reported to the Organization by, for example, Mozambique-in
January and
March I98 I and August 1982-and Angola-in
January
and August of 1981 and March and July of 1982. And
Lesotho too reported an insurgent attack from South
African territory against its paramilitary
headquarters
in March of this year.

112. Uganda expresses its deep sympathy and solidarity with Lesotho and the people of South Africa
during this painful period of mourning.

105. This latest hostile act by South Africa is thus
one additional incident which runs counter to all the
efforts of the world Organization in search of peace
in the region.

113. There is also no need for me to go to any great
length to prove that South Africa was responsible for
10

118. For those reasons, Lesotho
target of South African aggression.

thd aggression and the subsequent carnage, because
South Africa itself lost no time in boasting of its exploits
in Maseru.

has become

the

119.

Yet it is clear that the real threat to the apartSouth Africa itself, and not
outside its borders. The Pretoria rigime has no
choice but to come to terms with the oppressed people
of South Africa, who constitute the overwhelming
majority of the population.
hcid system lies within

114, Following a now familiar pattern, the aggressor has quickly sought to shift responsibility
for its
actions onto the victims, in this case Lesotho and the
South African refugees who have been residing in
Lesotho. What possible threat could Lesotho pose
to the national security of South Africa? Let us consider the following factors: geographically,
Lesotho
is located in the very belly of the beast, with barely
a breathing space for itself; Lesotho occupies an area
of barely 30,000 square kilometres as compared to
South Africa’s land space of 1.2 million square kilometres, which surrounds the Kingdom; Lesotho has
a population
of 1.2 million people, which is nearly
22 times less than the South African total of 27.3 million people; the gross national product of Lesotho
is $US 240 miliion, whereas that of South Africa is
a gigantic $US 45.7 billion; and Lesotho has an army
of 2,000 men, while South Africa has some 480,000 men
under arms.

120. The aggression against Lesotho raises some
larger questions that must also be addressed here.
121. First of all, the aggression against Lesotho is
only the latest incident in a comprehensive campaign
in which South Africa has unleashed and sustained a
reign of terror throughout
the southern region of
Africa. The impact of this undeclared war has been
especially damaging for Angola and Mozambique,
Even as we deliberate here, South African troops
continue to occupy part of the southern province of
Angola. Just before the attack on Maseru, a special
South African squadron mounted a similar raid on
fuel depots at Muhava, near Beira, in Mozambique,
Pretoria’s programme of aggression and destabilization has now extended well beyond the general area of
southern Africa. The best example was the mercenary
invasion of Seychelles in November 1981; yet Seychelles is geographically far removed from the borders
of South Africa. Whereas South Africa has continued
for years to commit aggression and conduct a campaign
of terror against independent African States, no one
can cite a single instance where an independent African
State has launched an attack against South Africa.

I 15. Where in this scenario can one locate the element of threat to South African national security?
Clearly, Lesotho is in no position to play David to the
npcwthcid
Goliath, and it has never tried to do so. On
the contrary, Lesotho has consistently pursued a
policy of peaceful coexistence in order to ensure its
survival.
116.

As for the refugees who fled from the perseof the npnrthck!
system and who have been
resident in Lesotho, the facts are as follows: the ANC
does not have any bases in Lesotho; the refugees are
a11 disarmed, and therefore are in no position to make
any armed incursions into South Africa; the refugees
are not located in refugee camps, but are settled
generally, within the Basotho community: and in any
case, there are not that many refugees, since the majority prefer to settle further afield in other parts of
Africa. It is obvious, therefore, that there is no basis
in fact for the claim of the apartheid rkgime that these
refugees constitute a threat to its security.
cution

122. Secondly, there are those who still cherish’
the notion of South Africa as some sort of regional
policeman for Africa. This is a truly curious notion.
A policeman is a keeper of the peace, an agent of law
and order. What kind of a policeman is this, who has
become the main instrument
of terror throughout
the southern region of Africa? Does all this mean
anything to those who speak so often about regional
security for southern Africa?
123. Thirdly, if South Africa is now escalating its
war of aggression against independent African States,
the Security Council must bear some measure of
responsibility
for this state of affairs. The Council
has consistently faiIed to take any action against South
Africa for its repeated acts of aggression. South Africa
has enjoyed an unusual protective shield within the
Council, which has blocked all moves against the
uprprrrtheid r@gime. This failure by the Council has
given South Africa the confidence to pursue its adventures with complete impunity.
Will the Council continue to fiddle while the whole of southern Africa is
burning? I fear that if the present trend is not arrested
soon, the whole of Africa could become a free hunting
ground for the npcrrtheid regime. To halt this dangerous trend, the Council will have to consider more
definite measures beyond the tokenism of mere
condemnation.

117. Since the claims of South Africa are false,
what then are the real reasons for South Africa’s
aggression against Lesotho? There is no doubt that the
crpnrtkeid
rkgime, today more than ever before, is
feeling the heat of the political and armed resistance
being waged within Soul% Africa by the liberation
movements.
This has led to some desperation, which
has led to the search for scapegoats outside South
Africa. The opnrtheid rkgime, like every bully, is
upset that Lesotho, in spite of its vulnerable size and
location,
has consistently denounced apartheid and
refused to confer any legitimacy on the manifestations
of the crprrrthcid system, most notably the so-called
bantustans.
Moreover,
Lesotho has continued
to
receive and host refugees fleeing from the oppression in
South Africa,
11

the black people for freedom and liberation. Beyond
its borders, Pretoria stubbornly clings to its illegal
occupation of and colonial rule over Namibia, and
has repeatedly launched armed incursions into Angola
and other neighbouring countries as well as poiing
a military threat and carrying out subversive activities
against Zimbabwe and Mozambique.

124. Finally. it must be stressed that no amount
of aggression, destabilization or intimidation
can hold
back the historic tide of freedom. This is the lesson
which colonial Portugal learned much too late in
Mozambique,
Angola and Guinea-Bissau,
125. Ian Smith of Rhodesia once declared that
never in ;I thousand years. never in his lifetime, would
thcrc bc majority rule in that land. Today, this man
is the recalcitrant citizen of an independent Zimhahwc. It is tr:lgic that the masters of rrpr/,tlrc~id in
Pretoria still suffer from the Ian Smith syndrome.
But the tide of freedom has irreversibly crossed the
Limpopo. The peoples of Africa will not rest until that
tide embraces the Cape of Good Hope.

130. However, despite the repeated denunciation of
those outrages by the United Nations and the international community, the South African rigime remains
defiant and recalcitrant. Instead of showing restraint,
it has become even more reckless in its aggressiveness. Hence the 9 December assault on Lesotho.
By its reactionary policies and acts of aggression,
Pretoria has again proved itself to he the main source
of the serious threat to peace and stability in southern
Afsica.

126. Mr. LING Qing (China) (interpretation
ft-om
~‘lrijlr~c,): First of all. Sir. I would like to express. in the
nnmc of the Chinese delegation. our warm congratulations to you on your assumption of the presidency fol
the month of December. With your outstanding capability and rich diplomatic experience. you will surely
puidc fhc Council in smoothly accomplishing
this
month’s work. I would also like to take this opportunity to express our appreciation to Mr. Carlos Ozores
Typaldos of Panama. under whose leadership the
Council successfully completed its work during the
month of November.

131. The Chinese Government firmly supports the
just position and legitimate demands OF Lesotho and
other African countries. Our support also extends to
the just struggle of the people of South Africa and
their national liberation organizations against ~rpnrfhc>id. We believe that, with its primary responsibility
for maintaining international
peace and security. the
Council should not only severely condemn Pretoria’s
wanton aggression against an independent sovereign
neighbour as well as its menace against and sabotage
of rhe peace and security of the region. but should
also adopt forceful and effective measures. such as
calling for the strict implementation
of the arms
embargo against South Africa and seriously considering the adoption against it of comprehensive and
mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter.
so as to prevent the recurrence of South Africa’s
aggressions against neighbouring States.

127. The Chinese delegation would also like to
extend :I warm welcome to the King of Lesotho fat
uttcnding the Council meeting. We listened attentively
to his important statement yesterday [ihicl. 1.
128. In the early morning of 9 Decetnber, the racist
South African authorities wantonly launched an armed
attack on Lesotho. Using military aircraft and helicopters. South African troops temporarily
occupied
Lesotho’s capital city, Maseru, and brutally killed
more than 40 innocent people. including women and
children. The attack. which caused heavy losses of
life and property to the people of Lesotho, is a serious
violation of the independence
and sovereignty of
Lesotho. a Member State of the United Nations and
;I member of the Organization of African Unity, It
also constitutes a gross violation of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the accepted norms of international
relations. Such
acts of aggression by Pretoria have met with the firm
resistance of the people of Lesotho and aroused the
anger of the African countries and the entire international community.
The Chinese Government
and
people express strong indignation and condemnation
over this fresh crime committed by the South African
authorities against the people of Lesotho and Africa.
We extend our deep sympathy to the Government and
people of Lesotho and our firm support for their just
struggle to resist South Africa’s acts of aggression.

134. I wish to take this opportunity
to express
appreciation of the outstanding manner in which the
President for last month, Mr. Cartos Typaldos of
friendly Panama, presided over the work of the Council during that period.

129. Over a long period of time, the South African
authorities have pursued a barbaric policy oF rrprrr.tk~aid at home snd brutally suppressed the struggle of

135. The dastardly act of unprovoked aggression
perpetrated last Thursday by the trpnrtheid rkgime of
South Africa against Maseru, the capital of the peace-

132. We are of the view that the Power which has
all along shielded, and connived with. South Africa
is duty bound to exert the necessary pressure on the
South African authorities so as to stop it from continuing its atrocities.
133. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I wish to express
on behalf of the Jordanian delegation the sincerest
congratulations of my delegation to the President of
the Council for the month of December, MI-. Wlodzimierz Natorf of friendly Poland, on his assumption
of the presidency. His wisdom, statesmanship and
grasp of international
issues will no doubt facilitate
the successful outcome of the Council’s deliberations.

I2

ful Kingdom of Lesotho, which resulted in grievous
loss of innocent refugee lives and extensive damage to
both private and government premises, can be described only as an act of State terrorism against a
contiguous independent, sovereign State.

140. What is no less important is to ensure that this
act of aggression does not serve as II pattern and
precedent. in violation of the cornerstone ofthe Charter
of the United Nations and international law. In out
Middle East region. such wanton acts started more th:ln
a decade ago.cin 1969 or even earlier. a\ relatively
limited acts of aggression and ended. as we have 41
seen. in last summer’s all-out genocidal war again\1
Lebanon and the Palestinian refugees.

I36. That warlike act is the more reprehensible
when we take into consideration that Lesotho is landlocked, small and to all intents and purposes unarmed
when
compared to armed-to-the-teeth
South Africa.
The victims of that ruthless attack were for the greatet
part evidently chosen at random, ranging from children
to-as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho
informed us two days ago-a newly-wed couple, who
by no stretch of the imagination could possibly. in any
rational analysis whatsoever, be accused of posing a
threat to the might of a racist and Fascist South Africa.
which has evidently gone literally berserk. Even
South African newspapers. usually supportive
of
South Africa’s inimical policies and practices. have
expressly and sternly criticized their Government’s
act of aggression and terrorism, describing it as not
only sterile but also counter-productive.
inasmuch
as it has intensified the sense of revulsion and insecurity which the peoples of southern Africa as a whole
already deeply feel in consequence of South Africa’s
repeated acts of aggression committed against neighbouring States. such as Angola and Mozambique,
as
well as a deepening justifiable alienation on the part
of the vast majority of the population of South Africa
against the ruling heartless and mindless circles in
South Africa itself.

141. It started-and
I recall all too well how it started,
because I was there-in an Israeli air strike. including
helicopters,
against Beirut’s
famous international
airport, More than 14 Boeing aircraft and other installations were totally destroyed.
142. The reason then given by Israel was that a
young man. or two young men, had embarked at that
airport. at which thousands of people embark every
day. We all know that Lebanon is a /oi.v.vt~:$/i/.~,
country. Tens of thousands of people go to all the
continents of the world from that airport-or
used to.
143. That was followed by commando strikes at
regular intervals against unarmed refugee camps. In
due course, those refugees were impelled to carry
small arms for self-defence or be massacred. The
Israelis took this instinctive step as a mortal dangel
to Israel. That is how the whole matter started.
The spiral began, and culminated in an indescribable
catastrophe.
144. Is South Africa embarking on a similar course
of action? Is it striving to derail the hoped-for settlement of Namihian independence‘? Is it a continuum
of the kind ofubiquitous attacks on Angola and Mozambique to which we have all become accustomed? Only
the future will tell. and the Council’s response is crucial indeed. for. with the whole of southern Africa
being enveloped and encompassed by this reign of
terror, international peace and security will inevitably
he at stake.

137. The abominable act of aggression committed
against Lesotho, as King Moshoeshoe II explained
before the Council yesterday [ibid.], was an act committed
against a fundamental precept and norm of
universally
accepted civilized behaviour,
namely,
the right and duty of every State to accord asylum
to immigrants
of conscience who might find themselves unable to accept the intolerable indignity of
crprrrthcid. Which self-respecting State in the world
is willing to give up this right and duty?

14s. My delegation would have supported a stronger
resolution, not so much in a spirit of taking punitive
action but in order to deter the kind of development
that has taken place in my part of the world and that
is at present taking place in southern Africa. It would
have liked a strtinger resolution on such a clear-cut
issue. but it went along with the existing resolution fol
the sake of unanimity.

138. Lesotho is a nation of refugees, as King MOshoeshoe mentioned yesterday, and no one can be
more conscious of the duties which devolve
upon
States towards the oppressed than those who themselves have experienced its inhuman wickedness.
139. The delegation of Jordan, mindful of similar
-though
far more extensive-acts
of State terrorism
perpetrated
by Israel in our region-and
I am not
trying
to score any political point here-strongly
condemns
trptrrthcid and South Africa’s savage and
indiscriminate
attack against Lesot.ho and supports
the demand in paragraph 2,of the resolution adopted
at the beginning of this meeting that South Africa pay
full and adequate compensation to the Kingdom
of,
Lesotho for all the damage to life and property wrought
by its act of aggression.

146. May I express the deep condolences of the
Government and people of Jordan to the families of the
bereaved and to the proud people of Lesotho.
147. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union
of’ Soviet
Socialist Republics) (inzcJr;DI,c~t~rtir~~~
,fi.o~z R~r.s.virrtl):
I should like first. Mr. President, to welcome you
to the presidency of the Council. Your exten\ivc
diplomatic experience and your ability. demonstrated
in the ncgoti21Lions in the Committee on Disarmament
13

----

in Geneva and in other international forums, are well
known to us all. We are happy to see in the President’s seat the representative of socialist Poland, a
country with which my country has brotherly relations
of friendship and co-operation, and we wish you every
success in that important position.

military, economic and diplomatic support of a number
of Western countries--to
be specific, primarily
the
United States. It is those very States that are advocating patience in dealing with the South African
racists, and are thereby in fact encouraging them
further to expand their aggression in southern Africa.

148. I should also like to express our appreciation
to the representative of Panama, Mr. Carlos Ozores
Typaldos, who so ably presided over the Council’s
work in November.

156. The latest commando-type
attack on Lesotho
was a direct consequence of the fact that Pretoria
went unpunished for its earlier misdeeds against the
African States.

149. The Soviet delegation
listened with close
attention to the statement made at yesterday’s meeting
of the Council by King Moshoeshoe II of Lesotho
[ihid.]. We were impressed by the convincing arguments in his statement and by the sincerity with which
he spoke. We should like to express to him and to the
peopte of Lesotho our deepest condolences at the
deaths of many innocent citizens of their country.

157. The Soviet Union firmly condemns
South
Africa’s armed invasion of the territory of Lesotho.
We share the view of the representatives of the African
States that the continuing acts of aggression by the
South African racists against neighbouring countries
constitute a serious threat to international peace and
security.
158. The Soviet delegation
supported the draft
resolution submitted to us for our consideration, but
the following question arises: What next? It would
probably be simply wishful thinking to believe that
the resolution would compel South Africa to abandon
its policy of aggression and terrorism against the
neighbouring African States.

150. The picture of what happened is quite clear.
The racist rigime of South Africa committed
yet
another crime, blatant armed aggression against the
African State of Lesotho. On 9 December, the armed
forces of the racists invaded the territory of Lesotho,
raided the capital of the country and wreaked havoc
there. killing completely innocent people. The South
African air force participated in the attack, using aircraft and military helicopters.

1.59. We can expect something quite different to
happen, namely, that South Africa once again, as so
often in the past, will simply ignore the resolution of
the Council and continue its policy of aggression.
In this connection, the question arises-and it was quite
rightly raised by the Secretary-General in his annual
report on the work of the Organization’-how
we are
to ensure implementation
of resolutions adopted by the
Security Council, which should be binding. We feel
that, in the event of the failure of one or another country to implement
a resolution of the Council, the
Council should take the next step and adopt such
coercive measures as would compel that State to take
account of and comply with its will.

IS I. This is another attempt to intimidate the young,
newly independent States of southern Africa and to
compel them to submit to the will of the racists.
152. This standard aggression by Pretoria is far from
being an isolated case. It is just one more link in the
long chain of unending military actions, basically a
permanent war, which South Africa wages against
the African States.
153. In recent years, the Council has frequently
condemned the aggressive attacks by South Africa
on Angola, Zambia, Mozambique
and Seychelles.
South African troops, having invaded the territory
of Angola, are still occupying towns and villages in
that country and killing people and destroying houses,
bridges and means of transport and communications.

160. The Soviet delegation has stated on many
occasions, and we repeat once again, that the Council
should be ready to adopt measures under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations against South
Africa: otherwise, all this talk about a desire to enhance
the effectiveness of the United Nations as a whole
and the Council in particular will remain just that, talk,

154. New reports are being received about a further
dangerous concentration and buildup of armed forces
by the racists on the border with Mozambique.
All
of this demonstrates once again that South Africa’s
policy is a growing threat to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the African States and to international peace and security in southern Africa.

161. Meanwhile, there are some States, permanent
members of the Security Council-we
do not have to
name them, they are already quite well known-that
quite blithely threaten and talk a lot about sanctions.
Things have even come to such a pass that, as was
reported in the press yesterday, the Under Secretary
of Defence of the United States even threatened to
apply sanctions against neutral Austria. But whenevel
it is a question of South Africa, whether in connection
with the question of Namibia or aggression against
Angola, Zambia or Mozambique, a thousand different
pretexts are put forward to explain why it is simply

155. It is quite clear to all sensible people that,
as was stated very convincingly yesterday by the King
of Lesotho, the Pretoria regime would never have
dared to act so boldly and brazenly if it had not been
able to rely on the direct and indirect, open and covert,
14

not possible to adopt a resolution on sanctions.
Apparently
sanctions &her are not effective, or
cannot be applied-or
even are unconstitutional.
And if, as has happened, we actually get as far as a
vote on a draft resolution calling for the application
of sanctions in accordance with the Charter, the
adoption of such a decision is simply blocked. We
believe that the Council must constantly keep in view
the aggressive foreign policy of Pretoria and its specific
actions so as finally to take decisive measures, in
nccol-dance with the provisions of Chapter VII of the
Charter. to compel South Africa to cease immediately
its aggression against States in the region.
162, Mr.
de PIN1 ES (Spain)
li)?rr,‘prrlrrtio,1
&lrn Spfrnisl?): I should first like to congratulate you,
Sir. on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. Of course. we assure you of ail the help
and co-operation that we can provide during your term
of office.

t63. We should also like to congratulate the outgoing President, the representative of Panama. for the
outstanding
way in which he discharged his responsibilities at the head of the Council.
I should also like to convey u special greeting
my friend from Zaire. who has been promoted to
the very important
post of Minister for Foreign
Affairs. I extend my most cordial congratulations
to
him.

“I have the honour to send to your Excellency
the expression of my most sincere condolences and
regrets for the loss of human lives due to the attack
against your country by South African troops. which
the Spanish Government
and people strongly
condemn as a flagrant viotation of international
law and a new blow against peace and stability in
southern Africa.“‘::
167. My delegation most strongly condemns this
act of aggression committed by South Africa in violalion of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of
Lesotho and once again expresses its concern at the
situation of tension prevailing in southern Africa. the
root cause of which is. in our opinion, the persistence
of the abominable rdgime of r,porthcdid. The Security
Council and the General Assembly have repeatedly
condemned that rigime, which not only constitutes
a flagrant violation of the human rights of the overwhelming majority of the South African population
but also bears the seeds of confrontation with neighbouring countries. The system of rrpo&rJid is a foreign
body which is rejected by the entire international
community.
In order to survive, it reacts against
the neighbouring
countries with such reprehensible
actions as that bring considered by the Council today.

i64.

to

165. This is not the first time that. the authorities of
Lesotho have addressed the Council because of acts
of violence committed against their country from South
African territory.
On this occasion, however. the
acts denounced are of particular seriousness, both
because of the brazen manner in which the offenders
invaded the territory and attacked the very capital of
a neighbouring
State and because of the damage and
above all the tragic loss of the dozens of human lives
-South
African refugees and citizens of Lesotho--that
those attacks caused. The seriousness of what
occurred in Maseru on 9 December fully warranted. in
the view of my delegation. approval of the resolution
that we have just adopted unanimously.
166. As soon as news was received of the South
African attack, the Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs
sent to his counterpart of Lesotho, who is honouring
US with his presence here today, a telegram, the text
of which read as follows:

168. The authorities in South Africa must realize
that t,he patience of the international
community is
not boundless and that they must refrain from harassing
and committing further attacks against Lesotho or any
other State of the region.
169. My delegation. which listened with great attention and sympathy to the statement made yesterday
by King Moshoeshoe II [ibid.], wishes to express its
solidarity to the delegation of Lesotho and to ask that
it convey our condolences to the victims’ families.

.:i Quoted

in English

hy the spalker.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATlONS

SE PROCIJRER

LES

Les publications
des Nations
Units
mnnde entier. Inlbrmez-vous
aupres
des ventcs. New York ou Gcneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICATIONS

may he ohtamcd
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
or write to: IJnttcd Nations.
Sales Section.
New York or Geneva.
DES

NATIONS

UNIES

sent ert vtmte dans les librairics
et Its agences
de witrc libraire
ou adressez-vous
a : Nations

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicacioues
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva York o Ginebra.

PUBI,ICATIONS

DE

LAS

NACIONES

Uniclas
estan en venta en librerlas
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

depositaires
du
Unies. Section

UNIDAS
y casas disttibuidoras
en
Unidas,
Section
de Ventas,
