208

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

2. Repe_ats its appeal to all States w~ich have not y~t
become parties to the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs of 1961, the 1972 Protocol Amending the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 and the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 to take the
necessary steps to accede to these conventions and thus
ensure their universal application;
3. Invites all Governments to collaborate closely
with the International Narcotics Control Board, the
Division of Narcotic Drugs and the other relevant
bodies in the United Nations system, particularly by
supplying them with the necessary information so th~t
they may fulfil their tasks both pursuant to the_ provisions of the narcotics conventions and in accordance
with their purposes;
4. Urges all States to take suitable steps to implement Economic and Social Council resolutions 1979 /8
of 9 May 1979 and 1980 /20 of 30 April 1980 with a view
to achieving and maintaining a lasting balance between
demand and supply of opiates and avoiding the possibility of diversion of licit production to illicit channels;
5. Invites States concerned to take appropriate
measures to discourage the powerful economic interests
which are propagating a false and deceitful image of
drug use with the aim of increasing the number of drug
abusers and legalizing the abuse;
6. Underlines its appeal to all Govern~ents to_ increase their financial support for the Untted Nations
Fund for Drug Abuse Control, so that it may forward
the enhancement of measures for the reduction of the
illicit supply, traffic and demand for narcotic drugs, a1:d
calls particularly upon States which require assistance m
crop-substitution o~ law enforcement prograri:mes to
present suitable projects to the Fund and other mternational funding bodies or projects for bilateral development assistance;
7. Underscores the need of producing countries to
receive greater assistance from interested Governments
and relevant international organizations to facilitate
drug abuse control, including crop-substitution policies
or law enforcement programmes;
8. Calls upon all States to co-operate in a suitable
fashion to prevent the uncontrolled or illicit cultivation,
production, export, import, transit and consumption of
narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances, and to take
suitable measures to prevent the misuse of chemical substances for the production of drugs;
9. Calls upon the Commission on Narcotic Drugs_to
present, at its thirtieth regular session, the completed mternational programme for drug abuse control so that
such a comprehensive, co-ordinated global strategy may
be translated at the earliest possible date into actions
seeking to interdict narcotics trafficking, eradicate the
illicit production and demand, educate citizens throughout the world regarding the dangers of drugs and treat
and rehabilitate those individuals who have become dependent upon or addicted to drugs;
lO. Invites the Economic and Social Council to give
once more particular attention to these questions at its
first regular session of 1981;
I l. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to all Governments.
96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35 / l 96.

Mass exoduses

The General Assembly,
Mindful of its mandate under the Charter of the
united Nations to promote and encourage resµect for
human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all,
Disturbed by the scale and magnitude of the exoduses
and displacements of populations involving hundreds of
thousands of men, women and children in many regions of the world,
Noting the immense burden imposed on the first host
countries and territories which receive the victims of
these sudden and massive movements of population,
Bearing in mind the resolutions of the Economic and
Social Council concerning international efforts to meet
humanitarian needs in emergency situations,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution
30 (XXXVI) of 11 March 1980 114 concerning human
rights and massive exoduses,
I. Expresses deep concern at the continued incidence
of large-scale exoduses and displacements of populations and the resulting hardships and problems for the
persons and States concerned;
2. Expresses its determination to facilitate solutions
to the problems caused by these large-scale movements
of population;
3. Endorses the requests of the Commission on
Human Rights in its resolution 30 (XXXVI);
4. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
examine the report of the Secretary-General to be submitted to it at its thirty-seventh session and, on the
basis of that report, to make recommendations for further action;
5. Decides, in light of the consideration given this
question by the Commission on Human Rights, to consider the question at its thirty-sixth session under the
item entitled "Report of the Economic and Social Council''.
96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/197.

Regional, national and local arrangements for
the promotion and protection of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34 / 171 of 17 D~cember 1979,
in which it reiterated its appeal to States m areas where
regional arrangements in the field of human rights do
not yet exist to consider agreements with a view to the
establishment within their respective regions of suitable
regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling also its resolution 34/49 of 23 November
1979 on national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights,
l. Notes with satisfaction the efforts currently under
way within the Organization of African Unity to elaborate an African charter of human rights and to establish an African commission on human rights, and
requests the Secretary-General to maintain close _cooperation with the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity on this matter and to keep the
'" See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. 1980.
Supplement No. 3 (E/1980/13 and Corr.I), chap. XXVI. sect. A.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

General Assembly and the Commission on Human
Rights informed as he deems it appropriate:
2. Welcomes with appreciation the offer made by the
Government of Sri Lanka to be host to a seminar of
Member States of the Asian region to consider appropriate arrangements for the promotion and protection
of human rights in the region;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary arrangements, following finalization of the
consultations with Member States of the Asian region,
with a view to holding the above-mentioned seminar at
Colombo in 1981 and to inform the General Assembly
at its thirty-sixth session of the deliberations of the
seminar.

96th plenary meeting
I 5 December I 980
35/198.

Measures to improve the situation and ensure
the human rights and dignity of all migrant
workers

The General Assembly,
Affirming the need to establish international cooperation by resolving international problems of an economic, social, intellectual or humanitarian nature and
by developing and encouraging respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as
to race, sex, language or religion,
Recalling in this connexion the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 1 ' ' of the 1nternational Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination' 1 " and of the International Covenants on Human Rights, 117
Convinced of the contribution made by migrant
workers to the economic growth and the social and cultural development of the host countries,
Bearing in mind the international instruments elaborated for the protection of migrant workers by the specialized agencies and especially by the International
Labour Organisation,
Bearing in mind the Migrant Workers (Supplementary
Provisions) Convention, 1975, ' 1' and the Recommendation concerning Migrant Workers, 1975,''" adopted
by the General Conference of the International Labour
Organisation,
Conscious, however, of the need for furth'c!r efforts to
ensure the protection of the rights and the improvement
of the living conditions of all migrant workers and their
families,
Concerned by the fact that the problem of migrant
workers is becoming more serious in certain regions,
owing to current political and economic circumstances
and for social and cultural reasons,
Recognizing the need for the Governments of host
countries and of countries of origin to co-operate with a
view to finding solutions conducive to improving the situation and ensuring the rights of all migrant workers
and their families.
Reaffirming that the family is the natural and fundamental unit of society and is entitled to protection by
"' Resolution 217 A (Ill).
6
Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
"' Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
13
' International Labour Office, Official Bulletin. vol. LVIII. 1975,
series A, No. I, Convention No. 143.
"' Ibid., No. I, Recommendation No. 151

209

society and the State and that, in that context, the
families of migrant workers are entitled to the same protection as the migrant workers themselves,
Recalling its resolution 34 / 172 of 17 December 1979,
in which it decided to create, at its thirty-fifth session, a
working group open to all Member States to elaborate
an international convention on the protection of the
rights of all migrant workers and their families,
Noting with satisfaction that the Working Group on
the Drafting of an International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Their
Families has been able to commence its work during the
thirty-fifth session in accordance with its terms of reference,
Noting, in particular, that it is important that the
Working Group should make substantial progress before the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly, in
order to facilitate the accomplishment of its task,
I. Welcomes the fact that at the current session the
Working Group has begun its work with a view to the
elaboration of a draft convention on the protection of
the rights of all migrant workers and their families;
2. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Chairman of the Working Group 140 as well as the documents annexed to it;
3. Decides that the Working Group shall hold an intersessional meeting of two weeks' duration in New
York in May 1981, immediately after the first regular
session of the Economic and Social Council of 1981, to
enable it to continue its work in order to discharge its
mandate to the best of its ability during the thirty-sixth
session of the General Assembly;
4. Invites the Secretary-General to communicate to
Governments the report of the Chairman of the Working Group and the documents annexed to it in order to
enable the members of the Working Group, in the light
of instructions from their respective Governments, to
undertake during the second phase of its activities, at the
intersessional meeting of May 1981, the preparation of a
preliminary draft convention for consideration by the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
5. Also invites the Secretary-General to communicate, for information purposes, the above-mentioned
documents to the competent organs of the United
Nations system and to the interested international organizations, in order to enable them to participate in the
work of the Working Group and to co-operate in the
preparation of the draft convention;
6. Further invites the Secretary-General to communicate to Governments, to the competent organs of
the United Nations system and to the interested international organizations the report and the preliminary
draft convention to be drawn up by the Working Group
at its intersessional meeting of May 1981, in order to ensure effective preparation of the work of the thirty-sixth
session of the General Assembly on the elaboration of a
draft convention on the protection of the rights of all
migrant workers and their families;
7. Decides that the Working Group shall meet during the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly in
order to continue its work on the elaboration of an international convention on the protection of the rights of
all migrant workers and their families.

96th plenary meeting
15 December l 980

"

'"' AIC.l/35/13.
