S/2021/501

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 May 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 26 May 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, Mr. Atul
Khare, Under-Secretary-General for Operational Support, and Mr. Gilles Michaud,
Under-Secretary-General for Safety and Security, as well as the statements delivered
by the representatives of China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, the
Niger, Norway, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America, and Viet Nam, in connection with the video-teleconference on “United
Nations peacekeeping operations: improving safety and security of peacekeepers”
convened on Monday, 24 May 2021. A statement was also delivered by the
representative of Brazil, who spoke on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Safety
and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for
this video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written
statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Brazil, Chile, Denmark. Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Germany, Guatemala, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Malaysia,
Malta, Morocco, Nepal, the Netherlands, Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
the Republic of Korea, Slovakia, South Africa, Switzerland, Thailand and Ukraine.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the
Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Zhang Jun
President of the Security Council

21-07011 (E) 280521 300721

*2107011*

S/2021/501

Annex 1
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations,
Jean-Pierre Lacroix
I thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to update the Security Council
on the measures taken to strengthen the safety and security of United Nations
peacekeepers. I am pleased to join Under-Secretaries-General Khare and Michaud
in briefing the Council.
Peacekeeping operations continue to operate in complex environments, where
they face an increasing number of attacks against their personnel by hostile actors.
Since 1 January of this year alone, 15 peacekeepers have lost their lives owing to
malicious acts. I want to express my deepest gratitude for the service and sacrifice
of all peacekeepers, particularly those who have lost their lives in the pursuit of
peace. One peacekeeper lost continues to be one too many. As our missions strive to
implement their tasks, it is important to stress that attacks against peacekeepers can
constitute war crimes; they are also a huge impediment to the pursuit of peace and
an added constraint for the effective implementation of Security Council mandates.
In addition to hostile environments and direct attacks, issues related to
peacekeeper safety, such as vehicle accidents and illnesses, are also causing fatalities
and can significantly affect the ability of peacekeepers to deliver on their mandated
tasks. In 2020, for example, 13 peacekeepers lost their lives to violent acts while 15
peacekeepers lost their lives due to accidents and 81 due to illness. This situation
has, of course, been compounded by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
The international community has clearly identified the safety and security of
peacekeepers as a paramount priority. Obviously, this is one of the top priorities of
the Secretary-General and the Department of Peace Operations. I want to thank the
People’s Republic of China for its continued leadership in advancing this agenda,
including through hosting today’s debate and the recent creation of the Group of
Friends on the Safety and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers, which it cochairs with Brazil, Indonesia and Rwanda. We also continue to strive to do our part.
Building on the progress made through Action for Peacekeeping initiative
(A4P), safety and security will continue to remain one of our highest priorities as we
take forward A4P plus. We will continue to focus on implementing resolution 2518
(2020) and on taking forward the Action Plan to Improve the Security of United
Nations Peacekeepers.
Implementation of the Action Plan has enabled us to make significant progress
in strengthening the safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers. It contributed
to a sustained decrease in peacekeeper fatalities resulting from malicious acts from
59 in 2017 to 13 in 2020. With our support, peacekeeping missions continued to
strengthen camp protection. For example, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) has centralized command,
control and coordination in its integrated camps, which has led to more expedient
responses to imminent threats. We have also made notable progress in improving the
capabilities within our missions. The use of specialized units, such as the tactical
unmanned aerial surveillance unit in the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), is contributing
to the improvement of peacekeeping intelligence, situational awareness and
early warning.
We have also revised existing guidance, processes and tools, and developed new
ones. The revision of the casualty evacuation (CASEVAC) policy, and modifications
to the Contingent-Owned Equipment Manual in 2020 tremendously streamlined
2/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

the evacuation process and reduced delays. We are in the process of establishing
a systematic tracking system for violations of status-of-forces agreements, a
phenomenon that is unfortunately growing in our missions, to enable us to more
systematically support our missions to resolve them.
To complement efforts to strengthen policy and procedures, the Secretariat
is also pursuing a number of training initiatives. These include stress testing for
CASEVAC and crisis-management exercises, the Buddy First Aid Course, the Field
Medical Assistant Course and the training of hospital commanders to ensure healthcare quality and patient-safety standards. We are also providing mentorship and
threat-mitigation training in relation to improvised explosive devices (IEDs) as
part of our overarching efforts to mitigate the threat of IEDs, and we are seeing
results. For example, in MINUSMA, the rate of IED detection and neutralization
by peacekeepers on convoys and patrols has increased from 11 per cent of devices
detected before detonation in 2014 to nearly 50 per cent in 2020.
The increased use of technologies has proved a key multiplier to the enhanced
preparedness and capabilities of peacekeepers. As Under-Secretary-General Khare
will also tell the Council, camp-security and early-warning technologies have proven
effective in enabling missions that are regularly under attack to achieve greater
security for their personnel. In an attack on the MINUSMA camp in the Kidal region
on 25 April this year, incoming rockets and mortars were detected in advance of
impact, enabling staff to take refuge in bunkers and contributing to lives saved.
The robust response of a special-forces contingent from Chad during the attack
against the Aguelhok camp on 2 April clearly indicates the effect of a comprehensive
approach to strengthening safety and security. Several factors contributed to this
proactive response and to limiting casualties, such as enhanced predeployment
training and the robust mindset of commanding officers and personnel, as well as
camp reinforcements and the sound alert provided by a counter-rocket artillerymortar system installed there. In this case, as in many others, I commend the
proactive mindset of peacekeepers as they implement their mandates.
We have also made progress supporting host countries in their efforts to
bring perpetrators of crimes against peacekeepers to justice, including in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), MINUSMA and MONUSCO, which has led to an increase in
the identification of alleged perpetrators of crimes against peacekeepers and a rise
in the number of investigations and convictions. Six individuals were convicted in
the Central African Republic in early 2020, one in Lebanon in December 2020, and,
in Mali, one was convicted, and eight were convicted and sentenced in absentia in
March 2021.
Safety, security and performance are mutually reinforcing and go hand in
hand. Ensuring the safety and security of peacekeepers is key to enabling them
to perform. Conversely, good performance from all mission components, including
through a proactive and robust posture, has the potential to enhance the safety and
security of peacekeepers. We continue to make marked progress in advancing the
performance agenda, even amid the pandemic. We have developed and rolled out
a remote predeployment skill-validation process to be utilized as necessary. Five
remote predeployment visits were conducted in 2020, and four were conducted in
2021. We also recently restarted in-person predeployment visits, with three having
been conducted thus far this year. We are strengthening in-mission performance
evaluation of military components, including through the deployment of a new tool
which enables evaluation in line with tasks, conditions and standards. Roll-out is
planned for MINUSMA and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan this summer
and to all peacekeeping operations by October.
21-070113/105

S/2021/501

Despite the progress made, many factors continue to impede the full
safety and security of our peacekeepers on the ground. Ensuring a high level of
robustness and capability for all uniformed personnel remains a challenge, and gaps
in leadership, mindset and preparation continue to hamper safety and security. In
addition, peacekeeping intelligence, situational awareness and early warning need
to be strengthened, particularly at the operational and tactical levels. Disinformation
campaigns are gaining in prominence in some theatres, putting our peacekeepers at
greater risk. The impact of COVID-19 on safety, including occupational health, also
continues to be a major concern.
We are seeking to address such challenges made stark by the spike in fatalities
this year. The Secretariat is planning on redoubling its efforts on safety and security
going forward. Through A4P plus, we commit to strengthening accountability
to peacekeepers. We revised the Action Plan in February to enable us to better
adapt to increasingly volatile operating environments, particularly in MINUSCA
and MINUSMA. We are strengthening tactical and operational peacekeeping
intelligence and situational awareness. We are further enhancing force protection,
including through improving capabilities to operate at night. We are strengthening
our ability to better understand the nature and source of IEDs. We are also enhancing
crisis-management training for mission leadership. And we are holding a new series
of CASEVAC stress tests. As part of A4P plus, we are also focusing our attention
on improved strategic communications. Missions are monitoring and countering
disinformation, misinformation and hate speech, including in the context of this
pandemic.
To complement these efforts, coordinated actions by Member States, including
members of the Security Council, in line with resolution 2518 (2020), would enable
us to better address continuing gaps and shortcomings that persist in the field. First,
I would like to underline the importance of deploying uniformed personnel without
caveats, particularly undeclared caveats. They undermine the safety and security of
United Nations peacekeepers and the performance of our operations.
Second, I call for Council support in providing personnel with the requisite
mindset and leadership skills. In particular, we need commanding officers with
significant operational experience to meet the highest United Nations standards.
Third, we also require adequate equipment, particularly armed and utility
helicopters, aeromedical aviation resources, quick-reaction companies, forward
medical teams, counter-IED equipment, including mine-protected vehicles, as well
as jammers and aerial-intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance capabilities.
Fourth, we also need qualified military-intelligence personnel and military
public-information personnel.
Fifth, deploying more female peacekeepers, where available, is also critical to
strengthening overall mission performance.
Sixth, I also call for the Council’s support to cut the flow of explosive
ordinance and IED precursors to prevent the manufacture of IEDs, particularly in
the Sahel region.
Seventh, political engagement with host nations and stakeholders, including
for countering disinformation and hate speech, would greatly contribute to enhancing
safety and security in high-risk theatres.
Eighth, political and technical support to ensure accountability for crimes
against peacekeepers is also needed to pursue justice for past crimes and deter future
attacks on our missions.

4/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Ninth, strengthening trauma care and occupational health, as well as adherence
to COVID-19 protocols, is also essential.
Finally, avoiding unnecessary cuts to the budgets of Headquarters and
missions will help us to ensure continuity of our efforts to strengthen the safety and
security of United Nations peacekeepers. We of course commit to being prudent and
conservative in using resources, but, at the same time, we all agree that missions in
these dangerous environments need adequate resources.

21-070115/105

S/2021/501

Annex 2
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Operational Support,
Atul Khare
I want to thank the Council for giving me the opportunity to speak today about
this very important topic. As is the case with the Department of Peace Operations
led by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, the security of peacekeepers around the
world is a top priority for the Department of Operational Support (DOS).
DOS supports the recognition by the Security Council of the difference
between safety from accidents and security from malicious acts, and that both need
to be addressed to decrease the loss of life in peacekeepers. I note that within the
common phrase “safety and security”, security remains the most highly emphasized
and most highly resourced component, although there is a relatively higher impact
of safety on lives lost and long-term injuries and illnesses.
Many Council members will be familiar with some of our key initiatives
in the area of security, including trying to mitigate and respond to malicious acts.
For example, the Office of Information, Communications and Technology has
recently launched, in the context of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic, an enterprise solution called
Unite Aware, which is designed to support situational awareness in United Nations
peace operations. It offers a coherent, comprehensive and integrated approach to
situational awareness and information analysis for field missions.
Camp-security and early-warning technologies are readily available to
peacekeeping missions on system contracts and can be deployed individually or as part
of a package. These technologies include persistent surveillance systems, day- and
night-observation cameras, indirect-fire detection systems, perimeter surveillance,
and other specialized capabilities. For example, in early April, at the Aguelhok base
operated by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, 35 projectiles, mortars and rockets were launched against the camp, and all
35 were detected. In Somalia, two separate attacks on the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia (UNSOS) camps this March, with a total of 11 mortars, were
detected. Overall, these systems help save lives by giving early warning of mortar
and rocket attacks and allow personnel to take cover when time is of the essence.
These systems also allow us to pinpoint the point of origin of the attack and collect
information to determine where to allocate our patrol and defence resources. We are
currently focusing on mobile solutions for convoy and patrol protection to extend
these capabilities to the riskiest of situations.
The support to casualty evacuation (CASEVAC) continues to be a key focus
for DOS. DPO and DOS have joined their efforts in an integrated multidisciplinary
CASEVAC working group that facilitates information and knowledge-sharing through
events and publications. In response to the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and the report of former United Nations
Force Commander, Lieutenant General (Retired) Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz,
entitled “Improving security of United Nations peacekeepers”, we also updated the
CASEVAC policy and issued it in February 2020, following stress tests conducted in
high-risk missions. Our field missions are now amending local procedures. A policy
and manual for the use of blood and blood products has been issued and we have also
implemented health-quality and patient-safety standards in level-one plus, level-two
and level-three clinics and hospitals.
In 2021, we are planning a new series of CASEVAC stress tests and the
implementation of a data-based trauma system. First aid in-mission training and
appropriate equipment are also essential for reducing preventable mortality. The
6/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

United Nations Buddy First Aid course and app have recently been released and a
field medical assistant course is in its final stages.
We also continue to work on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) response,
including by setting the criteria for the safe partial resumption of uniformed rotations,
repatriations and deployments to and from United Nations peace operations. The
Office of Supply Chain Management has established 13 standby air ambulance
contracts, covering Europe, Africa, the Middle East, Oceania and the Americas,
centrally managed by the Air Transport Service through its Strategic Air Operations
Centre in Brindisi.
We also established the medical evacuation (MEDEVAC) Mechanism, a
United Nations-system-wide mechanism to ensure that our personnel, uniformed
and civilian, can stay and deliver in some of the most difficult duty stations in the
world. To date, 36 uniformed personnel have been successfully medevacked through
the United Nations System-wide MEDEVAC Mechanism for COVID-19 from 14
troop- and police-contributing countries and across five missions. A total of 12 of
those personnel were repatriated for treatment in their home country and 24 were
treated in regional hubs established by the Mechanism. In addition, two Governmentprovided personnel were treated in regional hubs. We have also evacuated 22 civilian
personnel, including contractors, international and national volunteers and United
Nations Volunteers from peacekeeping missions — 26 including UNSOS — to
established hubs around the world.
As you are aware, DOS recently convened a Group of Friends on COVID-19
Vaccination for Uniformed Personnel. The recommendations of the Group of Friends
contained suggested principles to guide the United Nations on COVID-19 vaccinations
of uniformed personnel in theatre and prior to deployment to field missions. To date,
we have delivered vaccines to all the peacekeeping missions that have requested and
required support — eight in total — while the others will take advantage of national
programmes. Overall, DOS has delivered a total of 211,000 doses to 42 countries and
we continue to prioritize peacekeeping and special political missions. We also thank
the 22 troop-and police-contributing countries that have indicated their intention to
vaccinate their personnel.
As you may be aware, the Contingent-Owned Equipment Manual of 2020
introduced new capabilities that would contribute to improving the safety and security
of United Nations peacekeepers, such as a light surgical module to support troops
deployed in remote areas in cases of medical emergency and helicopter landing site
kits that will enable emergency evacuation at night under limited vision conditions.
We also continuously seek the support of Member States to deploy the
right capabilities and currently seek support for the deployment of armed and
utility helicopters, aero-medical aviation resources, mine-protected vehicles and
intelligence, and surveillance and reconnaissance capabilities.
The General Assembly has provided the Secretariat with six different ways
to deploy the required capabilities in the Contingent-Owned Equipment Manual. In
addition, I would like to note that the required capabilities to support the safety and
security of United Nations peacekeepers may also be deployed by troop- and policecontributing countries under a memorandum of understanding, a letter of assist or on
a bilateral basis between Member States. Furthermore, we stand ready to work with
Member States flexibly to promote triangular partnerships on training, as well as codeployments, in order to help troop- and police contributing countries deploy units
with strengthened capabilities and appropriate equipment. We will also continue to
be engaged, where required, with the light coordination mechanism, focusing on
information-sharing, partnership facilitation, training and capacity-building.
21-070117/105

S/2021/501

We have good models for the way forward already as many countries have
strong industrial safety systems supported by legislation. Many Council members
have extended a version to their militaries, which recognizes the unique environments
uniformed members work in. We are continuing to develop a safety capability in
DOS and extending support for occupational safety and health from the Secretariat,
while retaining that responsibility with the contingents themselves will help us to
meet our responsibility for providing our peacekeepers with reasonable safety as
they go about their important work.
I look forward to collaborating with Member States and my colleagues at
today’s meeting to strengthen United Nations peacekeeper support by addressing both
accidents and malicious acts, including through participating in the 2021 peacekeeping
ministerial preparatory conference on safety and security and protection. May our
partnerships enable the most effective safeguarding of peacekeepers.

8/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 3
Statement by the Under-Secretary-General for Safety and Security,
Gilles Michaud
It is my great pleasure to join this important discussion.
The United Nations is increasingly called upon to work in some of the world’s
most high-risk locations. Traditional and non-traditional security factors, including
increasingly deadly weapons, pose serious threats to the entire United Nations family,
including peacekeepers. The global security landscape is unlikely to improve in a
generation, while the economic, social and political root causes of conflicts persist.
In that context, we have an urgent and collective responsibility to improve
the security of United Nations personnel and operations in a multidimensional and
inclusive manner. To that end, I would like to highlight three points.
First, my colleagues have already raised important points in relation to
peacekeeping effectiveness and peacekeeper security as vital ends in themselves.
I would add that peacekeepers are a critical partner for the broader United Nations
family in keeping personnel safe and ensuring that the United Nations can operate
in very insecure environments. I am certain that improving the operational safety
and security of United Nations peacekeepers will better enable the United Nations to
deliver on its peace, security, human rights and humanitarian mandates.
Secondly, allow me to briefly recap the safety and security frameworks and
roles already in place, as that could further inform Council members’ discussion on
opportunities within the United Nations system.
The Department of Safety and Security (DSS), which I head, is mandated by
the General Assembly to direct and lead the United Nations security management
system (UNSMS). This system comprises more than 50 United Nations and nonUnited Nations entities. My Department has representatives working on the security
of more than 180,000 United Nations personnel and their dependents across the
globe, including in mission and non-mission settings.
Turning specifically to United Nations peace operations, UNSMS does
not cover United Nations troops deployed in military contingents, neither does it
cover those deployed in formed police units. Peacekeepers that are included under
the purview of DSS include United Nations civilian personnel in missions and
individually deployed military and police personnel working in peace operations.
UNSMS has put in place security management policy guidance and operational
support to enable the United Nations to stay and deliver programmes in high-risk
areas. It provides security threat and risk analysis and increases security awareness
for UNSMS leaders and personnel through training programmes. As such, the
UNSMS has a robust, tried-and-tested system in place to support the security of
civilian and individually deployed military and police personnel in peace operations.
Of course, there is always room to improve. My strategic vision is to develop
a more agile and diverse security workforce. We need to embed a people- and
community-centred approach to security risk management and ensure that our
workforce can apply an approach based not just on physical security measures but
also on forward-looking threat and risk analysis, data-based security management,
access negotiation, engagement with non-State armed actors and acceptance by the
communities we serve, among others.
Thirdly, dialogue and collaboration among Secretariat departments and with
Member States is key to strengthening the safety and security of peacekeepers.
Mechanisms are already in place for coordination among Secretariat departments on
21-070119/105

S/2021/501

security policy and operational issues. For example, DSS has worked hand in hand
with the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs (DPPA)-Department of
Peace Operations (DPO) focal points on developing mission policies, such as guidance
on improvised explosive devices. Our collective aim is to ensure that DPPA and DPO
policies are coherent with UNSMS policies. Existing crisis-management mechanisms
in the field and at United Nations Headquarters allow for daily coordination.
The United Nations relies on coordination with Member States and a primary
role of United Nations security advisers in field duty stations is to work closely
with host Government authorities on security issues. Further coordination across
the intergovernmental processes on the safety and security of United Nations
personnel will contribute to improving the security of peacekeepers and the security
of mandated United Nations operations overall.
Of course, security involves resources and cannot be an afterthought. To
truly improve the security of United Nations peacekeepers, with all the associated
implications for broader United Nations delivery, security considerations and
associated resources must be integral to deliberations on United Nations mandates
and in the design and planning of missions.
In closing, DSS is fully committed to supporting efforts to further enhance
the safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers. My department has a wealth
of expertise on security matters relevant to United Nations programme delivery.
We stand ready to provide technical support and to engage with all stakeholders on
issues under my purview.
I thank Council members for the opportunity to contribute to this important
discussion. They can be assured of my support and attention.

10/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 4
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: Chinese]
I thank Under-Secretaries-General Lacroix, Khare and Michaud for their
briefings. I thank the relevant departments of the Secretariat for their efforts in
protecting the safety and security of peacekeepers. I welcome the presence of Brazil
at today’s meeting on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Safety and Security of
United Nations Peacekeepers.
United Nations peacekeeping operations represent an important means for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Peacekeepers are an important asset
to international peace. Over more than 70 years, more than 4,000 peacekeepers have
died in the line of duty. This year, 50 peacekeepers have laid down their precious
lives. While peacekeeping operations cannot be absolutely zero risk, we should try
our best to minimize security risk.
I would like to make four points.
First, we should step up implementation and continue to improve the integrated
security capacity of peacekeepers. In recent years, the United Nations has continued
to increase the importance given to the safety and security of peacekeepers — the
Security Council adopted resolution 2518 (2020) last year; the report of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (A/75/19) devoted a special section to that
issue; and the Secretariat formulated the Action Plan to Improve the Security of
Peacekeepers. It is necessary to increase the related input and ensure that the relevant
considerations are reflected in the implementation. We should continue to scale up
risk assessment in the light of the actual situation of each mission, incorporate it into
all aspects of decision-making and take effective measures.
It is necessary to improve the quality of the equipment of peacekeeping
missions in a targeted manner; improve the quality of peacekeeping personnel;
strengthen the situational awareness, emergency response and emergency rescue
capabilities of peacekeeping operations; and increase the resilience of peacekeeping
operations to various security risks.
Secondly, we should concentrate optimal resources on resolving the key and
difficult issues facing peacekeepers in safety and security. The coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic is a new challenge to safety and security. China calls for the
vaccination of all peacekeepers to be completed as soon as possible. Improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) have again become a major cause of casualties among
peacekeepers this year. China expects the Secretariat to submit an independent
strategic assessment report on peacekeeping operations’ response to the threat
of IEDs.
The development and use of new technologies are changing rapidly and
peacekeeping operations should not be left behind. It is imperative to enhance
communication and coordination among the United Nations, the troop- and policecontributing countries and the countries concerned and, on the basis of full respect
for the sovereignty of the countries concerned, to actively study how to use new
technologies to ensure the safety and security of peacekeepers.
Thirdly, we should strengthen partnerships and create favourable conditions
for improving the safety and security of peacekeepers. That is a matter which requires
the joint efforts of all stakeholders. The Security Council should formulate realistic,
clear and operable mandates for peacekeeping operations and avoid needless sacrifice
21-0701111/105

S/2021/501

due to inappropriate mandates. The Fifth Committee of the General Assembly should
provide sufficient resources to ensure the safety and security of peacekeepers. China
calls on all Member States to pay their peacekeeping assessments on time and in full.
All efforts should be made to investigate attacks against peacekeepers and bring the
perpetrators to justice. Status-of-forces agreements should be complied with and
the Secretariat, peacekeeping organizations and host countries should strengthen
communication to properly resolve related issues.
Fourthly, we should keep abreast of the times and continue to identify and
address new challenges to the safety and security of peacekeepers. While the
world is changing, so are the risks faced by peacekeepers. We should keep up with
developments; stay ahead of risks as much as possible; incorporate safety precautions
into all aspects of decision-making, training, equipment and management; and
reduce casualties among peacekeepers through preventive action.
For more than 30 years, while actively participating in peacekeeping operations,
China has attached great importance to the safety and security of peacekeepers.
We promoted the adoption of resolution 2518 (2020), the first Security Council
resolution on the safety and security of peacekeepers, as well as its follow-up. We
provided financial support to the Secretariat for formulating the Action Plan. We also
established with other Member States, including Brazil, Indonesia and Rwanda, the
Group of Friends on the Safety and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers, in a bid
to enhance communication and information-sharing, promote policy coordination
and improve capacity-building. We also actively provided other troop and policecontributing countries with security training, funded the Secretariat’s workshop
on safety and security issues and decided to donate 300,000 doses of COVID-19
vaccines to peacekeepers.
China stands ready to continue to work with other Council members and the
international community in contributing to the protection of our Blue Helmets.

12/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 5
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I would like to thank Under-Secretaries-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Atul
Khare and Gilles Michaud for their very insightful briefings.
The safety and security of peacekeepers are an integral benchmark of the
ability of United Nations peacekeeping to adapt to the ever-changing circumstances
of where and how it operates. Three years ago, the establishment of the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative and the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations provided a clear, cohesive approach to tackling
the interconnected priorities of United Nations peacekeeping and ensuring that it is
able to reform and adjust to the needs and challenges that it is facing.
Estonia will now continue to support the Action for Peacekeeping Plus
initiative and place high importance on its goals of improving the performance
and accountability of peacekeeping, promoting the women and peace and security
agenda and addressing capability and integration gaps. All those priorities in turn
affect the safety and security of peacekeepers as they implement their core mandates
of protecting civilians and advancing political solutions.
Improving the safety and security of peacekeepers involves a multitude of
factors. It includes ensuring that equipment and training meet the requisite standards
and are appropriate for the circumstances of the particular area of operation; utilizing
new technologies, including unmanned aerial vehicles, together with appropriate
training to increase the capabilities of peacekeepers; and addressing greater attention
to status-of-forces agreement violations, which can constitute a serious risk to the
safety of peacekeepers and mandate implementation. Meanwhile, the coronavirus
disease pandemic has introduced new medical risks and entrenched illnesses as the
largest contributor to peacekeeper casualties.
Violence against peacekeepers remains a grave issue that must be better
investigated and prosecuted. More can also be done to prevent it. Regrettably, the
deliberate targeting of United Nations peacekeepers has increasingly become an
approach for those not interested in peace — the spoilers who profit from instability.
However, that makes the job of peacekeepers so much more important because for
millions of people around the world our Blue Helmets represent the best hope for
peace and stability. Estonia condemns in the strongest terms the targeting and killing
of United Nations peacekeepers and emphasizes that the perpetrators and instigators
of such violence must be brought to justice.
I would like to conclude by expressing our gratitude and strong support to all
United Nations peacekeepers, women and men, whose dedication and sacrifice bring
hope to millions and help countries to navigate the difficult path from conflict to
peace. I will finish by honouring the service of those United Nations peacekeepers
who paid the ultimate price in that endeavour.

21-0701113/105

S/2021/501

Annex 6
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: French]
I would like to thank Atul Khare, Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Gilles Michaud for
their briefings.
France pays tribute to the peacekeepers who died or who were injured in the
course of their work. I would like to emphasize three points.
First, the main priorities of the Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative focus
on the safety and security of the Blue Helmets.
France is convinced that effective, mobile and robust operations, conducted
with determination, deter attacks and limit the freedom of action of hostile groups.
That is also a prerequisite for effectively fulfilling mandates, particularly in terms
of civilian protection. That is, for example, the purpose of reconfiguring the
Intervention Brigade within the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which must continue.
The security of peacekeepers also depends on their greater awareness of the
situation on the ground thanks to the peacekeeping intelligence policy and the use
of technological resources. It also depends on the ability to build trust with the
population. In that regard, language skills are crucial.
Lastly, the host State has a particular responsibility for the security of
peacekeepers. Compliance with status-of-forces agreements (SOFAs) is key. In
that regard, I would like to underscore France’s concern about SOFA violations,
which have increased in number in the Central African Republic in recent months.
Those actions are unacceptable, and we call on the authorities of the Central African
Republic to do their utmost to ensure the safety of United Nations personnel deployed
to assist the Central African people. It is also crucial to prevent crimes against
peacekeepers. In that regard, the Security Council must increase the penalties
against those responsible. The United Nations must support national investigations
and, more generally, efforts to combat impunity for such crimes.
France is actively involved in improving the safety and security of
peacekeepers. That support includes operational cooperation between the French
forces and peacekeeping operations. That is particularly the case between Operation
Barkhane and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, as well as with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic. The shows of force by the French forces
are a good illustration of that, as was the case during the attack on the Aguelhok
camp in Mali on 2 April, when the overflight of a French aircraft helped to repel the
attackers.
France also contributes to the training of peacekeepers, both before and during
their deployment. We are striving to meet the capability needs, in particular so as to
fill the gaps identified in the context of the light coordination mechanism.
Lastly, I would like to mention boosting security in camps by implementing
high-tech systems, in particular to detect indirect fire and warn United Nations
personnel.
Finally, and this is my last point, the recent increase in the number of victims,
which is not acceptable, should not cause us to lose sight of the collective efforts that
have led to a decrease in the number of victims over recent years.
14/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

To that end, the independent strategic review of United Nations peacekeeping
operations’ responses to improvised explosive devices, which is provided for in
the presidential statement (S/2021/11) to be adopted today, offers an opportunity to
renew those efforts.

21-0701115/105

S/2021/501

Annex 7
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, Nagaraj Naidu Kakanur
At the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and your delegation
for organizing this important debate on an issue of priority for my delegation and for
other troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs). Later this week, on 29
May, we will observe the International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers. This
open debate is therefore very timely. I also thank Under-Secretary-General JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General Atul Khare and Under-Secretary-General
Gilles Michaud for their valuable briefings.
India joins other delegations in paying tribute to the men and women who have
served and continue to serve in peacekeeping operations for their professionalism,
dedication and courage. We remember the 4,089 peacekeepers who lost their lives
and the valour and bravery of India’s 175 peacekeepers who laid down their lives
across various missions. India is proud of its long and rich tradition of contribution
to United Nations peacekeeping operations. We have contributed more than 250,000
troops in 49 missions over the years, cumulatively the largest from any country.
Even as we speak today, an Indian peacekeeping brigade stationed in Goma, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, is saving the lives of civilians stranded in the
aftermath of the Mount Nayargongo eruption in the country.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has posed severe challenges to
peacekeeping missions and peacekeepers. We are pleased to note that peacekeeping
missions are putting in place a series of mitigation measures to promote the safety,
security and health of all United Nations personnel, while maintaining the continuity
of operations. To that end, during the pandemic India readily answered the SecretaryGeneral’s call by upgrading its hospitals in the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). We also delivered 200,000
doses of Made in India COVID-19 vaccines for vaccinating all uniformed personnel
deployed in various field missions and are pleased to note that almost 140,000 field
personnel have already been vaccinated, using the same.
Peacekeeping is not a strategy in itself but rather a strategic tool. I take
this opportunity to recall the cardinal principles of peacekeeping: consent of the
parties, impartiality and non-use of force except in self-defence and in defence of the
mandate. Those principles continue to be as relevant as ever.
United Nations peacekeepers operate in a complex security environment
involving armed groups, non-State actors and terrorists. The ever-expanding
mandates of peacekeeping missions with limited resources have only added to the
challenges and complexities that peacekeepers face on the ground. The strategy of
peacekeepers needing to do more with less is setting us all up for a potential crisis.
The fallout of such a strategy is glaringly evident in the increasing casualties over
the years.
Such challenges are further compounded by the increasing use of improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) by terrorists and armed groups against peacekeepers.
The Blue Helmets, who are currently operating in 13 peacekeeping missions, are
under tremendous pressure. More than 260 peacekeepers have died due to malicious
attacks since 2013. It is evident that protecting the protectors should be our primary
objective.
In that context, I would like to make the following suggestions for the Security
Council’s consideration.
16/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

First, the tendency to burden peacekeepers with responsibilities that ought
to primarily lie with the host State or other relevant international organizations
should stop. The Security Council needs to authorize carefully thought-out
mandates for peacekeepers in close consultation with troop-contributing countries,
since the protection of peacekeepers is as important as the protection of civilians.
Peacekeeping missions cannot be a long-term response to what are fundamentally
political problems. It is for the Council to address such issues rather than burden
peacekeeping missions beyond their mandate.
Second, while a number of initiatives have been taken to incorporate IED
disposal standards in the field, we are of the view that this issue needs more
attention. Missions facing IED threats should have dedicated resources to counter
that particular threat. The training of United Nations personnel on IED threats, both
in-country and prior to deployment, needs to be more context specific. Advance
patrol parties in affected areas, along with the involvement of the relevant host State
security authorities, should become the norm.
Third, there should also be concerted efforts to upgrade the security
infrastructure of the camps of United Nations peacekeepers, as a number of casualties
have been related to direct attacks on security camps. Timely and reliable medical
evacuation and casualty evacuation, including the use of helicopters with night flight
capability and night retrieval operations, are essential. Force Commanders should be
given the direct authority for commanding such air assets in order to respond in a
timely manner to crisis situations and accidents.
Fourth, peacekeepers need to be provided full access to medical facilities, in
accordance with the golden hour principle, throughout the mission area. Medical
capabilities in all missions need to be reviewed to identify the gaps that currently
exist. India has also pledged a helicopter unit for the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. We have also upgraded our medical
facilities at MONUSCO, Goma, and UNMISS, Juba.
Fifth, we believe that the infusion of appropriate technology can play
a significant role in improving the safety and security of peacekeepers. The use
of field-focused, reliable and cost-effective new technologies in peacekeeping
operations that are driven by the practical needs of the end users on the ground is
the need of the hour. In that regard, I am happy to inform the Council that India,
in partnership with the Department of Operational Support, has been working
towards the development of the mobile technological platform Unite Aware, which
helps to increase situational awareness and provides terrain-related information to
peacekeepers. We have contributed $1.64 million towards that project, and we hope
to launch it under our August presidency later this year.
Sixth, our peacekeepers are deployed in increasingly complex and often hostile
environments. Training is an essential and strategic investment in peacekeeping and
is a shared responsibility between Member States and the Secretariat. India’s Centre
for United Nations Peacekeeping, set up in 2000, has a rich tradition of not only
imparting predeployment training but also developing curricula for emerging TCCs
and delivering targeted training modules, including for women peacekeepers. India’s
Centre for United Nations Peacekeeping is looking forward to signing a memorandum
of understanding and partnering with the United Nations C4ISR Academy for Peace
Operations to prepare training modules on a range of capabilities.
Seventh, India appreciates the Secretary-General’s call for Action for
Peacekeeping, under which close attention is given to improving the safety and
security of United Nations peacekeeping personnel. We also welcome the launch
of the Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative, which has further strengthened our
21-0701117/105

S/2021/501

commitment to safety and security, as well as accountability for crimes against
peacekeepers. We also support the work of the Implementation Support Team for
Fatalities and the Working Group on Accountability for Serious Crimes against
Peacekeepers.
Besides taking preventive measures to improve the safety and security of
peacekeepers, it is also imperative to bring the perpetrators who have committed
heinous crimes against them to justice. That requires collaboration and coordination
between the different stakeholders, including the United Nations and the host
countries where the peacekeepers are deployed, and extending assistance to countries
that need help to frame such legislation.
In conclusion, the issue of the safety and security of peacekeepers requires
a comprehensive approach and concerted efforts by all stakeholders involved. We
need to look at the issue both holistically and in a sustained manner. In keeping with
its time-tested credentials and commitment to United Nations peacekeeping, India
would never be found wanting in that regard.

18/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 8
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on such an important
topic. I would also like to thank the briefers for their valuable interventions.
Like China, my country has a long and proud tradition of peacekeeping. For
Ireland, and for any troop-contributing country, I imagine, keeping the women and
men whom we deploy as peacekeepers safe is always to the forefront of our minds.
The topic of today’s debate is not abstract for Ireland. It is personal. Today we
remember those who gave their lives in the cause of peace and the loved ones whom
they left behind. We should spare no effort in bringing those responsible for attacks
on peacekeepers to justice.
As the ones who decide to send our peacekeepers into the most difficult
contexts, we all have a responsibility to look at how we contribute, collectively and
individually, to the safety and security of those women and men.
The threats faced by peacekeepers are wide-ranging, from the increasingly
complex nature of conflict to improvised explosive devices, drone technology, and
most recently the coronavirus disease. As these threats evolve, so too must our
responses. For an issue as critical as this, we believe that a concerted, whole-United
Nations approach is necessary.
Under China’s presidency last March, the Security Council adopted resolution
2518 (2020). We have achieved progress in implementing its provisions already and
we encourage everyone to redouble their efforts. We believe that the new Group
of Friends on Safety and Security, which we were delighted to join, can play an
important role in supporting this and I am particularly pleased to welcome with us
this morning the Ambassador of Brazil, who co-chairs that Group.
The recently adopted report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (A/75/19) makes a range of recommendations, including on the need
for increased predeployment training, gender-sensitive working environments,
improved intelligence and situational awareness, enhanced cooperation and the use
of new technology. What is needed now is implementation.
The Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative also gives us a
framework to create stronger and safer peacekeeping operations. At its heart, that
initiative is about political will and showing leadership. Its success relies on all
of us stepping up collectively in support of our troops. Today’s debate, along with
the presidential statement (S/PRST/2021/11) we have just adopted, will serve as an
important step on that path.
It is our firm belief that our peacekeepers are safer — and our missions more
effective — when high-quality training and capacity-building are consistently
delivered. Put simply, you cannot have one without the other.
Tools such as the light coordination mechanism, which Ireland actively
supports, are invaluable when it comes to matching needs on the ground
with resources.
But as a long-standing troop-contributor to United Nations peacekeeping,
Ireland has also seen the importance of training for the development of safer and
more effective missions.
That is why we have invested heavily in sharing our more than 60 years of
experience on the ground as peacekeepers in order to help to build on-the-ground
21-0701119/105

S/2021/501

capacity among other troop-contributing countries, such as through the provision
of predeployment training and field training, in particular on countering
improvised explosive devices. We have also supported initiatives such as the
United Nations Buddy First Aid Training and the United Nations Police Training
Architecture Programme.
Non-State actors are becoming ever more innovative in their use of emerging
technology. We need to be equally innovative in how we face such threats. Sharing
information is critical, as is understanding how the accessibility of information and
technology is exploited.
It is also vital to ensure that our peacekeepers work to enhance their
understanding of their respective operating environments. The comprehensive
peacekeeping intelligence policy and related doctrine, including the Military
Peacekeeping-Intelligence Handbook, will improve situational awareness in
missions, leading to better decision-making for the protection of our United Nations
personnel and civilians. Again, we keep coming back to the fact that what matters
here is effective implementation.
We know that increased participation of women has a positive impact across
all pillars of peacekeeping. Safety and security are certainly no exception.
Let us be clear: increased and meaningful female participation benefits not
just the mission itself but also those we seek to protect. Ireland, along with fellow
Action for Peacekeeping Women, Peace and Security Champions, recently initiated
a series of events focused on overcoming barriers to women’s participation in
peacekeeping. We look forward to presenting the outcome and recommendations of
that work very shortly.
Finally, I want to underline the importance of maintaining a strong focus on
safety and security throughout the mission cycle — from inception to transition.
Transitions, we know, can be a time of heightened risks for missions and those they
seek to protect. Ensuring properly planned, coordinated and managed transitions can
help mitigate those risks. That is a priority for Ireland as a member of the Council —
to look at how we manage those critical periods of change to ensure the most effective
and sustainable path to peace.
Millions of the most vulnerable people rely on our peacekeepers for protection,
but those peacekeepers are not invincible: they rely on their host nation, their troopcontributing countries and especially on the Council to ensure that they have the
means and the support to do what they do every day.
They are putting their lives on the line in our collective pursuit of peace. We
owe it to them — and to all those who have made the ultimate sacrifice — to do our
utmost to ensure their safety.

20/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 9
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Martin Kimani
I thank you, Sir, for convening this important debate. I also thank Mr. Lacroix,
Mr. Khare and Mr. Michaud for their briefings. I also thank the representative of
Brazil, speaking on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Safety and Security of
United Nations Peacekeepers.
As a troop- and police-contributing country for close to five decades, Kenya
attaches great importance to peacekeeping and the role it plays in the maintenance
of international peace and security. Conscious of the increasingly serious threats
to peacekeepers in the peacekeeping environment, we consider their safety and
security an utmost priority.
Reflecting that concern, Kenya organized an Arria Formula meeting in March,
which was co-hosted by many Security Council members, on the threats posed by
improvised explosive devices. We continue to recommend that the ideas that emerged
from that useful discussion be reflected in the practicalities of peacekeeping and
how mandates and their leadership are crafted.
Kenya commends other recent complementary initiatives, including the
launch by China and co-founders of the Group of Friends on Safety and Security of
Peacekeepers.
We also note that significant efforts have already gone into improving the
safety and security of peacekeepers. In particular, we appreciate the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative and resolution 2518 (2020), which
was unanimously adopted by the Security Council in March 2020.
There is consensus that the elements necessary for the safety and security of
peacekeepers should include clear and realistic mandates; adequate, quality training
of peacekeepers; situational awareness; universal and quality medical support;
respect for status-of-force agreements; and gaining and maintaining the trust of
host communities.
Let me highlight six points that are necessary for the actualization of those
elements. The protection of peacekeepers is a collective effort. Each key stakeholder
must diligently perform its respective and complimentary roles: the Security Council
must put in place clear mandates that are informed by the prevailing situation on the
ground; the Secretariat should coordinate the implementation of Council decisions,
as well as operational and logistical support; troop- and police-contributing countries
must ensure that their personnel are competent for the task ahead and also conversant
with safety imperatives; partners should meet their commitments for timely and
sustainable financial support; and host countries have the duty to facilitate the
operations of the peacekeeping mission, including through public sensitization and
investigations into any attacks on peacekeepers.
The safety and security of peacekeepers should be a long-term commitment,
with clear benchmarks and targets that are realistic, measurable and achievable.
The implementation of the Secretary-General’s Action for Peace Plus initiative is a
positive step in that direction.
There is a need for the United Nations to continue exploiting existing triangular
partnership programmes so that all troop- and police-contributing countries can
have access to quality training. Kenya’s International Peace Support Training Centre
remains available for that purpose.

21-0701121/105

S/2021/501

Relevant modern technology and equipment should be provided for improved
situational awareness, as traditional intelligence mechanisms are no longer adequate.
Preparedness, proper management of communicable diseases and other
safety-related issues must be part of the medical strategy for peacekeeping missions.
Therefore, responsive medical support that utilizes high mobility and better-equipped
field facilities, including medical evacuation, should be prioritized.
It is important to constructively engage host countries on the importance of
meeting their obligations under status-of-forces agreements, especially in relation to
the safety of peacekeepers.
The breach of status-of-forces agreements is sometimes signalled politically
before it happens and can lead to direct harm to peacekeepers. It is therefore critical
that the Security Council be made aware of any negative and deliberate propaganda
by political actors that may compromise the safety and security of peacekeepers. The
Council should respond to such actions in clear and pre-emptive terms if necessary.
The safety and security of peacekeepers should always be understood as a Council
priority that triggers a strong reaction if compromised.
I reaffirm Kenya’s commitment to the safety and security of peacekeepers and
our readiness to work with all States Members of the United Nations in advancing
that agenda.
In conclusion, I want to highlight the achievement of Military Gender Advisor
Major Steplyne Nyaboga, who recently completed her peacekeeping assignment in
Darfur. She has been awarded the 2020 United Nations Military Gender Advocate
of the Year Award.
Kenya is proud of her achievement, which highlights the quality and dedication
of our peacekeepers, and of the gender-sensitive outreach in which she excelled. Her
recognition is indicative of the journey that Kenya is committed to making to reach
gender equity and equality. We thank her Commanders and the Secretary-General
for that recognition.

22/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 10
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
[Original: Spanish]
We thank China for convoking this timely debate and Under-SecretariesGeneral Lacroix, Khare and Michaud for their briefings.
My delegation subscribes to the statement to be delivered by the representative
of Brazil on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Safety and Security of United
Nations Peacekeepers, in which Mexico actively participates.
While Mexico recognizes the efforts of the Secretariat to improve the
protection and security of peacekeeping personnel, we regret the attacks against
them to date this year and join others in paying tribute to those lost in the line of
duty. We condemn all attacks against peacekeepers and those providing medical
assistance. It is unacceptable for the perpetrators of such attacks to go unpunished.
Resolution 2518 (2020) and the presidential statement adopted today (S/
PRST/2021/11) are important tools for tackling threats affecting peacekeeping
mission personnel. However, they must be implemented fully and not remain mere
empty words.
Although the number of incidents decreased from 50 to 14 between 2017 and
2020, by the end of April 2021 there had already been 14 casualties due to violent
attacks against peacekeepers, equal to the total number of deaths from such attacks
in 2020. In accordance with international humanitarian law, peacekeeping forces
must be protected.
It is important to note that the number of casualties due to occupational safety
and health reasons exceeds the number of lives lost to violent attacks. Indeed, 104
people died from work-related accidents and illnesses in 2020. Those figures are
troubling and must be recognized in order to advocate strengthened preventive
measures to reduce such incidents and improve the occupational safety and health
conditions of peacekeepers. In that regard, we recognize the efforts of the United
Nations and other international actors to ensure that peacekeepers, whether already
on the ground or about to be deployed, have access to coronavirus-disease vaccines.
In order to operate in an agile and effective manner, peace operations
must be equipped with adequate resources, capacities and systems. That includes
standards for deployment, training, equipment, medical support, new technologies
and responsive coordination between missions and the countries where operations
are deployed.
All peacekeeping settings must guarantee safe and gender-sensitive work
environments and any threats or acts of violence against female staff, whose
contribution has been essential to maintaining the peace and improving efficiency
of operations, must be dealt with robustly.
All those issues must be taken into account when the Council reviews and
adjusts the mandates of peace operations. It is also important to incorporate the
necessary inputs and hear the points of view of those on the ground. The review
carried out by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, in which troopand personnel-contributing countries participated, should be made full use of since
it provided relevant information on the main challenges in ensuring the safety and
security of personnel.

21-0701123/105

S/2021/501

Mexico reiterates its support for the commitments made through the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, including prioritizing collective action to improve
security and protection.
The forthcoming United Nations ministerial conference on peacekeeping to
be held in the Republic of Korea will also provide an opportunity to share good
practices for improving the security and protection of peacekeepers.
It is important that the Security Council continue adopting concrete measures
in that area to enhance the effectiveness of mandates and ensure, as far as possible,
that peacekeeping operations fulfil their mandates without compromising the wellbeing and security of their personnel.

24/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 11
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
In June 2020, China proposed resolution 2518 (2020) on the safety and security
of peacekeepers, which was unanimously adopted. Last month, China organized
a meeting of the Group of Friends on the Safety and Security of United Nations
Peacekeepers, at which the issue was discussed in depth. China is now bringing it
back to the table to ensure that it remains consistent in its approach. I would like
to thank China for its efforts to strengthen the security and safety of peacekeepers.
I would also like to thank Under-Secretaries-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Atul Khare and Gilles Michaud for their excellent briefings on the subject.
I also welcome the Permanent Representative of Brazil to today’s debate.
The Niger welcomes all efforts by the Secretariat, in particular through the
Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which prioritizes the safety
and security of peacekeepers.
The Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, for its part, made
relevant recommendations in its report (A/75/19) on measures to strengthen the
security of peacekeepers.
For the Niger, which has recorded many casualties and injuries in the ranks of
the contingents it has deployed to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali since its founding, the importance of today’s debate
is no longer in question. The attack in Aguelhok, in which four peacekeepers were
killed and some 30 wounded, again reminds us of the need to protect peacekeepers
in the face of the perils of contemporary areas of operation, especially in the context
of the coronavirus disease pandemic, which poses an additional threat to the safety
and security of the Blue Helmets.
That approach is the shared responsibility of the Security Council, the
Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries and all peacekeeping partners.
It is implemented by strengthening measures to address the factors that affect the
safety and security of peacekeepers. Such measures include:
Implementing the relevant resolutions adopted by the Security Council, such
as resolution 2518 (2020);
Improved training and its continuous adaptation to the situation on the ground.
Although training is considered to be the responsibility of troop-contributing
countries, it is important to send teams to those countries to verify how contingents
are trained and ensure that training modules are taught in line with United Nations
standards so as to bridge any gaps;
Strengthening the medical and hygiene conditions for peacekeepers to improve
their performance and the outcome of operations;
Strengthening triangular cooperation to facilitate the provision of equipment
for troop-contributing countries with few opportunities in that area;
Updating equipment, including the use of new technologies and their
adaptation to the situation on the ground;
Improving performance evaluation tools by ensuring that corrective measures
are regularly taken, following assessments;
21-0701125/105

S/2021/501

Enhancing relations between missions and host countries by strengthening
consultation and coordination frameworks;
Developing effective partnerships with other regional and subregional
organizations in the area of safety and security of peacekeeping personnel;
Ongoing active cooperation with local communities to ensure protection
against the pandemic, while also benefiting from their support and collaboration;
Ensuring that all appropriate measures are taken to bring to justice those
responsible for criminal acts against personnel serving in peace operations. Such
crimes should not be covered by a statute of limitations or pardon.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that in order to be successful,
peace operations — the most visible United Nations tool for the maintenance of
international peace and security — need the support of all actors involved, including
support for their rules of engagement. That includes improving the welfare and
combat readiness of peacekeepers, in particular in the light of new contemporary
challenges in conflict areas, such as terrorism and the use of improvised explosive
devices and new technologies by non-State groups.

26/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 12
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
I thank the briefers, as well as China, for adding this important debate to
our agenda. We see it in connection with other events, including the Arria Formula
meeting on improvised explosive devices, organized by Kenya in March.
The safety and security of peacekeepers has been a key concern for Norway
since our first United Nations deployments. On 13 July 1948 in Jerusalem, our
countryman Ole Helge Bakke became the first peacekeeper to lose his life while
on United Nations duty. Since then, almost 4,100 women and men have died while
serving as United Nations peacekeepers. Earlier this month, the Secretary-General
held his annual memorial service for 2020. The names of 336 lost United Nations
colleagues were read out, including the names of 130 peacekeepers. Just reading
their names lasted almost half an hour.
We also recall the countless others who have suffered severe physical or
mental scars after having served with the United Nations. Those keepers of peace —
and their families — have made enormous sacrifices on our behalf, and for that we
thank them profoundly.
The least we can do to honour their bravery is to keep looking for solutions
to prevent accidents and illness, not least to reduce the threat of malicious acts.
In that regard, we would like to highlight three points — training, technology
and accountability.
First, adequate training is essential to ensure that peacekeepers are prepared
to deal with the complex operational situations that they will face in the field. That
training must be as context-specific as possible. Norway urges fellow troop- and
police-contributing countries to train and deploy personnel with the capabilities
set forth in the Peacekeeping-Intelligence Policy. That will help protect our
peacekeepers and also enhance their capacity to handle what is the main priority of
most missions — the protection of civilians.
Secondly, the United Nations must optimize the use of technology and
equipment to maximize the safety and security of its personnel. That includes
enhancing situational awareness and analysis. Optimizing the use of technology
should also include the transition to renewable energy, whenever feasible. That will
reduce missions’ fuel requirements and the frequency of long-distance fuel convoys,
which are vulnerable to attacks and prone to accidents. Transitioning to renewable
energy can also create socioeconomic dividends, which may lessen the animosity
towards peacekeepers that exists in some host communities. That in turn could have
a positive impact on the implementation of a mission’s mandate.
Thirdly, host States must take seriously their obligation to bring to justice
those who attack peacekeepers. The United Nations, however, must also play its
part to assist in that endeavour. Norway is pleased to provide targeted capacitybuilding support to the Malian authorities in their fight against impunity. We do
so through our specialized police team in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, which also includes French improvised
explosive device experts.
Norway is heartened by the engagement of fellow Member States — as
well as the United Nations Secretariat — in enhancing the safety and security of
peacekeepers, including substantive efforts to deal with the coronavirus disease. We
trust that ongoing engagement will result in concrete proposals to make good on our
joint commitment to ensure their well-being.
21-0701127/105

S/2021/501

We owe it to all those whom we have lost and all those who will bear the scars
of their service to the United Nations for the rest of their lives. We also owe it to the
host communities, because safe and secure peacekeepers are better peacekeepers.

28/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 13
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
At the outset, let me stress again that, with the General Assembly convening
in-person meetings and coronavirus disease-related restrictive measures in New
York being gradually lifted, our return to the Security Council chamber becomes
imperative. We call upon the Chinese presidency to take all necessary steps to
that end.
We thank you, Sir, for convening a discussion on such an important and
relevant issue as the safety and security of the Blue Helmets. We also thank UnderSecretaries-General Lacroix, Khare and Michaud for their briefings and welcome
the participation of the Permanent Representative of Brazil.
Nowadays, peacekeeping operations are deployed in complicated conditions,
which are often very dangerous and aggravated by a dire humanitarian and
socioeconomic environment. It is not seldom that the Blue Helmets are subject to
asymmetric threats. The coronavirus pandemic posed another unexpected yet very
serious challenge. The pandemic negatively impacted both the effectiveness of
peacekeeping efforts and the safety of peacekeepers.
Against that backdrop, proper planning and organization of the work of
peacekeeping missions, awareness of the surrounding situations and possible threats
are factors of paramount importance for the safety and security of peacekeepers.
Therefore, measures related to peacekeeping intelligence must be carried out in
strict compliance with the parameters agreed upon by Member States.
Another pivotal factor is quality training for Blue Helmets prior to their
deployment, as well as adequate material and technical support. By all means,
the host State that receives the mission on its territory bears key responsibility in
that regard. It depends on the host country authorities as to whether all necessary
measures are taken in order to hold to account those who commit acts of violence
against United Nations personnel. Amid the ongoing coronavirus pandemic, it is
even more important to maintain the proper level of medical aid delivery in the field.
All of those issues require unwavering attention, constant improvement and,
wherever necessary, changes of approach. That is why the question of the safety and
security of peacekeepers always remains a focus of the Security Council, its Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations, the General Assembly’s Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and field missions. Of course, those issues are absolute
priorities for troop- and police-contributing countries.
Thanks to coordinated efforts and consultations in those formats, as well as
the close interaction between Member States and the United Nations Secretariat, the
number of injures and casualties among the Blue Helmets has dropped significantly
in recent years.
Russia is represented in all the formats I mentioned above. We consistently
contribute to promoting the safety and security of peacekeepers. We will continue
training peacekeepers from different countries in specialized Russian facilities. It was
therefore only natural for us to support the presidential statement (S/PRST/2021/11)
drafted by the Chinese delegation and join the newly created Group of Friends on
the Safety and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers. We are convinced that the
discussions of that informal Group will enrich and add value to the experience and
expertise already accumulated in that area.
21-0701129/105

S/2021/501

In conclusion, let me express our sincere appreciation to those who are
deployed on the front lines of peacekeeping efforts, namely the Blue Helmets and all
United Nations peacekeeping personnel, who implement the noblest of all mandates:
to maintain peace.
The recent volcano eruption in Goma, Democratic Republic of the Congo, is
one example of the unexpected challenges that populations and peacekeepers may be
faced with. Goma-based Blue Helmets from India and other States, as well as other
specialists present in the region on a contractual basis, including Russian pilots,
continue to provide assistance to civilians in those extremely precarious conditions

Statement by Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation, Anna Evstigneeva
[Original: Russian]
I thank you, Sir, for giving us the floor again. I had to request to take the
floor in order to respond to the statement by the representative of the United States
regarding the situation in the Central African Republic.
Russian instructors are present in the Central African Republic because the
Government of the country invited them to train and support the national army,
police and gendarmerie. All necessary contact is maintained with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
and other bilateral partners, first and foremost with the leadership of the Central
African Republic.
We believe that the question of improving coordination should be solved on
the ground by strengthening the relevant mechanisms. We are convinced that the
restoration of peace and security in the Central African Republic, through the joint
efforts of all stakeholders, is the most important task. Once that is achieved, it can
both ensure the safety and security of peacekeepers and the civilian population and
allow for the timely withdrawal of the peacekeeping mission from the country.

30/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 14
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines to the United Nations, Ms. Halimah DeShong
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes today’s discussion on
improving the safety and security of peacekeepers. We thank the briefers for their
insightful remarks.
Peace operations remain one of the most effective tools in our collective quest
for peace and security. Yet, amid a plethora of emerging and contemporary risk
factors — such as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the hazards of
climate change and the asymmetric threats posed by armed groups and terrorists —
peace operations have become increasingly complex.
Peacekeeping personnel are tasked with carrying out their mandates in
increasingly harsh political, security and environmental conditions. In far too many
contexts, they have paid the ultimate price in the noble pursuit of protecting others.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines pays tribute to all uniformed personnel for their
commitments and sacrifices. We also condemn in the strongest terms all acts of
violence perpetrated against peacekeepers and encourage host states to promptly
investigate and prosecute those responsible for such attacks.
The immense expectations placed on all mission personnel, both uniformed
and civilian, to deliver peace and security in the most volatile of circumstances
demand the full support and cooperation of the international community. Consistent
political engagement among the Secretariat, the Security Council, troop- and
police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs), and host countries is essential to
ensure effective mission performance and guarantee the safety and security of
mission personnel.
We must also ensure that peace operations are provided with the adequate
human, technical and financial resources, as well as clear, focused and actionable
mandates. Peacekeeping personnel should be provided with the necessary training and
support at all stages of peacekeeping — from predeployment to post-deployment —
accompanied by adequate incentive structures to reward high performance, as well
as remedial mechanisms to address performance gaps.
The health and well-being of peacekeepers must also be treated as a critical
priority, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic. To that end, all peacekeepers
should be provided with safe and efficacious vaccines as a means of protecting them
and the host communities to which they are deployed.
Professional development opportunities in areas such as language training
and cultural enrichment will enable peacekeepers to overcome the communication
barriers that they face when deployed and strengthen their engagement with local
communities. Improving community engagement is an essential means of keeping
peacekeepers safe in the field.
The issue of sexual exploitation and abuse is one that demands urgent attention.
We firmly condemn such violations and reaffirm our support for the zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse. Swift and impartial investigations must
be conducted whenever those incidents occur. It is also crucial that TCCs/PCCs
be consulted immediately whenever there are allegations against their deployed
personnel in order to ensure that corrective measures are taken without delay.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes the thrust to streamline
peacekeeping under the Secretary-General’s ongoing Action for Peacekeeping
initiative. That initiative brings collective political action to the forefront of our efforts
21-0701131/105

S/2021/501

to maintain international peace and security, which is of paramount importance in
successfully preventing and resolving conflicts and bolstering peacekeeper safety
and security.
Our delegation also commends the ongoing efforts to include more women in
peace operations in all capacities, both uniformed and civilian, and at all levels from
front-line duty to senior leadership. Women are important agents and facilitators of
peace in all contexts, and we strongly encourage their increased participation and
engagement in all facets of peacekeeping. We take this opportunity to congratulate
Kenyan peacekeeper Ms. Steplyne Nyaboga, who served as Military Gender Adviser
to the recently ended African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, on
receiving the 2020 United Nations Military Gender Adviser of the Year Award.
In conclusion, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirms its view that lasting
peace and security can be achieved only through nationally owned and socially
inclusive political solutions. Peace operations are an effective political tool that can
help reconfigure the social fabric of conflict-affected States, facilitate humanitarian
delivery and lay the foundation for post-conflict peacebuilding and development. To
be most effective, peacekeeping must always be conducted with the utmost respect
for the sovereignty and political independence of host countries.

32/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 15
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Tunisia

to

the

[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I wish to thank China for convening this important meeting on
the security and safety of United Nations peacekeepers.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement submitted by the representative
of Brazil on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Safety and Security of United
Nations Peacekeepers (annex 19).
I also thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Mr. Atul Khare and Mr. Gilles Michaud
for their valuable briefings.
Peacekeeping operations are a key pillar of the role entrusted to the United
Nations in maintaining international peace and security. The experience of recent
decades has shown that peacekeeping operations have spared humankind many
conflicts by preventing conflict from erupting in the first place and by helping to
support political stabilization processes throughout the world. Peacekeepers have
also been responsible for protecting civilians, preventing human rights violations
and ensuring the delivery of humanitarian assistance, in addition to other noble
humanitarian duties.
We once again salute the efforts of all the women and men who contribute to
making the world a safer and more peaceful place, and we remember with reverence
those who have sacrificed their lives for the cause of peace.
Peacekeeping operations have undergone significant developments and radical
changes at all levels since their inception. Such an evolution has made it necessary
to re-evaluate their role and reconsider the nature of their duties. United Nations
peacekeeping missions are increasingly operating amid new threats and in hostile
and complex environments, owing to the presence of armed and terrorist groups
and organized crime activity. Peacekeeping operations also encounter difficulties
on the ground and have their movements restricted and, on occasion, their missions
disrupted.
In that connection, we are all deeply concerned by the tragic escalation
of attacks against United Nations peacekeepers in recent years, and this year in
particular. Further concerted efforts must be made to avoid exacerbating those
threats and risks.
We appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General to promote the safety and
security of peacekeepers through the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, and we
thank the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs for helping to improve
the safety and security of peacekeepers in a more effective manner, particularly
while tackling the coronavirus disease pandemic. We express our satisfaction with
the independent report Improving Security of United Nations Peacekeepers and the
Action Plan that was adopted.
In that context, we recall resolution 2518 (2020) and all relevant Security
Council resolutions on the issue, as well as the launch of the Group of Friends on
the Safety and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers, which Tunisia took part in
establishing.
My delegation would like to emphasize the following points.

21-0701133/105

S/2021/501

The mandate issued by the Security Council to establish a peace operation in
any conflict area in the world is of paramount importance to the safety and security
of peacekeepers. Prior to adopting a mandate, it is necessary to conduct a proactive,
in-depth risk study and collect and analyse all information that could have a direct
or indirect impact on the safety of peacekeepers, so as to be able to prepare carefully
and accurately for all potential risks.
Troops participating in peacekeeping operations must be educated about
potential risks and receive predeployment training geared towards the challenges
they may face. Key priorities include obtaining first aid training, making full use of
all information and employing relevant technologies to anticipate and reduce risks.
It is imperative that peacekeeping operations be provided with the tools and
equipment they need to repulse any attacks against United Nations missions and that
missions should operate in constant coordination with the host State authorities.
My delegation supports the effective partnership and cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations, in particular the African Union,
with a view to sharing experiences and assessing risks, thereby contributing to the
success of peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions and ensuring the protection of
peacekeepers.

34/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 16
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Dame Barbara Woodward
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s open debate, and I would
like to thank our briefers for their insightful remarks.
At the outset, I want to join others in paying tribute to those brave peacekeepers
killed or injured in the course of their duties. Addressing the threats facing our
peacekeepers requires commitment from all of us. The Secretary-General recognized
that in his Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Safety and security must remain a
central pillar of its implementation.
Just as we ask our peacekeepers to perform to the best of their abilities and the
Secretariat to put in place the required levels of support, it is our duty, as troop- and
police-contributing countries, to provide the training and equipment to enable our
personnel to fulfil their roles safely.
First, thorough and mission-specific predeployment preparation is key to
understanding and tackling threats. That is why, through our partnerships with
other troop contributors and training centres, the United Kingdom provides training
and mentoring in counter-improvised explosive device capabilities, peacekeeping
intelligence and first-aid skills to help prepare peacekeepers before they deploy. For
example, the United Kingdom has provided more than $1.4 million of support to the
Humanitarian Peace Support School in Nairobi, helping deliver 31 courses to more
than 600 personnel from 12 police- and troop-contributing countries.
Secondly, giving missions an accurate threat picture allows them to anticipate
and mitigate risks and challenge those targeting them. The deployment of the United
Kingdom’s Reconnaissance Task Group in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali demonstrates the value of peacekeeping
intelligence in connecting the Mission with difficult-to-reach communities and
improving situational awareness. That contributes to both safety and security and
the protection of civilians.
Thirdly, when incidents occur, peacekeepers should be assured that they will
benefit from reliable casualty evacuation and the right medical care needed in the first
crucial minutes and hours. The availability of adequately equipped and performing
air support is often key to that. Response times, processes and capabilities must be
thoroughly stress-tested to ensure that they are robust, dependable and in line with
medical needs.
Finally, we must be united in our action to hold the perpetrators of attacks
against peacekeepers accountable through the adoption of sanctions by the Security
Council and the pursuit of justice by host States. It is also the duty of host States
to ensure that missions be free to work without violations of their status-of-forces
agreement. We are concerned about the recent spike in such violations against the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic, and I join others in calling on the authorities to ensure the security
and free movement of United Nations personnel.

21-0701135/105

S/2021/501

Annex 17
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations, Richard Mills
I thank our briefers for their comprehensive updates this morning.
The United States welcomes this opportunity to discuss this critically important
issue as we look ahead to the International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers
later this week. We are deeply grateful — and here let me echo Mr. Jürgenson —
for the military, police and civilian personnel who have served in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We honour the more than 4,000 peacekeepers who have
made the ultimate sacrifice for the cause of peace, those who have been injured and
those who continue to risk their lives.
According to the most recent data, the United Nations has already lost more
peacekeepers this year to malicious acts than in all of last year. Since the pandemic
started, we have lost 30 peacekeepers to the coronavirus disease. Given that urgent
situation, we, as the Security Council, as many have said before me, must focus on
concrete actions to improve peacekeeper safety, which is best achieved by ensuring
that peacekeepers have achievable and realistic mandates, as well as the resources
and skills they need to implement those mandates. The 2017 report prepared by
Lieutenant General (Retired) Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled Improving
Security of United Nations Peacekeepers, made clear that the better the performance
of peacekeepers — whether in terms of their operational proficiency, skills, conduct
or discipline — the safer and more secure they will be.
With that in mind, the United States is proud that we have now built more
than 50 partnerships with troop- and police-contributing countries. We have
invested more than $70 million a year in those capacity-building partnerships. We
focus on them because they have proven effective in making tangible progress on
the ground in both improving peacekeeper performance and making peacekeepers
safer. To continue our momentum, we, alongside our co-host Rwanda, will focus on
ways to build partnerships to increase both performance and safety during our July
preparatory meeting in advance of the Seoul Peacekeeping Ministerial.
I will now take a moment to describe a few positive outcomes from our
partnership efforts.
With the support of the United States Global Peace Operations Initiative,
United States partners have now developed more than 60 new critical enabling
capabilities. That means new capabilities, such as level-2 hospitals. The United
States has provided more than $28 million to deliver hospital equipment and build up
hospital capacity with the aim of reducing the critical time from when a peacekeeper
is wounded to when she or he can receive care. With our partners, we also provide
counter-improvised explosive device training and equipment, including by providing
armoured personnel carriers to contingents in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, which in our assessment is the most
dangerous peacekeeping mission. That helps protect peacekeepers from threats,
while also enabling them to deliver on their mandates. To assist with leadership
training, which was another gap identified in the Dos Santos Cruz report, we
developed a formed police unit command staff course, which the United Nations has
since adopted as part of its standard predeployment certification.
When peacekeepers sexually exploit or abuse the people they were sent to
protect, it not only makes peacekeepers less effective but also puts them more at risk,
as they lose the situational awareness that comes only from a strong relationship
with local populations. Research has shown that the integration of women into
36/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

peacekeeping units better enables those units to engage with local communities and
may result in fewer incidents of sexual exploitation and abuse. The United States
has assisted partner countries in reducing the barriers to women’s meaningful
participation in peacekeeping — building female barracks, latrines and showers
at training centres, for example — and we stand ready to partner with troop- and
police-contributing countries in that effort.
Finally, let me end by saying that we would like to underline, as part of this
discussion, the importance of respect for status-of-forces agreements that host
Governments sign with United Nations peacekeeping missions. Host Government
cooperation with missions and Governments’ willingness to uphold those agreements
are essential for keeping peacekeepers safe. Status-of-forces agreements guarantee
peacekeepers’ ability to move and communicate freely, seek medical care when
necessary and receive essential supplies. We are concerned about violations of those
agreements in the Central African Republic and call on its Government to respect its
commitments in the Central African Republic under the status-of-forces agreement,
while ensuring that any forces or elements in the country at the invitation of the
Government of the Central African Republic also respect the agreement. We are
particularly concerned about reports of Russian instructors engaged in security
sector reform there. They need to deconflict their activities with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
respect the status-of-forces agreement and ensure humanitarian access.
The United States looks forward to continuing to work with the Security
Council and all stakeholders in determining the concrete actions we can take to
make peacekeeping safer and more effective.

21-0701137/105

S/2021/501

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I would like to express my appreciation to the three Under-Secretaries-General
for their valuable briefings. Viet Nam associates itself with the statement submitted
by Brazil on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Safety and Security of United
Nations Peacekeepers (annex 19).
United Nations peacekeepers promote the de-escalation and cessation of
armed conflicts, help the implementation of ceasefires and political agreements,
protect civilians, provide conditions for the delivery of humanitarian assistance
and so on. Therefore, their well-being and safety are critical to the success of the
mission’s mandate and to the Security Council’s responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security.
Unfortunately, United Nations peacekeepers continue to fall victim to attacks
and incidents, many of which are deliberately targeted. Viet Nam condemns all
malicious and intended attacks against peacekeeping personnel.
For the long term, international law, including international humanitarian
law, must be strictly observed by all parties. All parties must abide by the relevant
Security Council resolutions, stop targeting peacekeepers and uphold the basic
principles of international humanitarian law.
For more immediate goals, peacekeepers must be properly prepared, equipped
and afforded the best protection. In that context, I wish to share the following four
points.
First, good preparations save lives. Troop- and police-contributing countries,
the United Nations and other partners need to work together to further improve the
preparedness of deployed personnel. That can be achieved through a complete and
continuingly improved training cycle, which includes training before and during
deployment, post-deployment debriefing and updated training programmes based
on lessons learned.
Secondly, being properly equipped and resourced can make a big difference.
Traditional hardware can directly protect peacekeepers. The employment of
technologies has proved effective in indirectly guarding them from harm; for
example, the use of unmanned aerial vehicles improves real-time situational
awareness for better decision-making. Critical mission intelligence can also be
gained by building trust and good relations with the host country, local communities
and people. Adequate resources can ensure that the mission does not have to choose
among its equally important priorities and take risks.
Thirdly, protection from emerging threats is urgent. I wish to highlight two
such threats — the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and improvised explosive
devices (IEDs). As most peacekeeping mandates are in COVID-19-affected countries
with limited resources, it is important that peacekeepers be fully vaccinated. We
call on the United Nations, partners and countries to work towards that goal. Last
month, Viet Nam sent fully vaccinated personnel of the third tour of our level-2 field
hospital in the United Nations Mission in South Sudan.
As IEDs are a daily threat to peacekeepers in many locations, the United
Nations, partners and troop- and police-contributing countries need to strengthen
their cooperation to ensure that all peacekeepers in the field are equipped, informed
and trained to mitigate the threat posed by IEDs, as called for in presidential
statement S/PRST/2021/8, adopted last month.
38/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Fourthly, special protection and attention must be given to women peacekeepers,
as they can face multiple threats and risks. Only by doing that can we progressively
and sustainably ensure the stronger participation of women peacekeepers.
In conclusion, Viet Nam remains a strong supporter of United Nations
peacekeeping. As a troop-contributing country, we take to heart the importance
of improving the safety and security of our peacekeepers, particularly women
peacekeepers. We look forward to working closely with all partners to further
that cause.

21-0701139/105

S/2021/501

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations, Ronaldo Costa Filho, on behalf of the Group of
Friends on the Safety and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers
I am grateful for the opportunity to address the Security Council as co-Chair
of the Group of Friends on the Safety and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers.
Let me also thank Under-Secretaries-General Lacroix, Khare and Michaud for their
informative and insightful briefings.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are a major instrument for
maintaining international peace and security at the disposal of the international
community. They have played an important role in promoting political processes,
monitoring the implementation of ceasefires, protecting civilians, promoting human
rights, assisting in humanitarian relief and bringing hope to people in areas affected
by conflict around the world.
Meanwhile, threats stemming from regional conflicts, ethnic strife, terrorism
and the use of improvised explosive devices, compounded by the coronavirus disease
pandemic, pose greater risks to Blue Helmets in the 12 peacekeeping operations that
are currently deployed.
In the past 70-plus years, more than 4,000 peacekeepers from over 120
countries lost their lives in the line of duty. While there has been a discernible
downward trend since 2018, we saw with concern an alarming spike in the number of
fatalities among peacekeepers last year and in the opening months of 2021. Ensuring
the safety and security of the men and women in uniform who risk their lives serving
under the United Nations flag is crucial and must be a collective priority.
In that context, Brazil, China, Indonesia and Rwanda jointly established the
Group of Friends on the Safety and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers, which
started off with more than 50 members, coming from every geographic group. The
members of the new Group of Friends are major stakeholders in peacekeeping,
including troop- and police-contributing countries members of the Security Council
and the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and current, as well as
former, host nations. The broad diversity of the Group, reflected in its original
composition, demonstrates the commitment to inclusiveness and cross-regional
representation shown by its members.
It is our collective goal to build a platform with a view to strengthening
information-sharing, policy coordination and capacity-building so as to support
the achievement of substantive progress in enhancing the safety and security of
peacekeepers in the field on the basis of a multidimensional approach. The Group
of Friends highlights the importance of the inclusion of a gender perspective at all
stages of the deployment of peacekeepers, that is, planning, training and evaluation,
with a view to mitigating the risks to their safety and security on the ground.
We welcome the progress achieved so far by Member States, the Secretariat
and field missions in enhancing the safety and security of peacekeepers in a
comprehensive manner and recall resolution 2518 (2020) and all relevant Security
Council resolutions on the matter, as well as the Secretary-General’s Action Plan to
Improve the Security of United Nations Peacekeepers. It is the collective duty of all
stakeholders involved to translate that global awareness into concrete actions.
The time is ripe to enhance our joint efforts and undertake the shared
responsibility to ensure the safety and security of peacekeepers. The Group of
Friends on the Safety and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers is keen to work
with the Secretariat and all Member States to make contributions to that effect,
including through the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
40/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Argentina to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Reality shows that the increasing complexity in which peacekeeping operations
carry out their work exposes troops to ever greater threats to their physical and
psychological well-being. That hinders the possibility of making such missions a
more effective tool for international stability and security. In that regard, Argentina
would like to focus in particular on six factors that it considers key to that end.
The first factor is the need for increased security and safety training, both
in the predeployment phase and in the field. Improved personnel training is the
only way to be able to anticipate threats adequately and efficiently. Argentina has
therefore always stressed the need for those with the highest capabilities in that
area to cooperate with those who have not yet reached such levels in order to ensure
that personnel have equal capabilities. That would have a positive impact on the
protection of each individual deployed and of the unit as a whole.
Argentina once again reiterates its commitment to training and capacitybuilding for peacekeeping. Through the Argentine Joint Training Centre for Peace
Operations, Argentina provides excellent training and instruction to the men and
women who will serve for peace in the context of the United Nations. In that regard,
Argentina also stresses the need to provide safety and security capabilities in the
field, taking into account the particular threats that each mission entails for the
deployed personnel, so that there is complementarity with the training received
during the predeployment phase.
The second factor that Argentina would like to mention is the urgent need to
address the use of improvised explosive devices, which remain one of the main threats
to deployed personnel. In that regard, as stressed by Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay
and Mexico at the most recent substantive session of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, Argentina believes it extremely useful to provide for the
possibility of deploying mobile training units together with the United Nations Mine
Action Service, where relevant and at the request of troop- and police-contributing
States, for the demining, detection and disposal of the above-mentioned devices.
As a third factor for consideration, our country believes that incorporating
new technologies for both individual and camp security is an indispensable element
in dealing with the threats to which deployed personnel are exposed. In that regard,
it is particularly important to bear in mind that not all countries are in the same
technological and economic position to purchase the appropriate equipment,
including for the purpose of training in the use of such technologies in the field. It is
therefore crucial to anticipate those gaps in order to ensure the adequate protection
of personnel.
As a fourth factor to be highlighted, Argentina believes that building a
genuine culture of accountability against impunity for perpetrators of attacks against
peacekeepers is an essential element in their protection and safeguarding. That is not
only for the reparation of victims but also as an example to prevent similar conduct.
In that regard, Argentina supports the systematic documentation of such attacks,
both to be aware of the existing threats in each peacekeeping operation and thus
warn the personnel deployed there and for the parties involved to shoulder their
responsibilities as guarantors of rights.

21-0701141/105

S/2021/501

The fifth factor that our country wishes to highlight in that context is the
need to improve medical support in the field, as well as infrastructure and personnel
training, bearing in mind the fact that a considerable number of casualties in
peacekeeping operations are due to issues of occupational health and safety.
Argentina therefore believes that the improvement of personnel training in that
regard would be beneficial, together with promoting the deployment of more doctors
and health personnel in general. To that end, calls by the Secretariat encouraging the
recruitment of health personnel could be an effective way to publicize the current
shortage in that area, thereby addressing the current situation.
As a sixth and final factor, Argentina would like to point out the importance
of acknowledging gender issues in peacekeeping operations in order to ensure an
enabling environment for each of their members to have access to the necessary
medical services in line with their needs. That would contribute to the improved
performance of personnel in achieving the mandate and fulfils the obligation to
recognize and protect their human rights. Having more female peacekeepers would
greatly improve communication and relations between peacekeeping operations and
local communities, especially with women and girls.
Argentina believes it a priority to continue the debate on the training and
instruction of peacekeeping personnel. We encourage ongoing work to engender
a constructive, transparent and inclusive dialogue between States and other
stakeholders. That will allow us to continue to bring the most value to the societies
and nations where troops are deployed and will contribute to the more effective
performance of uniformed personnel in the field for the success of mission mandates
as part of the collective commitment under the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative.

42/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Australia, on behalf of
Canada, Australia and New Zealand
There is no higher priority than the safety and security of our peacekeepers
and the civilians whom they are mandated to protect. We pay tribute to all those
Blue Helmets who paid the ultimate sacrifice in the service of peace, and we call for
greater accountability for crimes against peacekeepers.
In recent years, our collective efforts have seen meaningful progress in
reforming peacekeeping, particularly through the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P)
initiative and, more recently, the Action for Peacekeeping Plus (A4P+). However,
as the security environment deteriorates in some missions and new threats emerge,
peacekeeping missions must be able to meet those challenges.
We must do all that we can to generate the right capabilities, resources and
mindset for missions to deliver their mandates safely and effectively. There is a clear
need to enhance the peacekeeping toolkit. Canada, Australia and New Zealand (CANZ)
encourage peacekeeping intelligence, early warning and rapid-response systems
to be more effectively utilized, including through the necessary predeployment
training. Not only are such capabilities essential to protecting peacekeepers, but they
are also critical to the protection of civilians. We also welcome the focus on stronger
strategic and operational integration as a priority of A4P+. That is essential within
missions and, more broadly, across the entire peacekeeping enterprise.
CANZ reiterates the strong link between peacekeeping performance, safety
and security. We welcome the implementation of the Integrated Peacekeeping
Performance and Accountability Framework, which we see as an important
mechanism to support accountability for improved safety and security. The Action
Plan to Improve the Security of United Nations Peacekeepers has been central to
improved security, and we call for the full implementation of its recommendations.
CANZ also takes great interest in the implementation of the recommendations made
by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
Conventional threats such as improvised explosive devices and attacks on
peacekeepers rightly demand a significant focus, especially in an evolving threat
environment. But it is also critical that we focus on eliminating the more insidious
dangers that can occur within peacekeeping missions. Bullying, sexual harassment
and assault continue to undermine a safe and inclusive work environment,
particularly for women peacekeepers, and we must work tirelessly to create a culture
of zero tolerance. We must also ensure that women peacekeepers have access to
appropriately fitting equipment and necessary medical services throughout their
deployment.
Sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeeping personnel is not only
an egregious assault on those they are mandated to protect; it also threatens the
legitimacy of peacekeeping missions in the countries in which they operate and, by
extension, the safety and security of peacekeepers serving in good faith. We must
uphold the Secretary-General’s commitment to zero tolerance across the United
Nations system and work to eradicate all forms of sexual exploitation and abuse.
Over the past year, peacekeeping missions have shown immense resilience
during the coronavirus disease pandemic — we applaud ongoing efforts to roll out
vaccinations in the field and by Member States prior to deployment. As we begin to
emerge from the pandemic, improvements to the quality and availability of medical
support, including casualty evacuation, should remain a top priority, which includes
placing greater emphasis on the mental health of peacekeepers. CANZ reiterates
21-0701143/105

S/2021/501

calls for the systematic documentation of all status-of-forces agreement violations,
which continue to pose a risk to safety by impeding medical evacuations and the
freedom of movement.
There is also much work to be done in addressing occupational safety and
health issues, which are avoidable and, regrettably, remain a major cause of casualties.
Work accidents, including driving incidents and illness, both require increased focus
during the predeployment phase through better training and medical screening.
CANZ encourages the adoption of a holistic and systematic approach to
improving the safety and security of peacekeepers. That remains critical for missions
to effectively deliver their mandate, protect civilians and support sustainable peace.

44/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
I commend China for convening this important debate today. I also thank the
briefers for their insightful briefings.
We align ourselves with the statement submitted on behalf of the Group of
Friends on the Safety and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers (annex 19).
For more than seven decades, peacekeeping has remained the United Nations
flagship contribution to international peace and security and conflict resolution.
Peacekeepers are invaluable assets for international peace and security.
They are also the most affected agents of peace, as they are deployed in very
fragile and dangerous environments that are characterized by ever-evolving forms of
threats. The alarming increase in fatalities, injuries, kidnappings and other deliberate
attacks against peacekeepers is of great concern. The coronavirus disease pandemic
has not only affected the implementation of peacekeeping mandates but also posed
serious challenges to the safety and security of peacekeepers.
As the leading troop- and police-contributing country, with about 7,000 of
our men and women in Blue Helmets deployed in various complex conflict zones,
ensuring the safety and security of our contingents is of paramount importance to us.
Progress has been made in recent years, particularly in raising awareness of
the safety and security of peacekeepers. That is evident in the adoption of resolution
2518 (2020) by the Security Council in 2020, which Bangladesh co-sponsored.
We welcome the presidential statement issued today (S/PRST/2021/11) and thank
Council members for their efforts in that regard.
We would like to share some of our priorities for the Council’s consideration.
First, the safety and security of peacekeepers is a shared responsibility of
the international community. Therefore, we cannot emphasize enough the seminal
importance of meaningful triangular cooperation and consultations among Security
Council, troop- and police-contributing countries and the Secretariat in setting
up the mandates. In that regard, we believe the recommendations of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations could serve as important guidance.
Secondly, it is also imperative that peacekeeping missions be adequately
funded in order to achieve their objectives. Doing more with less is an unsustainable
prescription in potentially dangerous operational situations. We call upon the
Security Council to ensure that United Nations peacekeeping operations have clear
and realistic mandates and that sufficient resources are allocated that are consistent
with the mandate and the situation on the ground.
Thirdly, given the complex political and security environments it is important
that peacekeeping missions remain agile and effective in implementing their
mandates. The United Nations needs to enhance improved training and capacitybuilding, including the application of new technologies among Member States,
particularly troop- and police-contributing countries. We call for reviewing and
ensuring the uniformity of United Nations standards on training and performance,
including, but not limited to, countering improvised explosive devices.
Fourthly, the safety of peacekeepers is also closely linked to effective
coordination and information-sharing among and between relevant stakeholders,
as well as effective cooperation with host authorities. The availability of reliable
intelligence and timely logistical support are important to ensure maximum
21-0701145/105

S/2021/501

performance with minimum risk of casualty, and they should be made available to
the peacekeepers during operations.
Fifthly, the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, as a
cross-cutting issue, should remain a priority for the Council, and gender dimensions
should therefore be integrated in all stages of peacekeeping operations. The issue
of the safety and security of women peacekeepers, including threats of sexual
harassment against them, must be tackled with urgency in order to ensure effective
peacekeeping.
Sixthly, the pandemic has posed new threats to peacekeepers, with additional
tasks and increased risks. We must ensure the vaccination of all peacekeepers on a
priority basis. In addition to that, we would like to request that the Council incorporate
better preparedness in peacekeeping mandates in future. Adequate medical facilities
should be provided, and qualified personnel should be deployed in the field. We need
to develop a comprehensive strategy to address that growing phenomenon.
Finally, there must be accountability for attacks against peacekeepers. We
are happy to see that element being reflected as one of the seven priorities of the
Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative. Cooperation with host
authorities is critical in that regard.

46/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Mission Belgium to the United Nations
United Nations peacekeepers are often deployed in complex political and
security environments, face asymmetrical threats and have increasingly become
a target for hostile actors. The importance of protecting the protectors cannot be
overemphasized.
We want to commend the Department of Peace Operations and the Department
of Operational Support for the important steps taken to improve safety and security
and strengthen the casualty evacuation capabilities of field missions, data collection,
peacekeepers’ situational awareness and so on, which are priorities of the Action Plan
to Improve the Security of Peacekeepers and the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
Belgium honours the memory of those peacekeepers who have fallen victim to
violence. A lot remains to be done to improve the safety and security of peacekeepers.
The following elements could further that work.
First, the most important line of effort remains ensuring the adequate and
standardized training of peacekeepers, as well as providing them with access to
appropriate equipment, thereby enabling them to work confidently in asymmetrical
threat environments. It is the primary responsibility of each troop- and policecontributing country to deploy only well-trained and well-equipped units.
Secondly, among the main threats against peacekeepers are improvised
explosive devices (IEDs). The United Nations must continue to strengthen IED
threat mitigation at the mission level and increase predeployment and in-mission
training, including through the deployment of mobile training teams. Peacekeeping
mission capabilities should be adapted to specific high-risk operational contexts
by ensuring that missions be provided with adequate and high-tech equipment,
including counter-IED equipment and explosive ordnance disposal equipment;
modern technologies, such as unarmed aerial systems; mine-protected vehicles/
armoured personnel carriers; signal-block devices; and expert engineers to supervise
anti-IED operations. An adequate system for effective exchange of information on
all incidents involving IEDs is crucial.
Intelligence capacities and situational awareness in field missions should
also be strengthened by deploying intelligence and surveillance capabilities for the
detection of IED threat locations. In that regard, there is a need to better implement
United Nations military peacekeeping intelligence policy in all peacekeeping
missions in order to enhance information and intelligence-led peace operations. An
adequate system for effective exchange of information on all incidents involving
IEDs is crucial.
A more integrated and comprehensive approach is necessary. In that context,
we stress the importance of proper weapons and ammunition management by
peacekeeping operations and host nations, in line with the safety standards of
relevant United Nations manuals, policies and standard operating procedures. We
also encourage Member States and the Secretariat to better equip peacekeeping
operations in the area of weapons and ammunition management; strengthen host
Government capacities; address the proliferation of weapons and ammunition;
prevent loss and other diversions of military equipment, including of possible
precursors for improvised explosive devices; and prevent accidental explosions.
A more integrated approach to the planning of operations will enhance not only
the overall performance of missions but also the safety of United Nations personnel.
In particular, enhancing situational awareness by utilizing innovative technologies
21-0701147/105

S/2021/501

and integrated analysis and planning across civilian, military and police components
is essential for better handling the threats of IEDs.
Thirdly, an all-inclusive approach, including strong partnerships among the
United Nations, troop- and police-contributing countries, host nations and local
citizens, as well as other stakeholders, including civil society organizations, will
result in a more integrated response from the United Nations system, thereby
enhancing safety and security for civilians and peacekeepers.
Finally, where efforts focus on stabilizing fragile countries, peacekeeping
missions should evolve their capabilities and systems to remain agile and effective at
confronting terrorist threats. It is time to give further consideration to the principles
of peacekeeping in those changing and challenging environments.

48/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 24
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations, Ronaldo Costa Filho
The contribution of United Nations peacekeeping operations to the maintenance
of international peace and security is beyond dispute. Similarly, it is hard to deny
that the targeting of Blue Helmets amounts to attacking what peacekeeping and the
flag of the United Nations stand for.
While the number of fatalities among peacekeepers has dropped steadily in
the past few years, we witnessed a worrisome uptick in 2020, which should prompt
us to reflect on measures to avoid that unacceptable statistic repeating itself.
As we approach the International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers, the
Brazilian Government mourns every single loss of life sustained by peacekeeping
operations and offers its most sincere condolences to the families of the fallen. We
are also disheartened by the deaths of peacekeepers as a result of the coronavirus
disease, while recognizing the commendable job done jointly by troop- and policecontributing countries, host nations, the Secretariat, field missions and other key
stakeholders in avoiding the spread of the disease in conflict-affected areas.
Brazil is especially concerned about the use of improvised explosive devices
against peacekeepers. We must persevere relentlessly in mitigating that threat,
including through the United Nations Mine Action Service.
Brazil encourages the Secretariat to sustain its efforts to ensure the
implementation of the Action Plan to Improve the Security of United Nations
Peacekeepers. We commend the efforts undertaken by all stakeholders to fully
implement resolution 2518 (2020) — the first-ever resolution dedicated exclusively
to the safety and security of peacekeepers.
Brazil has a long-standing tradition of contributing to peacekeeping operations,
spanning more than 70 years. As many as 46,000 Brazilian civilians, military and
police personnel have been deployed to 40 of the 72 peacekeeping operations ever
created under the United Nations flag. Brazil is proud of the track record of its
Blue Helmets for their professionalism and commitment to the mission, as well as
to United Nations principles, in spite of the insurmountable risks they often face as
they perform their duties.
Providing well-trained troops is an indispensable factor in improving
performance, enhancing safety and security and ensuring the successful
implementation of mandates. Blue Helmets should not be deployed without specific
preparation that is tailor-made for the operating environment they will be deployed to.
We are especially proud of the work done by the Brazilian Peace Operations
Joint Training Centre and the Naval Peace Operations Training Centre, both of
which offer training predeployment partnerships for a broad range of international
partners. Brazil is also proud of the mobile training team specializing in jungle
warfare that is deployed to the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a case in point of how the provision of
adequate training can strengthen the safety and security of uniformed personnel.
Brazil is a strong supporter of the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
initiative — as well as the Action for Peacekeeping Plus follow-up initiative — which
we view as a constructive approach to dealing with peacekeeping in all its aspects,
not least the safety and security of Blue Helmets.
Recently, Brazil proudly joined China, Indonesia and Rwanda in establishing
the new Group of Friends on the Safety and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers.
21-0701149/105

S/2021/501

The co-Chairs are grateful to the more than 50 Member States that answered the
call and accepted the invitation to join the Group of Friends. The broad and diverse
composition of that newly established Group of Friends, including several troopand police-contributing countries, financial contributors, host nations and key
stakeholders from every continent, is testimony to the relevance of the Group of
Friends and an important asset going forward.

50/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 25
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Chile to the United Nations
[Original: English and Spanish]
We are grateful to China’s presidency of the Security Council during the
month of May for organizing this open debate.
As a member of the Group of Friends on Safety and Security of United Nations
Peacekeepers, Chile associates itself with the statement submitted by the Permanent
Mission of Brazil on behalf of the Group (annex 19).
We firmly believe that, in both peacekeeping operations and other field
missions, only a joint and integrated commitment among all actors will allow us to
adequately address and cope with new threats that are detected or that unexpectedly
arise on the ground, such as global pandemics.
The new dimensions of conflicts, many of which have been exacerbated in the
context of the coronavirus disease pandemic, have directly impacted the security of
missions, which have been subjected to a series of attacks on deployed personnel.
Against that backdrop, we emphasize that the safety of our contingents is essential
for the fulfilment of mandates, and thereby for ensuring success in the main role of
missions: protecting civilians.
In that regard, Chile supported resolution 2518 (2020), and we value the
progress that has been made following the presentation of the report prepared by
Lieutenant General (Retired) Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled Improving
Security of United Nations Peacekeepers. But we must still work on the protection
and safety of the Blue Helmets.
Attacks on various peacekeeping missions prompt us to reflect and act
proactively, with particular emphasis on continuing efforts to ensure that staff have
the right technical support capabilities in place to successfully fulfil their role in
mission areas. It is also necessary to adequately monitor criminal proceedings and
convictions against those who carried out attacks on the work of the Organization
on peace and security. We value the contributions of the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, which provides for the safety of Blue Helmets among its areas of
commitments, as well as the Action for Peacekeeping Plus document, which has put
safety among its 2021-2023 priorities, particularly with regard to responsibility for
Blue Helmets, including issues related to mental health and the comprehensive wellbeing of deployed personnel.
We also believe that it is essential to have sufficient and predictable resources
for the correct implementation of mandates, in line with the cross-cutting agenda
for prevention, the protection of civilians and the inclusion of women in processes
involving United Nations participation in peace and security on the ground and on
our agenda.
In that regard, we stress the importance of providing capacity-building and
technical support to address the gender perspective with respect to the safety and
security of peacekeepers on the ground, given that addressing diverse needs is
necessary to reduce the existing gaps that prevent the full participation of women
in peace and security and are present at different stages, such as in the planning,
deployment and subsequent evaluation of missions.
We also underline the importance of women’s full, equitable and meaningful
participation in peace and security and their crucial contribution to the safer and more
secure implementation of peacekeeping-operation mandates, in all their components
21-0701151/105

S/2021/501

and leadership positions, as we have learned from our experience of including
women in activities related to disarmament, demining and cross-cutting issues;
communication and public and strategic information-sharing; and strengthening
cooperation between civilians and uniformed personnel.
We look forward to contributing to this discussion what we have learned
and experienced in the missions we have been involved in, since we understand the
importance of maintaining the inclusion of a conflict-sensitive, multidimensional
perspective and consider it an ethical imperative for our Organization to be able to
deliver all the necessary tools and guarantees to ensure the contingent safety and
security of peacekeepers while implementing their mandates.

52/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 26
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Denmark to the
United Nations, Martin Bille Hermann
On behalf of the Nordic countries — Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and
my own country, Denmark — I want to thank the People’s Republic of China for
convening this timely meeting.
While United Nations peacekeeping consists of many integrated issues,
peacekeepers themselves remain the core component of that tool. We know that,
when troops and police are unable to protect themselves adequately, they are unable
to protect those whom they serve. Therefore, as mission theatres become increasingly
dangerous, improving the safety and security of our peacekeepers rightly remains a
fundamental priority for the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
The initiative provides the overarching umbrella for ongoing efforts to
improve not just the safety of peacekeepers but also the leadership, performance,
accountability and effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping operations on the
ground. Despite important progress, more needs to be done, not just by the Secretariat
but also by Member States, including troop- and police-contributing countries and
host countries. We as Member States have a shared commitment to ensuring that
robust mandates and difficult tasks are matched by the resources needed to fulfil
them. That includes providing capabilities that are vital to the safety of peacekeepers,
including technical, medical and logistical support for missions.
It also remains clear that skilled peacekeepers are safe peacekeepers. By
enhancing the qualifications of our peacekeepers and ensuring that they have the
proper equipment, the effectiveness of our troops and police increases, ranging
from basic skills to planning and improvised explosive device-threat awareness.
Ultimately, that contributes to improving their safety and security as well. Enhanced
training, including thorough training of trainers and the development of training
materials for both troops and police, will therefore continue to be a focus area for
the Nordic countries.
Also, good conduct and the accountability of United Nations peacekeepers
remain axiomatic. In the end, the accountability of peacekeepers to the populations
they serve is directly linked to ensuring their own safety and their accountability to
themselves.
The Nordic commitment to peacekeeping is as old as the instrument itself.
From the day that peacekeeping missions were first put to use as a means to address
international crises, personnel from the Nordic countries, as well as substantial unit
contributions and supplies of critical capabilities, have been deployed alongside
troops, police and corrections personnel from more than 120 Member States.
Moreover, such contributions have gone hand in hand with our efforts to continuously
improve the tool of peacekeeping, including through training and capacity-building
efforts and the provision of support for improvements at the policy level.
Access to reliable, relevant and up-to-date information about the local
context is key to ensuring that peacekeepers can operate both effectively and safely.
Therefore, the Nordic countries have supported the efforts of the Office of Military
Affairs in developing guidance and training on the use of military peacekeeping
intelligence to inform both planning and decision-making.
As we look ahead to the Peacekeeping Ministerial to be held in Seoul later
this year, the Nordic countries will continue to advocate honouring our shared
commitments to reforming United Nations peacekeeping by investing in this everimportant tool in our common toolbox.
21-0701153/105

S/2021/501

Finally, our commitment to the safety, security and well-being of our troops,
police and corrections officers does not end when their deployments do. Taking care
of those who take care of us also means making a political commitment to having
the interests and well-being of our peacekeepers at heart after they have taken off
their uniforms.
This Saturday, 29 May 2021, we pay tribute to those who paid the highest
price and those who continue to put their lives at risk every day in order to serve
and protect. Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden honour and respect all
those who serve and have served under the auspices of United Nations peacekeeping.
The International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers, as always, will be a day of
reflection and tribute.

54/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 27
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ecuador to the
United Nations, Cristian Espinosa Cañizares
[Original: Spanish]
I wish to express my delegation’s appreciation for the convening of this debate
on the safety and security of peacekeeping personnel one year on from the adoption
of resolution 2518 (2020), which Ecuador was honoured to co-sponsor and which was
adopted on 30 March 2020 (see S/2020/268) during our presidency of the Security
Council.
The adoption of that resolution was all the more relevant amid the pandemic.
While it does not mention the coronavirus disease, it contributed to health-protection
efforts. In that regard, I would like to recall Ecuador’s statement of 18 February,
during the general debate of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
when we commended the responsive measures taken by the Secretariat to incorporate
mechanisms to mitigate the spread of the pandemic, thereby protecting the health
of peacekeeping personnel and communities alike without disrupting operational
continuity.
The principal aim of peacekeeping operations is undoubtedly to protect
civilian populations, and it is precisely to achieve that aim that it is necessary to
ensure that personnel have adequate tools at their disposal.
In August 2020, Ecuador also co-sponsored resolution 2538 (2020), on women
in peacekeeping operations, in which the Council called upon Member States and
the Secretariat to ensure safe, enabling and gender-sensitive working environments
for women in peacekeeping operations, with adequate infrastructure, facilities,
sanitation and protective equipment. The security of peacekeepers, which we must
ensure, encompasses an environment free of violence, including sexual harassment.
Ecuador is concerned about the risks posed by terrorist attacks against
peacekeeping missions, in particular the risk posed by improvised explosive devices.
For that reason, we were privileged to co-sponsor the Arria Formula meeting of
the Security Council on the theme “Protecting the peacekeeper: suppressing the
deployment of improvised explosive devices against peace operations”, convened by
Kenya on 26 March.
On that occasion, I called on the Council to strengthen uniform performance
standards and capabilities through specialized training. In addition to technology,
progress must continue in the area of intergovernmental capacity-building
cooperation. I also reiterated the need to ensure an appropriate intelligence overview
of the theatres to which peace missions are deployed.
Against that backdrop, on 27 April Ecuador joined the Group of Friends on the
Safety and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers, co-chaired by Brazil, China,
Indonesia and Rwanda, with the aim of raising awareness on safety and security
needs as well as strengthening coordination with the Secretariat and promoting
actions that contribute to the peace and security objectives of the Organization. It is
in the same spirit that today I align myself with the statement submitted on behalf
of the Group of Friends by the Permanent Representative of Brazil, Ambassador
Ronaldo Costa Filho (annex 19).
I also underscore the progress made in implementing the 2018 Action Plan to
Improve the Security of Peacekeepers.

21-0701155/105

S/2021/501

Ecuador respectfully urges the Security Council to continue providing a
platform for dialogue on this topic, which helps mobilize the efforts required on the
part of the international community.
In conclusion, I must stress the importance of implementing resolutions
2532 (2020) and 2565 (2021) to facilitate humanitarian corridors and access for
humanitarian assistance, as well as all resolutions on the protection of civilians,
which are also of relevance to the security of peacekeeping personnel.

56/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 28
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the People’s Republic of China
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council and to extend my wishes for
a successful tenure. I also thank you, Sir, for convening this timely reflection on
improving the safety and security of peacekeepers.
Ensuring the safety and security of peacekeepers remains a top priority
for Egypt as a major troop- and police-contributing country. We acknowledge
and appreciate all efforts undertaken by the Secretariat to date to ensure that our
peacekeepers are safe and protected. However, we are deeply concerned about
the recent rising trend in fatalities as a result of malicious attacks against our
peacekeepers. Since January 2021, Egypt has lost two peacekeepers in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, and two of our
peacekeepers have been wounded.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic situation is also worrisome.
Since the outbreak of the pandemic, Egypt has lost two peacekeepers to COVID-19
in the Central African Republic, while other peacekeepers have also tested positive.
It is therefore imperative that we address this challenge holistically and
collectively in a way that improves the resilience of peacekeeping operations, as
follows.
We must strengthen the capacity of peacekeeping operations to identify,
analyse and respond to security challenges through improved situational awareness/
peacekeeping intelligence and better use of technologies.
Adequate medical resources must be provided in the field throughout the
life of a mission. We reiterate the recommendation of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations to conduct a mapping exercise of the status of existing
medical capabilities in missions with a view to addressing any gaps.
Troop- and police-contributing countries must be reimbursed in a timely
manner, considering the increasing burden that they are shouldering, not only as
troop-contributors but also simultaneously as financial contributors. In that regard,
Member States must pay their assessed contributions in full, on time and without
any conditions.
We must ensure accountability in cases of crimes against peacekeepers, which
will serve as an important deterrent for similar crimes. That requires continued
engagement and dialogue with host countries to build institutional capacities to
fight impunity.
Troop- and police-contributing countries have a responsibility to ensure that
their personnel are well trained with the requisite equipment. In the meantime, the
Secretariat must tailor United Nations training manuals to the threat environment
in each mission and expand partnerships to address any training gaps, in addition
to translating those manuals into the six official languages of the United Nations.
Adequate resources should also be allocated for in-mission training programmes.
The impact of the pandemic on our peacekeepers must be mitigated. We
acknowledge the swift measures taken by the United Nations to adapt and adjust
the work of field missions in order to mitigate the impact of the pandemic. For our
part, we continue to apply quarantine and testing measures and recently started to
vaccinate military personnel prior to deployments and rotations. In that connection,
we support all efforts to ensure equitable access for all peacekeepers to COVID-19
vaccines. We believe that no one will be truly safe until everyone is safe. Hence,
21-0701157/105

S/2021/501

we encourage countries with vaccine supply capacities to support United Nations
efforts to get all peacekeepers vaccinated.
In conclusion, we reiterate Egypt’s commitment to supporting all efforts
aimed at enhancing the safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers and
making peacekeeping more fit for purpose.

58/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 29
Statement by the Permanent Mission of El Salvador to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
El Salvador thanks the Permanent Mission of the People’s Republic of China
for holding this open debate on “United Nations peacekeeping operations: improving
safety and security of peacekeepers”.
As El Salvador contributes troops and police to six United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, the safety and security of peacekeepers is
a top priority for our country.
Along those lines, it should be noted that this open debate is taking place
in a context in which peacekeeping faces a wide range of challenges, which
have been exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its
multidimensional impacts.
It is noteworthy that despite the significant impact of the current crisis on
their work, peacekeepers continue to discharge their mandates and in some cases
have even expanded their activities in areas affected by the COVID-19 pandemic in
order to strongly support the efforts of States and local communities.
Likewise, El Salvador recognizes the significant progress that has been made
in the framework of the implementation of resolutions 2518 (2020) and the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping and Action for Peacekeeping Plus priorities,
which attach importance to the safety and security of peacekeepers.
However, taking into account the fact that peacekeeping personnel continue
to face extremely complex threats, including that posed by the COVID-19 pandemic,
and that, unfortunately, they continue to be the target of reprehensible attacks, El
Salvador believes it necessary to make further progress in the following areas.
First, the creation and strengthening of capacities in terms of the safety and
security of peacekeepers is considered vital to of the fulfilment of their mandates.
Along those lines, it is important that both the Secretariat and troop- and policecontributing countries ensure that such operations develop those capacities, which
will allow them to be agile and effective.
Secondly, El Salvador deems it essential that in addition, troop- and policecontributing countries must be reimbursed in a timely manner for their contributions
to peacekeeping activities. Failure to do so would jeopardize the capacity of those
countries to participate in missions.
The foregoing is considered highly relevant to the enhancement of personnel
training and the creation of specialized capacities that prepare such personnel
for specific threats, in accordance with the particular conditions of each mission.
Likewise, providing staff with the equipment necessary for the fulfilment of their
mandate is crucial; that must be done in a timely manner.
Thirdly, the importance of enhancing the existing cooperation between
peacekeeping operations and recipient States is widely recognized, as that would
allow for, inter alia, the periodic exchange of relevant information, with a view to
minimizing the impact of the threats that personnel face in the field.
Likewise, we believe that the aforementioned measures should be supported
by mandates, objectives, command structures and internal rules for peacekeeping

21-0701159/105

S/2021/501

operations that are viable and clearly defined and articulated, with sufficient
resources and predictable financing so that they can carry out their functions.
It is also vital that the gender perspective be incorporated into efforts
to strengthen the safety and security of peacekeeping personnel, with the aim
of contributing to the full, effective and meaningful participation of women in
peacekeeping operations.
Similarly, it is crucial that the personnel currently deployed be vaccinated
against COVID-19 without delay in order to ensure their health and safety. That
would demonstrate a commitment to such personnel, who risk their lives protecting
the most vulnerable and maintaining the peace.
El Salvador believes that in future profound transformations must take place
in peacekeeping operations in order to ensure that they have the capacity to adapt to
emerging threats; indeed, the safety and security of peacekeeping personnel is truly
a shared responsibility.

60/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 30
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to the
United Nations, Taye Atskeselassie Amde
We thank China for having organized this important open debate on the safety
and security of peacekeepers during the month of its presidency. We also thank
Under-Secretaries-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Atul Khare and Gilles Michaud for
their interventions.
Peacekeeping is one of the available tools in the promotion and maintenance
of international peace and security. It is therefore imperative that peacekeepers
be provided with the necessary predeployment and in-mission training, which
should also be tailored to the prevailing security challenges faced in specific
missions. Equally important is the equipment level and medical services, especially
in the context of the global pandemic and other adverse health challenges facing
peacekeeping missions.
Peacekeepers face increasingly asymmetric attacks and evolving protection
challenges, and they operate in dynamic security environments. In that regard,
we must continually invest in initiatives to improve their safety and performance.
Deficiencies in terms of safety and security are detrimental to performance and
hamper effective mandate delivery.
Ethiopia is a leading contributor to peacekeeping operations and has deployed
peacekeepers across continents since the 1950s. Our experience shows that the
deployment of sufficiently staffed peacekeeping missions, with police and troop
ceiling levels commensurate with the mandate of missions and the allocation of
resources, helps minimize risks to the safety and security of Blue Helmets. Recently,
drawdowns unjustified by mission requirements caused apparent damage to the
health and well-being as well as the security of Blue Helmets.
Over the last seven decades, the United Nations peacekeeping architecture has
developed valuable lessons on mitigating risks and addressing complex operational
challenges. However, experience and information-sharing among troop- and
police-contributing countries are currently underutilized. In addition to triangular
partnerships, we must make use of such tools as co-deployments and the light
coordination mechanism to bolster training and capacity-building efforts, with a
view to enhancing preparedness so as to ensure the safety and security of those we
have entrusted with maintaining international peace and security.
Additionally, the safety and security of all who serve under the United
Nations flag is our collective responsibility. Strong leadership and coordination at
all levels and coordination, including at Headquarters, is critical to enhancing the
safety and security of peacekeepers. Similarly, the Security Council, troop- and
police- contributing countries, Member States and the Secretariat need to work in
harmony to provide the conditions necessary to ensure the safety and security of
peacekeeping troops.
Such coordination is pivotal in order to set clear, realistic and feasible
mandates backed by the necessary resources and ensure the success of peacekeeping
operations. Furthermore, there is a clear link between capability and the safety
and security of uniformed and civilian peacekeeping personnel. In that regard,
efficient and effective mandate implementation depends on the resource capability
of uniformed and civilian peacekeeping personnel to discharge their responsibilities.
Finally, Ethiopia remains committed to playing its part and to working with
various partners to prepare for current and future global and regional peace and
security challenges. Later this year we will co-host a peacekeeping ministerial
21-0701161/105

S/2021/501

preparatory meeting, together with Indonesia and Japan, on training and capacitybuilding. We also hope that the Secretary-General’s revamped Action for Peacekeeping
Plus initiative will provide renewed impetus in addressing the evolving challenge
facing peacekeepers’ safety and security.

62/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 31
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Fiji to the United Nations
Thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this important debate on
improving the safety and security of peacekeepers.
United Nations peacekeeping has been by far the most important tool at the
disposal of the international community in maintaining international peace and
security. The United Nations has been deploying peacekeepers for more than 70
years. More than 4,000 peacekeepers from around the world have made the ultimate
sacrifice in the service of peace, across the most difficult regions of the world.
United Nations peacekeeping has evolved in the past 70 years. Peace- and
security-related situations are evolving more rapidly than in the past, shaped by
the rise of new technologies, the growing intensity of climate change and the rapid
internationalization of local and regional conflict. United Nations Blue Helmets
operate in increasingly complex political and security environments. In a number of
situations, there is very little peace to keep. The increase in peacekeeping fatalities
reflects both how complex the peace and security environments are and how
dangerous United Nations peace operations have become.
The international community and local communities need United Nations
peace operations to be effective, however complex the environment or however
risky the tasks. Peacekeepers save lives, they prevent tensions and conflicts in
communities from worsening, and they provide the space for humanitarian aid and
political mediation to work. To do all this, peacekeepers need to be safe. That means
protecting themselves from multiple security threats, protecting the communities
they serve and protecting humanitarian workers and others who work in the
peacekeeping space.
Nowhere has the vulnerability of peacekeepers been exposed more forcefully
than in the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Peacekeepers
need to be able to protect themselves if they are to be able to serve communities and
provide access corridors for humanitarian and health support. The pandemic has
exposed the need for multidimensional preparedness and capacity.
The Action for Peacekeeping initiative (A4P) is a shared commitment to
making peacekeeping more effective and efficient. Fiji is a proud partner of A4P
and is committed to supporting it and its successor, A4P Plus. Both of those
initiatives recognize that the safety and security of peacekeepers is key to how well
peacekeepers carry out their tasks. Fiji welcomes the progress made so far in the
implementation of A4P. More can be done by all stakeholders to improve the safety
and security of peacekeepers.
Improving the safety and security of peacekeepers involves greater political
commitment by the international community to support peace operations, improving
accountability for training, improving performance and equipment, and providing
adequate and predictable financing. Each of those requires careful scrutiny.
Fiji would like to highlight the following points.
The United Nations is accountable in terms of ensuring the safety of
peacekeepers through the relevant policies, effective leadership and investments in
capacity. The troop- and police- contributing countries are also accountable, as they
need to ensure that their peacekeepers are well trained and equipped to perform
effectively in high-risk and growingly complect environments. That is a shared
accountability.

21-0701163/105

S/2021/501

International and regional solidarity and commitment are needed to establish
a political environment that supports peacekeepers and peace operations even during
periods when their effectiveness may be questioned. Peacekeeping takes time, and
the United Nations and the international community should be prepared for the long
haul. Those responsible for direct attacks against peacekeepers should always be
held accountable and brought to justice, and States parties have a special obligation
to support such efforts. Host countries have an important role in ensuring for the
safety and security of peacekeepers within their borders. They need to be supported
at the regional level and by the international community, and such support should be
over the medium term.
United Nations peace operations require adequate and, even more important,
predictable medium-term funding. Member States cannot be endlessly asking
peacekeepers to do more and more with less. Over time, that will adversely impact
field missions, including the safety, security and well-being of peacekeepers.
Peacekeepers require the best possible medical support, as they operate in
harsh, austere and hostile environments. The COVID-19 pandemic has exposed the
need for greater investments in the level of medical support that missions have.
Surge and standby medical support for peacekeepers needs to be rapidly deployable.
Emergency medical care onsite and a reduction in the amount of time required to
take casualties to the nearest field hospitals are important considerations if we are to
save the lives of peacekeepers.
United Nations peacekeeping need to leverage technology to be effective.
Significant progress has been made, but more can be done to universalize the use of
new smart technologies across peace operations. Technology enhances and improves
monitoring, information analysis and security.
Fiji has been continually deploying peacekeepers around the world for more
than 40 years. Some 40,000 Fijians have served as United Nations peacekeepers.
Approximately 70 Fijian peacekeepers have made the ultimate sacrifice; that is an
outsize contribution by our country. We are proud of our service, and we remember
and cherish those Fijians fallen in the service of peace across the world. We remain
as committed as ever to being of service to the United Nations through peacekeeping
well into the future.
Since 2018, Fiji has embarked on a peacekeeping action plan to fundamentally
transform the training of its peacekeepers. We have sought the assistance of our
neighbours New Zealand and Australia and have expanded relations with China,
India, Malaysia and the United States of America. We are deeply thankful for that
support. With the support of the Government of Australia, Fiji is constructing
a peacekeeping centre that will be used to train future peacekeepers in Fiji. We
intend to open that centre to other small island Pacific States, so that they, too, can
participate in United Nations peace operations. Fiji has continued to improve the
equipment of its peacekeepers so as to enable them to effectively operate in high-risk
security environments.
Fiji reaffirms its commitment to United Nations peacekeeping and to the
Action for Peace Plus initiative.
I thank you very much once again, Mr. President, for having convened this
important debate.

64/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 32
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Germany to the
United Nations
This year as in previous years, we have already witnessed a large number of
attacks on United Nations peacekeeping missions. They are horrifying in both their
number and brutality, and peacekeepers therefore too often pay the ultimate price.
Germany condemns all attacks on peacekeeping missions and underlines that they
may constitute war crimes under international law.
As a consequence, this open debate is the third event in a few weeks on this
very important topic with a significant impact on discussions about the future of
peacekeeping: the safety and the security of our civilian and uniformed peacekeepers
deployed abroad to create and enhance peace and security on behalf of the
United Nations.
Many aspects of today’s discussion are already embedded in and implemented
by the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative that Secretary-General Guterres
launched three years ago. We recently celebrated its anniversary, and the Secretariat
initiated its evolutionary development into the A4P+. Germany is a strong supporter
of the A4P and has contributed to its implementation through various activities —
both bilaterally and within the United Nations framework.
In that connection, I would like to concentrate on four aspects.
First, modern technology can make a difference. Germany has a large
contingent in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), one of the most challenging ongoing peacekeeping missions.
Germany promotes the safety and security of all peacekeepers deployed alongside
or in the vicinity of the German contingent by offering unique high-end capabilities
to protect all Mission personnel. Our use of cutting-edge technology is not limited
to MINUSMA; remaining at the forefront of technology is also a key concern for
my country. Germany is in close and continuous dialogue with the Mission and the
Secretariat in order to enhance existing capabilities with a view to ensuring safety
and security.
Secondly, we must enhance training and capacity-building. We recognize
the efforts of the United Nations and troop- and police-contributing countries to
improve safety and security by enhancing the performance of their units. We very
much support those efforts, including by providing predeployment training for
police, civilian and military personnel and by dispatching mobile training teams
to interested troop-contributing countries. In order to avoid duplication and to
streamline bilateral efforts, the United Nations has introduced the Light Coordination
Mechanism, through which the offers of the supporting nations are being harmonized
with the needs of the supported countries. We strongly believe in the value of the
Mechanism and encourage all troop- and police-contributing countries to make full
use of it, as it is an important step to enhance the capabilities and capacities of all
troop- and police-contributing countries.
Thirdly, we must strengthen the women and peace and security agenda.
Sustainable peace can only be achieved when women are fully, equally and
meaningfully represented at all levels and at all stages of peace processes. That
includes their full, equal and meaningful participation in peace operations.
Furthermore, gender needs to be considered in all phases of mission planning,
implementation and assessment. Ultimately, that will also enhance the safety and
security of missions and their peacekeepers.

21-0701165/105

S/2021/501

Finally, we must provide the best available medical support. Even though we
all try our best to prevent accidents and attacks, they still occur and will continue to
do so. It is therefore of the utmost importance to ensure that missions are capable of
providing the best medical support to our peacekeepers at all times. That requires
both effective United Nations policies and tailored capabilities on the ground. The
German military medical service is well known for its very high standards, and we
will continue to provide training, share expertise and build the capacities of Member
States and their peacekeepers.
Member States and the Secretariat have made significant efforts in order to
achieve real progress in these and all other aspects mentioned today. Nevertheless,
Germany is convinced that more needs to be done to translate commitments into
concrete action and decrease the number of casualties even further. That is why
Germany will be a participant in the recently established Group of Friends on the
Safety and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers. We are very much looking
forward to the Group’s first meetings and to contributing to the discussion in order
to achieve tangible results for the benefit of the peacekeepers on the ground.

66/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 33
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Guatemala to the
United Nations
Guatemala thanks the delegation of the People’s Republic of China, in its
capacity as President of the Security Council during the month of May, for convening
this open debate on the theme “United Nations peacekeeping operations: improving
safety and security of peacekeepers” via video-teleconference. We also thank all
the briefers for their presentations and welcome the circulation of the concept note
(S/2021/432, annex), which will contribute to the deliberations during this open
debate.
Guatemala welcomes any initiative that seeks to bolster the safety and
security of peacekeeping personnel and contribute to improving peacekeeping
operations, in line with the full implementation of the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative, A4P+ and those established by the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations of the General Assembly (C-34). Guatemala takes this
opportunity to reiterate its position that the C-34 is the main forum mandated by
the General Assembly to discuss and analyse all matters related to United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
The Security Council has already adopted unanimous resolutions on the
safety and security of peacekeepers. These cover areas such as training, health,
technology and partnerships, including strengthening training systems, improving
health security and relief capabilities, requiring peacekeeping missions to enhance
communication with host countries, building mutual trust, improving the level of
applied technology and committing to taking various measures to ensure the safety
and security of peacekeepers.
Indeed, the primary responsibility for the security and protection of United
Nations peacekeeping personnel and assets rests with the host Government. That
responsibility flows from the Government’s inherent function of maintaining law
and order and protecting persons and property within its jurisdiction, as well as from
the special responsibility enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. Guatemala
also recognizes the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on
peacekeeping operations and the work that the Secretariat has done to adopt rapid
measures to adjust the Organization’s work to mitigate the impact of the pandemic.
Guatemala notes with deep concern the increasing frequency of attacks
against, and the killing of, peacekeepers. My delegation therefore considers that
the United Nations and its States Members must improve their ability to adapt to
the real needs on the ground and take the necessary measures to operate safely in
dangerous environments.
Likewise, the information received from missions leads to the conclusion that,
in many cases, physical protection is lacking — even in well-established bases —
and that the sensors, doors, walls and bunkers in camps are outdated, inadequate
and sometimes inefficient. It is important to improve the protective equipment of
peacekeeping personnel by providing armoured vests and helmets, for example, to
replace those that have expired.
Guatemala welcomes that the Security Council requested that the Secretariat
instruct all peacekeeping missions to systematically document violations of statusof-forces agreements, with the leaders of those missions using such information to
monitor and resolve risks to the safety and security of peacekeepers, as necessary.
It is crucial to continue making efforts to enhance operational health support,
including through the establishment of well-defined practical medical standards for
21-0701167/105

S/2021/501

peacekeeping operations. That includes addressing the lack of air assets, considering
its direct impact on the ability to ensure a medical response that can provide reliable
care, in line with the 10-1-2 principle, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, during the life
of the mission, specifically through casualty and medical evacuation.
We believe that the rules of engagement should be reviewed continuously
before our Blue Helmets are deployed, in order to implement the mandate without
unnecessarily risking their safety and security in the face of emerging threats.
Finally, Guatemala welcomes the various efforts being made by the Secretariat
in order to speed up the vaccination process against COVID-19. This process is of
particular importance for the Organization itself if it is to comply with the provisions
of the relevant Security Council resolutions. Guatemala also welcomes the initiative
of the Chinese delegation, together with Brazil, Indonesia and Rwanda, for the
creation for the Group of Friends on the Safety and Security of United Nations
Peacekeepers as an important space to discuss and enhance the safety and security
of peacekeepers.

68/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 34
St atement by the Chargé d’af fai res of I ndonesia to the
United Nations, Mohammad Kurniadi Koba
Let me begin by thanking China for convening this open debate on the critical
topic of the safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers, who are deployed to
save lives and advance peace. The environment where they are deployed has become
more complex and dangerous, which put their lives continuously at risk. The recent
increase in the number of attacks against peacekeepers shows how dangerous the
peacekeeping environment is.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has also compounded the
challenges faced by peacekeeping missions and peacekeepers in discharging their
mandates. We commend the continued work and dedication of peacekeepers despite
this difficult situation.
In that regard, let me share the following points.
First, improving the safety and security of peacekeepers is a shared
responsibility of all peacekeeping stakeholders. While host States have the primary
responsibility to ensure the safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers, the
Security Council, troop- and police-contributing countries and the Secretariat must
play a role.
We already have a solid policy framework, including resolution 2518 (2020), the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of the General Assembly report and
the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations
of the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative. The recently launched A4P+ also
puts special emphasis on improving the safety and security of peacekeepers, which
includes promoting accountability to peacekeepers. We need to redouble our efforts
to implement those frameworks.
As a major troop- and-police-contributing country, Indonesia attaches great
importance to the safety and security of peacekeepers. Recently, Indonesia —
together with Brazil, China and Rwanda — established the Group of Friends on
the Safety and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers. The Group is a dedicated
informal forum to support efforts to improve the safety and security of peacekeepers.
Secondly, a comprehensive approach is needed to improve the safety and
security of peacekeepers. That entails ensuring peacekeepers are properly trained
and well equipped. Both predeployment and in-mission trainings are crucial to
prepare peacekeepers to carry out their mandated tasks more effectively and to
improve their safety and security.
Equally important for the safety and security of peacekeepers are efforts
to improve peacekeeping intelligence and situational awareness, strategic
communication and community engagement, the use of technology and addressing
occupational and safety hazards. We underline the need for the application and
sharing of emerging technologies in order to improve the safety and security of
peacekeepers.
Missions must also be supported with adequate medical facilities, including
for medical and casualty evacuation. It is therefore critical that peacekeeping
missions be provided with sufficient financial resources.
In line with resolution 2538 (2020), particular attention must also be given to
ensure the safety and security of women peacekeepers, including by providing a safe
and conducive environment.
21-0701169/105

S/2021/501

In order to address the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic, peacekeeping
missions must continue to adapt. As the front-line workers for peace and humanity,
all peacekeepers must be given priority access to vaccines. We welcome the efforts
by the Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries (TPCCs) and other
stakeholders to provide vaccines for peacekeepers and look forward to further
progress in that endeavour.
Thirdly, we must ensure accountability to peacekeepers by bringing
perpetrators of crimes against peacekeepers to justice. Investigating and prosecuting
them is also critical for deterring further attacks. We welcome some progress in
that regard but call for greater efforts. We must help host States enhance their
investigation and prosecution capacities, including through programmatic funding.
In that connection, we call on the Working Group on Accountability for Serious
Crimes against Peacekeepers to continue its work and provide updates to TPCCs on
a regular basis.
In conclusion, Indonesia would like to reiterate its strong commitment to
collective efforts to improve the safety and security of peacekeepers, who have
dedicated their lives and made sacrifices for the cause of peace. Their safety and
security must remain our top priority.

70/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 35
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations
Italy thanks the Government of the People’s Republic of China for organizing
this open debate. It subscribes to the statement submitted by the Permanent
Representative of Brazil to the United Nations, Ambassador Ronaldo Costa Filho,
on behalf of the Group for the Safety and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers
(annex 19) and would like to add the following remarks in its national capacity.
On Saturday, we will celebrate the International Day of United Nations
Peacekeepers. The women and men wearing Blue Helmets represent the backbone
of the global peace and security architecture, and we have to pay homage to their
sacrifice and dedication.
Their contribution is today more crucial than ever, given the multiple threats to
international peace and security, and considering that the pandemic has exacerbated
the suffering of the people living in conflict situations and continues to challenge the
global peacekeeping architecture.
We commend the exemplary professionalism of our peacekeepers in performing
their duties and we mourn the loss of those who have given their lives to protect peace
and freedom in conflict-torn countries. To date, more than 4,000 peacekeepers have
been killed in action — 52 this year and more than 1,000 since 2011. We must reverse
this worrisome trend, and the international community as a whole must assume its
collective responsibility to keep the death toll as low as possible.
We firmly believe that providing our Blue Helmets with adequate training
and equipment is paramount to enhancing their safety and security and to ensuring
that the peacekeeping operations comply with the highest performance standards
required of them. Training and capacity-building should not be viewed as oneoff activities, but rather as tools to enhance operational effectiveness throughout
a mission’s life cycle. Training activities should take place both before and after
deployment and should be calibrated to the specific context of every mission and
tailored to contemporary requirements and threats.
We believe that a steady dialogue between the Secretariat and troop- and
police contributing countries (TPCCs), as well as between TPCCs and their own
training centres, is essential in order to share experiences and best practices,
develop common standards and provide information on training opportunities in
different fields.
Partnerships also are crucial in the training sector. We therefore support
efforts aimed at enhancing synergies between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, in particular the African Union. Further, as a member of
the European Union (EU), Italy welcomes EU cooperation with the United Nations
to this end.
As the first Western European and Others Group police- and troop-contributing
country, Italy holds the safety and security of peacekeepers and of the civilian
populations they are mandated to protect to be of utmost concern. In line with the
Action for Peacekeeping and Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiatives, our country
is deeply engaged in devising training activities. Over recent years, our military
training centres have provided specialized training and capacity-building to more
than 10,000 military and police officers from more than a hundred countries and
from several international organizations. We are proud of the successful cooperation
that is in place between the Centre of Excellence for Stability Police Units in
Vicenza and the United Nations Department of Peace Operations. These targeted
training activities have become increasingly relevant in the light of the growing
21-0701171/105

S/2021/501

and indiscriminate use of landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices, which pose serious threats to civilians, humanitarian workers and
peacekeeping personnel in conflict-afflicted and post-conflict areas.
Providing peacekeepers with adequate equipment is as important as training.
Peacekeeping missions must be able to proactively adapt to and cope with the
multiple challenges posed by technological development. Although technology
might be a double-edged sword, it is key to enhancing the safety and security of
peacekeepers. The successful use of uncrewed aerial vehicles in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
have effectively and efficiently improved the gathering of information and provided
enhanced situational awareness to the Mission’s peacekeepers, is a clear reminder
of the tangible benefits of technology and advanced equipment. In this vein, Italy
regularly pledges such valuable units and assets to the United Nations peacekeeping
capability readiness system as manoeuvre units, complemented by a basket of niche
skill sets and enablers, and utility helicopters.
Last but certainly not least, as they are an essential tool for global peace
and security, peacekeeping missions must benefit from sufficient, predictable
and sustainable funding. Italy, which is the seventh largest contributor to the
peacekeeping budget, will continue to do its part in this respect, in the interest of
the safety and security of the United Nations peacekeepers and for the sake of the
successful implementation of their mandates.

72/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 36
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
I thank the Chinese presidency for convening today’s important open debate.
At the outset, I would like to pay tribute to all the peacekeepers who have made the
ultimate sacrifice in conducting their missions.
Ensuring the safety and security of peacekeepers is a high priority for Japan.
I would like to highlight three specific points today: intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance (ISR); countering improvised explosive devices (IEDs); and medical
capacity.
With regard to ISR, if we are to improve the safety and security of peacekeepers,
it is essential to enhance the situational awareness of United Nations peace operations
by utilizing innovative ISR technologies and integrated analysis and planning. We
commend the efforts of the Secretariat to introduce high-end equipment and systems
using emerging technologies through partnerships with Member States. We also
encourage the Secretariat to continue to institutionalize integrated analysis and
planning, including through the implementation of the Comprehensive Planning and
Performance Assessment System.
With respect to countering improvised explosive devices, IEDs pose a serious
threat to several United Nations peace operations, especially in Mali, Somalia and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Adequate training and capacity-building on
counter-IED and explosive ordnance disposal (EOD) should be provided to policeand troop-contributing countries as well as to host State authorities. In this regard,
we highly value the role of the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS).
With regard to medical capacity, improving the medical capacities of field
missions is also critical. We urge the Secretariat to continue to hold and develop
relevant medical training courses, keep an adequate posture for medical and casualty
evacuation, and make necessary medical expertise available to peace operations
through the telemedicine system, in accordance with the 0-10-1-2 concept. In
addition, we encourage troop- and police-contributing countries to ensure that their
peacekeepers have undergone the relevant training courses and are equipped with
the necessary medical kits.
To support the efforts of the troop- and police-contributing countries and the
Secretariat in these areas, Japan recently made a contribution of $2.8 million to the
training and capacity-building programmes of the United Nations C4ISR Academy
for Peace Operations as well as the United Nations telemedicine project under the
Triangular Partnership Programme.
Japan also decided to contribute more than $4 million to UNMAS for enhancing
the counter-IED and EOD capabilities of the Somali Police Force in order to provide
a safer environment for African Union and United Nations peace operations as well
as for the people of Somalia. Japan stands ready to continue its efforts aimed at
enhancing the safety and security of peacekeepers.

21-0701173/105

S/2021/501

Annex 37
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Kazakhstan to the
United Nations
I commend the Permanent Mission of China for focusing on the need to
adopt urgent measures to ensure the safety of United Nations Blue Helmets as they
contribute to peace and security across the globe. It is tragic that as from January this
year, as many as 52 United Nations peacekeepers have been killed, who have been
added to the thousands who have been killed over the years. Kazakhstan honours
them all for their noble sacrifice for the cause of peace.
Kazakhstan supports the efforts undertaken by the United Nations Secretariat
to improve the effectiveness of peacekeeping activities. In particular, Kazakhstan
supported the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative and the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations.
My delegation fully endorses the A4P priorities for 2021-2023, and the subsequent
three resolutions of the Council — resolutions 2436 (2018), 2518 (2020) and 2538
(2020) — which point the way forward. In this regard, my delegation offers a few key
recommendations to consider with respect to peacekeeping in conflict zones, which
today show a wide range of dangers that must be addressed.
The A4P initiative and the three resolutions must be implemented in the
context of the Secretary-General’s management and development reforms so as to
guarantee greater operational cooperation across the United Nations system and its
peacekeeping missions. Accordingly, it is imperative that leadership, administration,
logistics and decision-making be streamlined for swift action.
We need to rethink achievable mandates, mission size, required capabilities,
operating procedures, mission base security, and predeployment and in-mission
training for troops facing armed groups, terrorists, organized crime, and political
and criminal exploitation, among other threats.
Acts of violence are taking place against the backdrop of the high level of
health risk associated with the coronavirus disease pandemic. Therefore, to reduce
fatalities, we need adequate relief measures, trained experts and instantly available
supplies, personal protection equipment, ambulances and level 1 hospitals for acute
trauma and fatal emergencies, as well as prolonged conditions. Prompt medical
evacuation facilities are therefore also critical.
The very high-risk settings call for state-of-the-art early-warning systems,
informational awareness, intelligence gathering and coordination between field
missions, Headquarters, troop-contributing countries, regional organizations and
host countries.
Strengthening peacekeeping missions with adequate technologies and assets
to counteract violence from insurgents, especially with appropriate vehicles for
difficult terrain, night-vision capability, and special uniforms and kits, is essential.
Peacekeepers must be prepared to act in the unfamiliar settings of jungles and face
the tactics of guerrilla warfare, improvised explosive devices and suicide bombings.
Training and security sector reform must be imparted for military and police
forces and the national security apparatus of the host country to be prepared, with
the establishment of clear agreements and acceptance of the responsibility to protect
United Nations personnel and citizens alike. Further, more women must be recruited
into the military, police and civilian components of missions for greater conflict
prevention at all levels.

74/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Predictable long-term funding for comprehensive security, political, military
and humanitarian aspects must be guaranteed. At the same time, we need to
strengthen the security-development nexus for greater ongoing stability in the host
country, through poverty reduction, job creation, and health and welfare services.
Kazakhstan considers peacekeeping to be an important component of its policy
to strengthen international and regional security. As the leading country in Central
Asia — and the second among the post-Soviet countries — to do so, Kazakhstan has,
since 2018, deployed peacekeeping units comprising more than 500 peacekeepers,
including a woman staff officer, to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL). We express our gratitude to the United Nations Secretariat and India
for supporting our peacekeeping initiatives, in particular our unique co-deployment
within the UNIFIL. We will continue to field larger units with support from other
partner countries and work on possible independent deployment in the future.
Furthermore, as one of the youngest troop-contributing countries, Kazakhstan
has sent a total of 33 men and women as military observers to the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara and the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire. Through our contribution and experience, we have been able to
prove that the competent predeployment training of troops, reinforcement of their
moral and psychological strength, execution of strict standards-of-performance
evaluation, together with coordination of rotations, are some of the key ways to
protect peacekeepers.
To ensure that our troops are well qualified, Kazakhstan has established
KAZCENT, our Partnership for Peace Training Centre, which was designed to
conform with international norms and provide United Nations certified courses. The
country will continue its contribution to United Nations peacekeeping operations by
sending specialized peacekeeping units that have been pledged to the peacekeeping
capability readiness system.
As a strong ally and supporter of the United Nations, Kazakhstan is deeply
committed to the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter. We intend
to work closely with the United Nations and the international community as a whole
to support shared efforts to maintain peace and security throughout the world.

21-0701175/105

S/2021/501

Annex 38
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations, Amal Mudallali
We congratulate China on assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month and thank Viet Nam for its productive presidency during the month of April.
Peacekeeping operations continue to play an essential role in maintaining
international peace and security around the world. They represent an indispensable
tool of the international community to mitigate regional crises and curb the evolution
of tensions into wars.
With the multiplicity of challenges faced by peacekeepers, ensuring and
continuously improving their safety and security is of great importance. The threats
and dangers are numerous and require the concerted efforts of the Security Council,
the Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries, financial contributors and
host countries to address them.
Enhanced capacity-building through training and provision of equipment and
other resources to improve the awareness and preparedness of forces in responding
to the challenges presented by complex situations and dangerous environments,
whether human-made or nature-made, are some of the different forms of improving
the safety and security of peacekeepers. Moreover, training and capacity-building of
peacekeepers prior to and during their deployment play key roles in enhancing their
safety and security.
The work of peacekeepers did not cease despite the mounting security
challenges that they are facing on several terrains, and, recently, with the health threat
posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The impact of COVID-19
on peacekeepers’ safety remains a point of concern for all States Members of the
United Nations.
We commend the Secretariat for the measures it has undertaken in the
context of protecting peacekeepers from COVID-19 and treating those who have
become infected. Such measures have significantly limited the numbers of fatalities
and contagion among peacekeepers and host communities. We pay tribute to the
peacekeepers, both uniformed personnel and civilians, who have lost their lives
to COVID-19 while in service. Lebanon also pays tribute to those who have lost
their lives in the field, commends the efforts that have contributed to the continued
decrease in fatalities and condemns all attacks on peacekeepers. We stress that even
one fatality is too many.
The explosion that hit Beirut on 4 August last year took its toll on one of
the Maritime Task Force ships of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) and was a testament to the mission’s readiness and preparedness in case of
emergency. A total of 23 UNIFIL peacekeepers from Bangladesh were admitted to
hospitals in the aftermath of the explosion. UNIFIL’s crisis response was a proof of
its high state of readiness, which was invaluable for the rapid evacuation and medical
treatment of the injured personnel.
As a country that is hosting peacekeepers, Lebanon is committed to the
safety and security of the UNIFIL mission as a whole. Lebanon is also committed to
abiding by resolution 2518 (2020) on capacity-building and the safety and security
of peacekeepers. Lebanon condemns all attacks against UNIFIL personnel, and
Lebanese authorities will act swiftly to bring the perpetrators to justice.
The relationship between UNIFIL and the Lebanese authorities is very strong,
and Lebanon is eager to strengthen it further through capacity-building programmes
76/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

and continuous cooperation and coordination on the ground. Lebanon is extremely
thankful to UNIFIL’s leadership and staff for their unstinting dedication, and it
commends the strong and steady cooperation that exists between UNIFIL and the
Lebanese authorities. We also wish to thank the troop-contributing countries for their
long-standing support and unwavering commitment, especially in the challenging
times that Lebanon is experiencing. Finally, Lebanon reiterates its full commitment
to the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) in its entirety and to preserving the
safety and security of UNIFIL’s personnel.

21-0701177/105

S/2021/501

Annex 39
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the
United Nations, Syed Mohamad Hasrin Aidid
Peacekeeping operations remain one of the core components of the work of the
United Nations. To this day, the Blue Helmets continue to be globally recognized as
synonymous with the Organization.
Over the years, the nature of United Nations peacekeeping operations has
continued to evolve. Indeed, it has become more complex and challenging. To be
effective, United Nations peacekeeping operations have to adapt to the challenges
that arise.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has greatly tested the resolve
and robustness of United Nations peacekeeping operations in the field. We all could
certainly learn lessons from how peacekeeping operations conducted themselves in
a pandemic situation.
The safety and security of peacekeepers is indispensable for effective United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Today’s debate is timely indeed, as we work
towards improving the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations globally.
Malaysia believes that continuous engagement with all relevant stakeholders
on the safety and security of peacekeepers is pivotal in searching for ways and means
to improve the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations. For this reason, Malaysia
is pleased to be part of the Group of Friends on the Safety and Security of United
Nations Peacekeepers that was launched recently.
Malaysia believes that the COVID-19 pandemic has taught us a few important
lessons.
First, to be effective, our peacekeepers need to be well protected to carry
out their mandates effectively. In this context, they have to be equipped with the
necessary tools, such as adequate protective equipment, including face masks, gloves
and face shields. As front-liners, those already in the field should be vaccinated
fully as a matter of priority. We must also ensure that new peacekeepers are fully
vaccinated before their deployment.
Secondly, the pandemic has also underscored the importance of training. Our
peacekeepers must be trained appropriately and adequately to operate in a pandemic
situation. They require the necessary skills on how to interact with stakeholders
while observing safety protocols and practicing social distance. They also need to
be trained in coping with mental-health issues.
It is also important that peacekeepers continue to receive targeted and
constant training in traditional areas of peacekeeping. Adequate and up-to-date
training with the assistance of the United Nations is critical, particularly in areas
such as developing relevant training materials, predeployment training, countering
improvised explosive devices, health and basic first aid.
Thirdly, the pandemic has also taught us the need to respond faster and safer.
In this context, peacekeepers should be able to rely on new technologies in gathering
vital information in areas of operation. With better knowledge of the situation on
the ground, we would be able to significantly improve the safety and security of
peacekeepers, enhance field support and facilitate better substantive mandate
implementation.
Malaysian peacekeepers — men and women — are deployed in four United
Nations peacekeeping operations around the world. My country takes pride in and
78/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

remains committed to our contribution to the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Let me conclude by reiterating Malaysia’s full support and readiness to work
closely with all stakeholders in ensuring that our peacekeeping operations are better
fit for purpose.

21-0701179/105

S/2021/501

Annex 40
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Malta to the United Nations
We thank you for the timely organization of this open debate, which focuses
on one of the pillars of the United Nations. Peacekeeping operations have played a
pivotal role in the maintenance of international peace and security and continue to
form an integral part of multilateral action. It remains our responsibility to close
remaining gaps in peacekeeping operations, and this also applies to the safety and
security of peacekeepers.
We remain concerned at the rising challenges being faced by peacekeepers in
the fulfilment of their mandates. The rise of attacks against peacekeepers is worrying
and has led us to rethink what tools are necessary to mitigate these challenges.
Terrorist attacks, improvised explosive devices (IEDs), climate change and the use
of emerging technologies have forced peacekeeping operations to adapt to these new
realities in order to ensure not only the fulfilment of their mandates, but also the
safety and security of peacekeepers. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
has also created new challenges, and the vaccination drive for peacekeepers on
the ground will help mitigate the worst impacts of the pandemic and ensure the
continuity of operations.
The continued safety and security of peacekeepers demand both a lot of
preparatory work before deployment and ensuring that the right tools, equipment
and strategies are in place during the actual operations. This includes the use of new
technologies, the provision of up-to-date equipment and the evaluation of mission
standards so they can meet new challenges. Continuous training is also key to ensuring
that new standards are implemented across the board. The relationship between the
host communities and the peacekeeping mission is another vital component.
We commend the results achieved through the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, of which the safety and security of peacekeepers are a main
component. Positive results have been recorded in improving the efficiency and
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations. Hopefully, this will also ring true with the
renewed Action for Peacekeeping Plus.
The importance of policy guidance remains a prerequisite for the fulfilment
of any United Nations -sanctioned mandate. Effective action and implementation of
resolution 2518 (2020), on the safety and security of peacekeepers, remain essential.
This resolution includes a number of measures that are crucial to ensuring the safety
of peacekeepers, including the responsibilities of host countries, the importance of
timely investigations into and prosecutions of attacks on peacekeepers, increased
capacities for missions to deal with emerging threats, and the setting-up of gendersensitive working environments. It also underscores the complexity involved in
ensuring the safety of peacekeepers and in rising to the challenge to meet emerging
threats. The Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations plays an important
role in providing policy guidance, and the safety and security of peacekeepers
consistently feature as an important pillar in its annual reports.
Taking stock of the needs of peacekeeping operations and conducting a
thorough analysis of the new emerging threats to the implementation of peacekeeping
mandates is important work that we need to encourage and support. However, what
is also needed is continued dynamism among the United Nations system, troopand police-contributing countries and other stakeholders. This is the only way that
we can ensure that peacekeeping missions succeed in fulfilling their mandates and
keeping peacekeepers safe. Clear examples include the capacity-building involved
in combating emerging threats such as the use of IEDs and the COVID-19 pandemic,
which necessitates a collaborative effort among all stakeholders involved. The
80/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

provision of equipment, capacity-building, renewed strategies and the mastering of
emerging technologies can be achieved only through a system-wide effort that puts
at its core the safety and security of all peacekeepers and the missions they represent.
Malta remains committed to supporting all peacekeeping operations and all
measures that contribute to the safety and security of peacekeepers.

21-0701181/105

S/2021/501

Annex 41
Statement by the Permanent M ission of Morocco to the
United Nations
[Original; French]
First of all, I would like to thank China for organizing this open debate of the
Security Council on improving the safety and security of peacekeeping personnel
and for its leadership on this priority issue for Morocco. .I also thank the various
speakers for their efforts to improve the safety and security of deployed personnel.
As a major contributor to United Nations peacekeeping, Morocco naturally
attaches particular importance to enhancing the safety and security of the troops it
deploys, especially since we continue to be the subject of malicious attacks in our
various theatres of engagement. The most recent victim we mourn fell in January
2020, when a master corporal was attacked in his convoy by an armed group in the
Central African Republic.
Peacekeeping, which is constantly evolving, has experienced a sharp increase
in risks, specifically with the heightened number of asymmetrical attacks against
Blue Helmets, the fight against terrorism in certain mission areas and disinformation
campaigns targeting the image of the United Nations. Facing up to all that calls for
ongoing, robust mobilization.
In that regard, I would like to commend the work of the Secretariat, under the
leadership of the Secretary-General, for all its efforts, especially the launch of the
Action Plan to Improve the Security of Peacekeepers and the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, which attaches particular importance to that challenge.
Morocco also commends the swiftness with which concrete measures have
been put in place to combat the coronavirus disease pandemic, which has saved
millions of lives, including among local populations. The vaccination campaign
under way for uniformed personnel is another example of concrete steps taken by the
Secretariat, with the support of Member States, to improve the safety and security
of Blue Helmets.
We are aware of the fact that improving the safety and security of personnel
is a shared responsibility for the host of peacekeeping actors; hence the importance
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34), which every year
draws up concrete recommendations, including on improving safety and security for
personnel. Moreover, it brings together all key actors, including troop contributors,
the members of the Security Council and those providing financing, along with the
participation of representatives of the Secretariat.
In addition, that improvement depends upon a multitude of factors, which are
set out in detail in the latest draft report of the C-34 (A/AC.121/2021/L.3) as well
as in resolution 2518 (2000), adopted in the year 2000. On the basis of those two
documents and its experience with United Nations peacekeeping, Morocco would
like to share the following observations and recommendations.
The nature of the mandates has a significant impact on the safety and security
of our troops. In order to be able to perform their duties in secure conditions, troops
need clear guidance as well as realistic mandates that are supported by adequate
human and financial resources
Improving medical capacities as well as medical evacuation procedures must
be a priority. It is unfortunate that our Blue Helmets do not always enjoy appropriate
and accessible medical facilities.
82/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Appropriate and targeted training focused on the specific needs of each
operation is essential. Predeployment training must be complemented by in-mission
training using updated materials. Morocco is actively engaged with the Secretariat
in updating and developing various training materials. As part of the triangular
partnership programme, Morocco has hosted various training workshops and
sessions, mainly targeting Francophone police and troop contributors.
Combating impunity for the perpetrators of attacks against the United
Nations is also a key element. It is crucial that host countries legally prosecute those
responsible for such crimes. In certain conflict situations, at the request of the host
country, the United Nations could be called upon to support the strengthening of
State institutions. The support provided to the authorities of the Central African
Republic is a good example of best practice.
Another aspect that is frequently mentioned is the importance of winning
hearts and minds among the local populations we are mandated to protect. That
is all the more important at a time of growing use of social networks to facilitate
disinformation campaigns. We strongly condemn such campaigns targeting the
entirety of United Nations staff. In addition, quick-impact projects carried out by
contingents with a view to improving conditions for populations makes it possible
for troops to be better accepted by local populations.
In conclusion, Morocco pays heartfelt tribute to all those who have made the
ultimate sacrifice in the name of peace and in service of the United Nations flag.
Despite the risks and difficulties, Morocco is fully committed to supporting United
Nations peacekeeping, which continues often to be the sole bulwark against the
disastrous consequences of conflict.

21-0701183/105

S/2021/501

Annex 42
Statement by Permanent Representative of Nepal to the
United Nations, Amrit Bahadur Rai
I begin by thanking the presidency of the People’s Republic of China
for convening today’s open debate on the theme “United Nations peacekeeping
operations: improving safety and security of peacekeepers”.
Peacekeeping has remained the most visible conflict management tool at the
disposal of the United Nations. Over the years, it has evolved as a multidimensional
global undertaking. Its mandate has been expanding, from the supervision of
ceasefires to the protection of civilians, community engagement and the advancement
of a political solution. United Nations Blue Helmets have continued to build and
maintain peace in conflict environments in different regions.
Threats to peacekeepers’ safety and security are growing in today’s world.
Beyond malicious threats, peacekeepers are also prone to accidents and health
hazards. The current pandemic has exacerbated the pre-existing fragilities
experienced by peacekeepers.
The safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers is essential for mandate
delivery. It is sad to see that peacekeepers are targeted and attacked asymmetrically.
Our common responsibilities lie in protecting Blue Helmets operating in volatile and
active conflict environments.
As a major troop- and police-contributing country, Nepal appreciates the
initiatives aimed at enhancing the safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers,
including through the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping (A4) initiative
and the A4P Plus. However, we must acknowledge that there are gaps; and we should
address those gaps while integrating safety and security perspectives in all stages of
planning, implementation, reporting and analysis.
We must not view the safety and security of peacekeepers as a stand-alone
agenda. The mission mandate, management, available technologies, medical facilities
and leadership are all intrinsically related to it. Therefore, a safety and security
approach to strategic decision-making is critical for achieving a mission’s objectives.
That warrants system-wide coherence and cooperation among the Security Council,
the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, other relevant departments,
troop- and police-contributing countries and host countries.
Nowadays, peacekeeping missions are mandated to conduct sensitive business
including the protection of civilians and the promotion of human rights. For that,
situational awareness and intelligence are the critical aspects so as to undertake
threat assessments and devise response strategies. Missions should be adequately
resourced to keep peacekeepers up to date.
Malicious acts against peacekeepers are intolerable. Perpetrators of attacks
against United Nations peacekeepers must be held accountable under international
law. Due legal and political actions need to be taken.
The graph of United Nations peacekeeping fatalities keeps reminding us that
our efforts in ensuring the safety and security of peacekeepers have not been enough.
Peacekeepers have been losing their lives due to hostile acts, accidents and illness,
among other things.
We appreciate the efforts of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs to immunize troops and police against the coronavirus disease. Adequate
safety measures must continue to be in place along with vaccination. In that regard,
84/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Nepal expresses its commitment to vaccinating all its troops before their deployment
to missions.
This pandemic has once again proved that the health safety of peacekeepers
should be given due importance. Adequate health services with capacity for trauma
medicine, emergency evacuation, nutrition and sanitation must be ensured for
peacekeepers, while health emergency response strategies should be in place to cope
the pandemic.
United Nations peacekeeping has been a hope for global peace and security.
Its mandate and objectives will remain unfulfilled if peacekeepers’ safety and
security are not safeguarded. Our collective efforts should be aimed at mitigating
risks and enabling peacekeepers to perform in a safe and secured environment, with
high morale.
In conclusion, peacekeeping missions should be strengthened holistically to
ensure the safety and security of peacekeepers so that they can secure peace on
the ground and deliver the mandates of the mission. Nepal remains committed to
continue contributing to the noble goals of United Nations peace operations.

21-0701185/105

S/2021/501

Annex 43
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Netherlands to the
United Nations
We would like to thank China for organizing today’s debate. The safety
and security of peacekeepers is a matter of great importance, and we are therefore
pleased to see it on today’s agenda.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully aligns itself with the joint statement
submitted on behalf of the Group of Friends for the Safety and Security of United
Nations Peacekeepers (annex 19).
Peacekeeping operations are an effective instrument in preserving international
peace and security. However, over the past 70 years, the operating environment for
United Nations peacekeepers has changed significantly. The intensity and complexity
of conflict has increased, and various security factors are posing threats to the safety
and security of peacekeepers.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands expresses its appreciation to all peacekeepers
who have been, and continue to be, deployed to maintain peace. Their safety
and security is a shared responsibility of the international community — as for
without them, operations could not and cannot be carried out. It is for that reason
that enhancing the safety and security of peacekeepers is paramount. Moreover,
increased safety and security will result in greater effectiveness and performance
of peacekeeping operations in the carrying out of mission-mandate tasks such as the
protection of civilians.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands therefore appreciates the efforts of the
Secretary-General through Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative to give renewed
impetus to the safety and security of peacekeepers, among other things. In this
statement, we wish to highlight three areas of action the Kingdom of the Netherlands
considers critical to increase the safety and security of peacekeepers.
First, with regard to technology and increasing situational awareness, in
your much-valued concept note (S/2021/432, annex), Mr. President, it is emphasized
that enhancing missions’ early-warning and emergency response capabilities is
essential. In addition, it is stated that new technologies can have a significant
impact on the security of peacekeepers. We fully concur with that and believe
that an increase in capabilities and instruments for data gathering, integrated
analyses and information dissemination could be a great step forward in improving
peacekeepers’ safety and security.
Technologies such as big data radio mining and the Situational Awareness
Geospatial Enterprise allow missions to increase their situational awareness and
develop data-driven activities. The collection and analysis of data and information,
culminating in peacekeeping intelligence, enables information-driven operations
that will enhance safety and security as well as mission performance. Over the
past years, the Secretariat has developed valuable policies on matters relating to
peacekeeping intelligence and information gathering and analysis, to which the
Kingdom of the Netherlands gladly contributed. Further incorporation of those
policies in predeployment training would allow for information-driven peacekeeping
operations to further mature.
Secondly, on improving capabilities and mindsets through relevant
predeployment and specialized training, appropriate and targeted training and
capacity-building is an effective way to ensure that peacekeepers are adequately
trained and equipped to ensure their own safety and security. We are pleased that
the Secretary-General has included that element in the Action for Peacekeeping Plus
86/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

initiative, highlighting the need for specialized training in the field of improvised
explosive device (IED) threat-mitigation and counter-IED training. Moreover,
training on basic first aid, peacekeeping intelligence and gender-specific risk
considerations is equally important. Recently, the Netherlands contributed to that
plethora of specialized training by developing the Buddy First Aid Course app and
the United Nations COVID-19 Response app.
We also wish to highlight the continuous relevance of the Light Coordination
Mechanism (LCM), developed by the Secretariat. Through the mechanism, training
supply and training demand can be orchestrated and matched. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands is a proud member of the LCM’s core group and encourages all Member
States to use the mechanism to their advantage.
Thirdly, on integrated planning, in the Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative
the Secretary-General acknowledges that inadequate integration undermines
our political goals, our protection efforts and our efforts to strengthen the safety,
security and performance of peacekeepers. The Comprehensive Planning and
Performance Assessment System is an important step towards enhanced integration,
yet more should be done to strengthen integrated planning and reporting between
the uniformed and civilian sides. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is willing to
participate in discussions on how to achieve that and will facilitate further debate on
the topic during the preparatory conference it is organizing together with Pakistan
on 25 and 26 October. We would greatly value and appreciate all Member States’
participation.
Lastly, the coronavirus disease pandemic has explicitly demonstrated the
vulnerability and indispensability of good health. It is irrefutable that, at the core of
safety and security for peacekeepers, lies basic medical preparedness, casualty and
medical evacuation and the provision of medical and hospital coverage at all levels.
We commend the improvement in health and medical support that has been achieved
over the years and believe that it can be further strengthened and developed.

21-0701187/105

S/2021/501

Annex 44
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the
United Nations, Munir Akram
I would like the thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate.
Today’s discussion is extremely important. Conf licts have become more complex.
Threats to peacekeepers have escalated. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic has added another layer of threat to peacekeepers as well as to the
general population.
Our decision to support predeployment and in-theatre immunization of
peacekeepers seeks to protect both Blue Helmets and local communities against the
COVID-19 pandemic. To demonstrate our commitment, we have already started to
administer vaccines to our contingents in the field.
Taking this opportunity, we would also like to appreciate the Secretariat’s
continued efforts to mitigate pandemic-related threats, especially its decision to
introduce field-based precautionary measures and facilitate the vaccination process
for uniformed personnel. Our peacekeepers are indeed the front-line United Nations
workers, and their safety and security should be accorded high priority. This should
be part of our comprehensive approach to ensuring equitable global access to
COVID-19 vaccines. Accelerating the equitable roll-out of vaccines will advance
the peace and development agenda, especially in conflict-affected countries.
Pakistan also appreciates the introduction of accountability for peacekeepers
as a central theme in Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative. It ref lects a progressive
approach that seeks to strengthen the legal framework of safety and security.
The commitment to prosecute crimes against peacekeepers is a step in the right
direction. It affirms Pakistan’s consistent view that safety and security’ should be
promoted in a holistic manner giving due consideration to technical as well as legal
and political aspects.
Keeping in view the focus of today’s meeting, I would like to advance the
following recommendations.
First, as part of the recently launched Group of Friends on the Safety and
Security of United Nations Peacekeepers, Pakistan supports all efforts aimed at
elevating the political visibility of safety and security and placing it at the centre of
robust peacekeeping.
Secondly, a capability-driven approach is needed to shape an effective response
to the existing threat environment. Specialized capabilities, such as action to counter
improvised explosive devices and mines, combined with critical enablers, including
multi-role engineers, aviation and medical units, contribute to personnel security.
They should be given priority during the force-generation process. Similarly, the
discipline, morale, training and operational experience of peacekeeping contingents
could have a significant impact on the security environment.
Thirdly, the gaps between mandates and resources must be addressed.
Currently, expectations outstrip resources, exposing peacekeepers to undue risks.
Similarly, inadequate equipment has a direct bearing on the likelihood of casualties
among peacekeepers. The remedy lies in a two-pronged approach — devising clear,
focused and achievable mandates on the one hand, and allocating adequate budgetary
resources and equipment, on the other.
The pressing financial situation of United Nations peacekeeping demands
that Member States pay their financial obligations in full, on time and without
conditions. Delayed payments hamper the deployment of new units, depriving
88/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

missions of critical capabilities such as aviation support, medical equipment and
explosive ordnance disposal.
Given the nature of recent attacks on United Nations peacekeepers, mineprotected vehicles have become a vital asset in some peacekeeping missions.
Tactical intelligence is another key tool to improve situational awareness and
prevent casualties. However, it must conform with the requirements and policies of
host countries.
Military units, convoys and long-range patrols should have reliable medical
support for first aid and casualty evacuation. Based on most recent assessments,
more needs to be done to support troops in improving their emergency medical care
practices and in using technology, such as telemedicine, for this purpose.
At the strategic level, ensuring coherence and synergy between the policy and
operational levels is crucial. This can be achieved through meaningful triangular
consultations and effective feedback between the Security Council, the Secretariat
and troop-contributing countries (TCCs).
Fourthly, reaching out to local communities and leveraging strategic
communications can help manage expectations and address disinformation and hate
speech. To realize these goals, we must continue to innovate and modernize the
public communication capabilities of peacekeeping missions. The deployment of
Pakistan’s all-female engagement team in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
reflects our commitment to such endeavours.
We reiterate our suggestion that the Security Council, when authorizing a
peacekeeping mission, allocate a certain percentage of the budget to community
support projects and other peacebuilding actions.
Fifthly, we should be enhancing training and capacity-building through
partnerships. Training improves knowledge, skills and attitudes and builds capacities
to manage crises and protect the lives of peacekeepers as well as civilians. Pakistan
has hosted several peacekeeping courses for partner countries. We look forward to
strengthening this engagement and working with Member States and the Secretariat
to enlarge and diversify such training, especially for new TCCs, at the Centre for
International Peace and Stability in Islamabad.
Finally, the United Nations must prioritize political solutions to conflicts,
as recommended in resolution 2518 (2020) and the 2017 report authored by former
United Nations Force Commander, Lieutenant General Carlos (Retired) Alberto
dos Santos Cruz. Sustainable peace requires a comprehensive approach, from
conflict prevention and resolution to peacekeeping, peacebuilding and long-term
development.
Over the last six decades, Pakistan has lost 160 of our bravest in United Nations
peacekeeping missions — three of them only last year. Pakistan therefore accords
the highest priority to the safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers and
will host, along with the Netherlands, a ministerial meeting in October on safety,
security and protection, in preparation for the Seoul conference.

21-0701189/105

S/2021/501

Annex 45
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Philippines to
the United Nations, Enrique A. Manalo
Peacekeeping operations remain the flagship programme of the United
Nations enterprise. The safety and security of peacekeepers continues to be one of
the highest priorities of the Organization.
During the general debate of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (C-34) in February this year, delegations, including that of the Philippines,
reaffirmed their national commitments to the safety and security of peacekeepers
and condemned in the strongest terms attacks against United Nations peacekeeping
personnel and all acts of violence. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
has exacerbated the complexity of security risks to our peacekeepers.
The 2021 C-34 report, negotiated virtually early this year under extraordinary
circumstances, stresses that
“United Nations peacekeepers deployed in deteriorating and complex political
and security environments face asymmetrical and complex threats, and have
increasingly become a target for hostile actors... It is of critical importance
that the Secretariat work closely in consultation with Member States in a
transparent manner on the implementation of the Action Plan to Improve the
Security of Peacekeepers, within its authority” (A/75/19, para. 152).
We appreciate the efforts of China, under its presidency of the Security
Council, to convene today’s open debate on “United Nations peacekeeping operations:
improving safety and security of peacekeepers”.
The Philippines joined last month the Group of Friends on the Safety and
Security of Peacekeepers, together with over 50 Member States from all geographical
regions. The Group of Friends aims to build a platform for strengthening informationsharing, policy coordination and capacity-building to enhance the safety and security
of our peacekeepers in United Nations field missions. This is a timely initiative,
given the pandemic context.
The Philippines wishes to submit the following points.
First, on long-term investment and efforts to improve the safety and security
of peacekeepers, the Philippines reiterates its call for the United Nations to continue
its partnership with international development and financial institutions in terms of
innovative financing options on peacebuilding and sustaining peace programmes.
Whether at the United Nations country team level or through the United NationsWorld Bank partnership in crisis-affected settings, such initiatives enhance
investments in capacity for conflict prevention and strengthen the link between
peace and development actors. This shift towards prevention and partnership
strategically contributes to the prospects of strengthening the safety and security of
our peacekeepers.
Secondly, on improving the safety and security of peacekeepers as a shared
responsibility, the Philippines believes that policy and financial support for
intergovernmental platforms that enable peer learning among Member States are key
to building resilience in peacekeeping, encouraging constructive dialogues on the
challenges in sustaining peace and pursuing strategic partnerships. We encourage
greater collaboration between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
and the United Nations in peace operations, including through the implementation of
the Plan of Action to Implement the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership
between ASEAN and the United Nations, in areas such as the Triangular Partnership
90/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Project, capacity-building, the sharing of best practices and increasing women’s
participation in peacekeeping.
Thirdly, on the implementation of resolution 2518 (2020), to enhance the
safety and security of peacekeepers, the Philippines supports the appointment of
“an overall focal point for the safety and security of peacekeepers” (ibid, para. 156),
a new strategic policy recommendation put forward in the 2021 C-34 report. We
recommend that the terms of reference of the focal point be discussed between the
C-34 members and the Secretariat and approved by the Security Council members.
Fourthly, on the specific actions that must be taken to improve the safety
and security of peacekeepers, the Philippines underscores the continued importance
of predeployment and in-mission training sessions for our peacekeepers, not only
for their safety and security, but also to contribute to the peacekeeping mission’s
overall performance. There should also be better integration and coordination of
efforts across the pillars of peacekeeping missions and United Nations agencies.
United Nations peacekeepers should not be left behind in global and local efforts
to contain the virus and should be prioritized in health programmes in response to
the pandemic.
Finally, the Philippines underscores the importance of the Secretariat
accountability system and the need to strengthen risk management and internal
controls in the management of peacekeeping budgets to facilitate mandate
implementation and increase transparency in peacekeeping operations.
We believe that peacekeeping issues must be discussed in a broader forum in
order to respond to the problem of the persistent gap between those who decide on
the mandates of peace operations and those who deploy the troops and police for
implementation of the mandates.
Finally, the Philippines looks forward to participating in the 2021 Peacekeeping
Ministerial Conference to be hosted by the Republic of Korea this December, which,
we anticipate, will discuss safety and security issues in a post-COVID-19 era.

21-0701191/105

S/2021/501

Annex 46
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Poland to the United Nations
Poland would like to thank China for organizing this timely and important
debate. We also express our appreciation to Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Mr. Atul Khare
and Mr. Gilles Michaud for their thought-provoking and informative briefings.
Peacekeeping remains one of the most effective United Nations tools in the
promotion and maintenance of international peace and security. Over the years,
the scope of peacekeeping mandates has expanded significantly in response to the
changing nature of conflicts. As the daily activities of peacekeepers range from
protecting civilians to assisting peacebuilding activities, their central role in the
implementation of the sustaining peace agenda needs to be recognized.
United Nations civilian, military and police personnel risk their lives in
complex security environments in order to protect the most vulnerable and help
countries to navigate the difficult path from conflict to peace. On 29 May, we will
pay tribute to all the men and women who have served under the United Nations
flag and honour the memory of over 4,000 peacekeepers who have lost their lives in
the cause of peace. This sacrifice demands a decisive and long-term engagement in
improving the safety and security of peacekeepers.
While United Nations peacekeeping is constantly evolving to meet new
challenges, stronger preventive measures must follow in order to address new risks
and threats. In this vein, Poland reiterates its support for resolution 2518 (2020)
and calls for its full implementation. Further efforts are also needed to carry into
effect the recommendations of the 2018 Action Plan to Improve the Security of
Peacekeepers.
Their protection cannot be safeguarded, however, without a clear understanding
of the situation on the ground. Hence, we underscore the need for regular safety
and security audits of all deployments and for the systematic documentation of all
violations of status-of-forces agreements.
Acknowledging that the safety and security of United Nations peacekeeping
personnel require the commitment of all relevant stakeholders, including the Security
Council, the Secretariat and host countries, as well as troop- and police-contributing
countries, Poland highlights the primary responsibility of host States in this regard.
It is crucial that host States facilitate access and freedom of movement for United
Nations peacekeepers and their equipment within the established mandate, including
for casualty and medical evacuation. Strengthening accountability is another
important obligation that rests with host States, and Poland strongly condemns all
attacks against United Nations peacekeeping personnel. Although in recent years
we have observed a continued decrease in fatalities from acts of violence, we need
to ensure that those responsible for attacks on peacekeepers are effectively brought
to justice.
Tragically, last year the total number of fatalities increased, reaching 130
persons. Given that illness remains a predominant cause, it is pertinent to enhance
the provision of logistical and operational health support, ensure adequate medical
facilities and qualified medical personnel, and improve peacekeepers’ medical
capabilities. Naturally, adjusting the medical conditions of peacekeeping operations
to the needs of our times also implies learning from experience of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic and addressing the potential risk of future outbreaks
of infectious diseases.
It is clear that the pandemic has exposed peacekeepers to additional risks and
strained mission resources. Nevertheless, peacekeepers have engaged in conducting
public education campaigns about the virus, establishing new health and safety
92/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

protocols and supporting local Government responses. Their courage, flexibility
and adaptability are an example to follow. Unfortunately, some have paid the highest
price for this outstanding commitment.
In this vein, Poland requests the Secretariat to continue its efforts to address
security and safety challenges that have arisen due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We
commend the timely provision of updated policies and guidelines on the COVID-19
response, such as the COVID-19 Duty Station Medical Capacities Review and the
COVID-19 Preparedness Checklist. Nevertheless, the resilience of missions needs
to be further strengthened in view of possible health emergencies. In this context,
Poland highlights the importance of enhancing health-risk assessments, earlywarning and emergency response capabilities. We also underscore the importance of
early COVID-19 vaccination for all United Nations peacekeepers in order to protect
their safety, security and health and prevent the spread of the virus.
Improving medical standards, force protection and camp defence, as well as
addressing persistent security threats posed by improvised explosive devices, are,
among others, necessary conditions to strengthen peacekeepers’ safety and security.
However, adequate operational behaviour and mindset are equally as important.
Hence, Poland would like to highlight the crucial role of enhancing the
situational awareness, capacity-building and training of United Nations peacekeeping
personnel, including through the provision of solid, mission-specific predeployment
training in accordance with United Nations standards. Peacekeepers should be
equipped and trained in a way that enhances not only their performance but also
their safety and security. In-mission training methodologies need to be regularly
updated in order to address new security challenges and operational needs. We need
to ensure that personnel are aware of the risks and empowered to take the initiative
to deter, prevent and respond to attacks.
We also cannot underestimate the importance of United Nations peacekeeping
missions’ engagement with local authorities and communities in order to build trust.
In this context, Poland underlines the need for adequate strategic communications in
peacekeeping in order to counter the anti-United Nations propaganda.
Recognizing that safeguarding United Nations peacekeeping personnel
requires coordinated efforts, it is necessary to address their safety and security also
within the frameworks of partnerships between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations.
Poland remains a strong advocate of the women and peace and security
agenda and endorses all efforts aimed at ensuring the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women, including in United Nations peacekeeping. Therefore,
we cannot stress enough how important it is to take into consideration the needs
of women peacekeepers in order to ensure safe and enabling environments in
the missions.
In the spirit of the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative, we
agree that operational performance and the safety and security of peacekeepers are
strongly interlinked. It is pivotal that peacekeeping missions evolve their capabilities
and systems in order to remain agile and effective. Reviewing and ensuring the
uniformity of United Nations standards on training and performance is key in this
regard. Furthermore, Poland calls for continued efforts of the Secretariat to develop
clear policy and practices in the field of safety and security. In this context, we
welcome recently promulgated policies on casualty evacuation.
Finally, the safety and security of peacekeepers are a joint endeavour; only
coherent actions at both Headquarters and field levels, supported by concerted
political engagement, will allow us to achieve tangible progress in this issue of
paramount importance.
21-0701193/105

S/2021/501

Annex 47
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Portugal to
the United Nations, Nuno Vaultier Mathias
Portugal thanks China, in its capacity as President of the Security Council,
for organizing this open debate on an issue of the utmost importance. Peacekeeping
is one of the most effective tools available to the United Nations in the promotion
and maintenance of international peace and security. We all know that it comes
at a heavy cost, and we would like to pay tribute to all the fallen and injured Blue
Helmets and Blue Berets.
Portugal has maintained consistent participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and we are currently engaged in several missions. As such,
we are well aware that peacekeeping has become more and more demanding, as
we face new actors with new approaches in more complex and hostile operational
environments. We therefore need to generate efficient capabilities, including
specialized capabilities, that enable us to tackle new and emerging threats and ensure
both operational success and the safety and security of our peacekeepers.
Knowledge of the country, the conflict, the parts to the conflict and respective
modus operandi are essential to enhance safety and security in a peacekeeping
operation. Appropriate equipment, making use of technological developments and
ensuring the necessary capabilities for medical and casualty evacuation; appropriate
training before deployment; and information sharing and lessons learned during
induction, training and once deployed to the theatre of operations — all those aspects
are vital for peacekeepers to identify and assess threats and to take appropriate
measures to improve their situational awareness.
The training of our peacekeepers is a top priority for Portugal. We have in place
a holistic approach that includes predeployment, deployment and post-deployment
training. Prior to deployment, our peacekeepers undergo a six-month, missionoriented training programme on peacekeeping operations, rules of engagement, the
protection of civilians and the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse. Only
thorough and updated training ensures high standards, proper posture and effective
performance. We also invest in in-mission training, which gives our contingents the
tools to operate in their specific areas of deployment and to work together with the
other military and police contingents.
Moreover, when our peacekeepers return home, they go through a six-month
regeneration programme. The programme allows for an analysis of the accumulated
experience from the field, producing reliable lessons learned that are introduced in
subsequent predeployment training.
Let me conclude by assuring the Security Council that the safety and security
of peacekeepers will continue to be a priority to Portugal.

94/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 48
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
Let me begin by commending your leadership, Mr. President, in convening
today’s timely open debate on this critical issue. I would like to pay tribute to all the
peacekeepers who have selflessly served in United Nations peacekeeping missions
around the world, as well as to extend condolences to those who have fallen in the
line of duty.
Since peacekeepers are operating in increasingly complex and risky political
and security environments, the safety and security of Blue Helmets has become one
of the top priorities for the effective delivery of mandates. Accordingly, relevant
stakeholders, such as troop- and police-contributing countries, host countries, the
Security Council and the Secretariat, have an ever-growing responsibility to ensure
and enhance the safety and security of peacekeepers. In this vein, I would like to
emphasize the following three points.
First, we must leverage more advanced technologies for stronger performance
and improved safety and security for peacekeepers. Given the increasing number of
hostile acts targeting Blue Helmets, it is more important than ever to strengthen the
capability to identify threats early on and mitigate casualties. Technology should
be an integral part of our strategy to improve situational awareness and enhance
field support.
As such, the upcoming 2021 Peacekeeping Ministerial will highlight
technology and medical capacity as cross-cutting themes, which is in line with the
Secretariat’s initiative to develop a strategy for the digital transformation of United
Nations peacekeeping. The Seoul Ministerial in December will be a great opportunity
for Member States to generate tangible pledges related to technology and medical
capacity, both of which are vital for the safety and security of peacekeepers.
Secondly, host States should facilitate the free movement of United Nations
peacekeepers and their equipment consistent with the mandate, including for casualty
and medical evacuation purposes. There have been reported cases of violations of
status-of-forces agreements, including restrictions on peacekeepers’ movement
and delays in resupplying missions. Hindering the freedom of movement threatens
the safety and security of peacekeepers as well as the lives of the civilians that
peacekeepers are mandated to protect.
To prevent such restrictions and build trust with the host Governments, we
should consider engaging more actively with local communities through civilian
and military coordination activities. The experience of Korean peacekeepers
currently deployed to South Sudan and Lebanon shows us that such engagement can
not only improve the safety and security of our peacekeepers but also facilitate the
implementation of their mandate.
Thirdly, the Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing countries should
regard landmines and improvised explosive devices (IEDs) as a major threat to
peacekeepers. According to recent research on peacekeeping casualties, mine
threats, including IEDs, pose the most lethal threats to missions. As discussed in the
Security Council open debate on mine action and sustaining peace held on 8 April
(see S/2021/346), appropriate mine action is indispensable to upholding the peace
and security agenda.
In particular, substantial predeployment and in-mission training are essential
in countering and mitigating the threat of IEDs. Moreover, convoys and peacekeepers
should be supported by situational awareness and threat assessments before and
21-0701195/105

S/2021/501

during operations. To strengthen cooperation, the Secretariat and peacekeeping
missions should provide adequate information and technical advice to their respective
troop and police contributors.
The Republic of Korea is committed to maintaining international peace
and security and has contributed all the necessary means, including financing and
troops. We are actively exploring new areas and ways to enhance the safety and
security of peacekeepers, which will ultimately improve the overall performance of
peace operations. The Republic of Korea will play its part in strengthening peace
operations, while working closely with all relevant partners moving forward.

96/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 49
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Slovakia to the
United Nations, Michal Mlynár
Slovakia welcomes this open debate on improving the safety and security of
peacekeepers.
For more than 70 years, as an effective means for maintaining international
peace and security, United Nations peacekeeping operations have played an important
role in the political settlement of conflicts. The safety and security of those who
devote their lives to protect the peace, human rights and lives of civilians is our
ultimate responsibility. More action and concrete and practical steps are therefore
required for ensuring their safety.
In April this year during a Security Council working group meeting on the
occasion of the implementation of resolution 2518 (2020), we named and specified
concrete needs to improve the safety and security of peacekeepers.
Current safety and security risks that members of peacekeeping operations
often face include insufficient predeployment training, scarce material and
technological support and hidden caveats that still pose an unpredictable risk to the
military and police components of peacekeeping operations.
Slovakia lauds improvements that have been made, especially in the
establishment of assessments of troop readiness and force generation. Yet, more than
three years after the publication of the report by Lieutenant General (Retired) Carlos
Alberto dos Santos Cruz entitled Improving Security of United Nations Peacekeepers,
we are still struggling with predeployment training to conduct peacekeeping
operations, caveats and insufficient capacity for operations led primarily by
peacekeeping intelligence.
Over the past two decades, the scope and intensity of conflicts have changed
dramatically, peacekeeping operations have faced increasing challenges and
traditional and non-traditional security factors alike have posed serious threats to
the safety and security of peacekeepers.
Effective preparation for peacekeeping operations must begin with
preparation for the defence of one’s own State. Furthermore, situational awareness
in the field is crucial for peacekeeping operations, which are often deployed in
environments characterized by volatility, significant security risks and present
hostility. Maintaining situational awareness requires “feeling of the pulse” on local
communities, which can have significant impact of the entire peacekeeping process.
The implementation of Action for Peacekeeping Plus priorities — such as
accountability of peacekeepers, the generation of right capabilities and mindsets and
operational evaluation, with regular involvement of troop-contributing countries
and police-contributing countries — has the potential to further increase the
operationalization and effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.
The United Nations conducts peacekeeping operations in the twenty-first
century, and peacekeepers therefore need to be supported by technologies worthy
of the twenty-first century and must face conflict with a precautionary approach,
before offenders of the peace threaten their lives.
Slovakia strongly supports the equal and full participation of women in all
efforts to create and maintain international peace and security and calls for the full
implementation of all relevant Security Council resolutions that address this issue.
Slovakia has been an active troop- and police-contributing country since
its admission to the United Nations. Currently, we have peacekeepers deployed in
21-0701197/105

S/2021/501

the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus and in the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization. We have also participated in military and civilian missions
of the European Union, NATO and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe. I would like to highlight that the members of the Armed Forces of the
Slovak Republic in Cyprus — our biggest presence in a United Nations mission,
where we have been deployed for 20 years and since 2018 have been the sole troopcontributor in Sector 4 — already exceed the targets set in the Uniformed Gender
Parity Strategy for the period 2018 to 2028.
Furthermore, for many years already, Slovakia has identified security
sector reform (SSR) as one of the key elements for effective conflict prevention
and successful post-conflict rebuilding and stabilization. The direct experience
from many peacekeeping missions clearly shows that a nationally led and inclusive
SSR process can progressively deal with the root causes of insecurity and fragility
and create an enabling environment for sustainable development and peace to take
place. In addition, SSR is directly linked to the protection of civilians and the
rule of law — two critical tasks that have become an integral part of almost every
peacekeeping operation.

98/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 50
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Mathu Joyini
My delegation expresses its appreciation to the People’s Republic of China for
convening this meeting and for your willingness, Mr. President, to allow the broader
membership to engage on a matter that affects the women and men we deploy in
dangerous situations to fulfil the mandate of the Organization. We thank the briefers
for their informative briefings.
Peacekeeping remains an important tool in the international community’s
efforts to manage and resolve conflicts. As a troop- and police- contributing country,
we find the focus of our meeting on the safety and security of peacekeepers germane
to the evolving security threats and dangerous operational environment for our
peacekeepers, intensified by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. South
Africa would like to raise the following points in the context of the subject matter
being considered at this meeting.
We reiterate our support for resolution 2518 (2020), which focuses on the
importance of enhancing the safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers.
We impress upon all relevant stakeholders the importance of ensuring its full
implementation.
South Africa strongly condemns all malicious attacks that have resulted in
injury and loss of life among United Nations peacekeepers. We urge host States
to pursue the ends of justice whereby perpetrators are held accountable for those
atrocities. We also call for an end to the violations of status-of-forces agreements, as
some of those acts may compromise the safety and security of peacekeepers.
We call for enhanced measures to address casualties caused by occupational
safety and health hazards, including through the implementation of the comprehensive
Secretariat-wide occupational and health framework. It is in the interests of all
Member States to have in place a consolidated occupational safety and health incident
reporting system to collect information, record data and take remedial action.
We reiterate the critical importance of enhanced support to peacekeepers to
mitigate attacks and threats through appropriate training and capacity-building, as
well as through the use of modern and smart technology. It is imperative that the
United Nations form part of the predeployment training of contingents, in order to
enhance the level of training of troops.
We will have an opportunity to discuss the use of technology to enhance
the safety and security of peacekeepers at the United Nations sixth Partnership
for Technology in Peacekeeping Symposium, to be hosted by South Africa in the
first half of 2022. Preparations are under way to hold the event in Pretoria. We will
communicate the details regarding the logistics and dates in due course.
We recognize the need for early warning, peacekeeping intelligence/
information gathering and analysis to enhance the safety and security of peacekeepers.
Such an activity must be undertaken with the consent of the host State.
As a Champion of the women and peace and security agenda, we underline the
dire need to ensure a safe, enabling and gender-sensitive working environment for
women in peacekeeping operations.
We also would like to reiterate the importance of equitable access to COVID-19
vaccines for all peacekeeping personnel, based on their individual consent. It is also
important that diverse vaccines be utilized by the United Nations, as some vaccines
may not be effective on certain variants.
21-0701199/105

S/2021/501

Our final point is to buttress the importance of partnerships, especially between
the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations in coordinating and
collaborating on various areas pertaining to the safety and security of peacekeepers.
We see merit in the sharing of best practices, the pursuit of training and capacitybuilding between the United Nations and regional organizations, in particular the
African Union, as well among the regional groups and training centres.
We are also pleased to have joined the recently established Group of Friends
on the Safety and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers, made up of like-minded
countries, which is in pursuit of the overarching objective of ensuring the safety and
security of our peacekeepers.
In conclusion, South Africa pays tribute to the women and men who have
served in United Nations peacekeeping operations. Their commitment and dedication
have saved scores of lives and continues to do so during most unprecedented times.
We owe them a great deal of gratitude for their efforts.

100/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Annex 51
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Switzerland to the
United Nations, Pascale Baeriswyl
[Original: English and French]
I thank China for organizing this debate and the speakers for their contributions.
Significant progress has been made in reducing the risks for personnel
deployed in peacekeeping missions. However, we still deplore the unacceptable
number of casualties. Political progress in conflict resolution is the ultimate guarantor
of security. In parallel, we must redouble our efforts to enhance the security of
peacekeepers where political progress is slow, through the following measures:
First, every operation requires an early-warning system to identify threats.
To this end, we must strengthen intelligence in peacekeeping operations and
make full use of the normative framework established by the Secretariat. The
use of new technologies, such as drones or artificial intelligence, can help protect
missions. Furthermore, greater diversity within peacekeeping operations allows
for differentiated access to local communities, including through the increased
participation of women, and thereby helps obtaining a better overview of the
situation. We encourage the Council to adopt mandates that allow for the extensive
implementation of intelligence capabilities.
Secondly, safe and secure ammunition management is essential to protecting
peacekeepers and to preventing ammunition stockpiles from becoming a source for
improvised explosive devices (IEDs). Since 2015, Switzerland has been pursuing
a political initiative to raise awareness of this issue. We have supported Mali and
Bosnia and Herzegovina in particular and contributed to the development of the
United Nations International Ammunition Technical Guidelines. These constitute a
useful reference framework for the establishment of sustainable national ammunition
management, which is essential in transition contexts. The diversion of contingentowned equipment can also be used to build IEDs. The United Nations Manual on
Ammunition Management helps to harmonize the management of contingent-owned
stocks. Swiss experts participated in the development of this manual and support its
implementation. The Security Council has an important role to play in strengthening
ammunition management measures when mandating peace operations, through the
training of authorities and peacekeepers and based on the Technical Guidelines and
the Manual, especially in transition contexts.
Thirdly, the training of personnel is essential to minimize security risks. It
must be adapted to current threats and include modern technologies. Switzerland,
for example, complements predeployment training with tailor-made training in the
areas of IEDs and non-conventional weapons. Convoy protection, first aid and stress
management in hostile areas are also included. In addition, Switzerland contributes
to the Triangular Partnership Programme in the field of military engineering and
supports the digitalization of the Core Predeployment Training Modules. For over
15 years, Switzerland has also supported the African Union’s training centres of
excellence, which strengthen African peacekeeping capabilities.
Switzerland, as a member of the Group of Friends on the Safety and Security
of Peacekeepers and as a candidate for a seat on the Security Council, will stay
committed to protecting peacekeepers in the spirit of the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping initiative.

21-07011101/105

S/2021/501

Annex 52
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Thailand to the
United Nations
Thailand aligns itself with the statement submitted by Brazil on behalf of
the Group of Friends on the Safety and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers
(annex 19).
The Blue Helmets are the indispensable frontline to peacekeeping operations
and continue to operate in some of the harshest environments with continued
commitment, dedication and professionalism. We join other delegations in paying
tribute to them and to those who have paid the ultimate sacrifice for the cause
of peace.
As a longstanding troop-and police-contributing country (T/PCC), Thailand
fully supports the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative
and looks forward to its continued priority, including the development of the A4P+,
in furthering efforts to ensure the safety and security of peacekeepers. When
peacekeepers are safe, physically and mentally, they are more likely to succeed in
fulfilling their mandates.
Thailand also shares great concern over the recent increase in attacks on and
casualties among peacekeepers. We strongly condemn all acts of violence against
peacekeepers and call on host countries to effectively investigate and prosecute
those responsible. In this regard, Thailand wishes to highlight the following points:
First, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to impact not
only the health and well-being of peacekeepers, but also their best ability to operate.
Now that COVID-19 vaccines are increasingly available, it is our responsibility to
ensure timely access to vaccines for these essential frontline personnel. We thank
the Group of Friends on COVID-19 Vaccination for Uniformed Personnel for its
important work.
In addition to COVID-19 vaccines, ensuring adequate and prompt medical
support and services remains critical to the safety and security of peacekeepers.
The experience of our personnel also suggests that accessible, gender-sensitive
health care, as well as accommodation and equipment, are vital to the successful
participation of women peacekeepers.
Secondly, we must ensure quality predeployment trainings, including those
with mission-specific requirements, as well as the availability of additional Safe and
Secure Approaches in Field Environments trainings, as required.
For our part, Thailand has been developing United Nations-standard
predeployment training courses that will enable peacekeepers to handle various
situations, including crisis management in cases of attacks by armed groups, and
pandemic responses. Concurrently, the protection of civilians and the safety of
fellow peacekeepers remain the highest priority of our trainings.
Thirdly, nurturing trust with local communities is vital to the development
of situation awareness and early warning mechanism. In this regard, the Thai
Horizontal Military Engineering Company in the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan continues to support local community development in South Sudan, including
by sharing Thailand’s best practices on agriculture, water and land management
based on our home-grown development approach, the Sufficiency Economy
Philosophy, and constructing roads and other infrastructure, as well as COVID-19
screening facilities.

102/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

Above all, Thailand strongly believes that the safety and security of
peacekeepers can be achieved only through a strong, multi-stakeholder partnership
among the United Nations system, regional and subregional organizations, host
countries, and T/PCCs. Thailand stands ready to work closely with all partners in
this endeavour so that the Blue Helmets are safe, secure, and ready to fulfil their
mandates to the fullest of their abilities.

21-07011103/105

S/2021/501

Annex 53
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ukraine to the
United Nations
Ukraine highly appreciates the initiative of China to convene this open debate
and expresses its gratitude to the briefers for their presentations.
As we approach the International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers,
the issue of their safety and security appears to be among the most relevant to be
addressed. We perceive the Security Council’s discussion today as a manifestation of
the strong commitment to improving the Blue Helmets’ resilience to and protection
from any attack, violence, harassment, ill-treatment and misconduct.
Ukraine persistently reiterates its confidence in peacekeeping as one of the
United Nations most valuable assets and most efficient tools to respond to situations
of conflict and other security threats and challenges. In this regard, Ukraine remains
an active troop and police contributor, despite the need to defend its independence
and territorial integrity from foreign armed aggression.
We are therefore particularly concerned that the number of casualties among
peacekeeping personnel has remained unacceptably high over the past years. In
2020-2021, 182 peacekeepers have lost their lives. Ukrainian peacekeepers are also
on this sad list, including due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
We therefore must continue to explore all avenues for the improvement of
their safety and security, including on the basis of the resolution 2518 (2020) and the
Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative.
The A4P task to enhance the safety and security of peacekeepers has to
be addressed as a top priority, especially against the backdrop of COVID-19. We
welcome the inclusion of anti-pandemic elements into United Nations policies and
safety practices on the ground and support the need to ensure the swift vaccination
of personnel.
We also call for enhanced efforts to implement the provisions of resolution 2518
(2020), in particular with regard to addressing deficiencies in training, equipment,
leadership at all levels, performance and accountability, as well as in the medical
capacities of the missions. This is crucial to decrease risks to the safety and security
of peacekeepers, including the risk of fatalities.
Our efforts should also be aimed at developing intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance capabilities. That means both strengthening missions’ technical
capabilities and developing communications with local population to increase
situational awareness and preparedness. The intelligence system should stretch from
the field to Headquarters and utilize common platforms, modern technologies and
sufficient analysis capabilities.
In this regard, we take note of the request, made by the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations in its report (A75/19), adopted at this year’s session,
that the Secretariat complete in due course its peacekeeping technology strategy, in
close consultation with Member States, to better integrate the use of technologies to
improve the safety and security of peacekeepers.
The abovementioned report also contains a number of other valuable
conclusions and recommendations that should be duly implemented, including on
documentation of all attacks against peacekeepers and violations of status-of-forces
agreements; improving the security infrastructure of camps; and ensuring weapons
and ammunition management, proper predeployment trainings by troop- and
104/105

21-07011

S/2021/501

police-contributing countries, and the effective investigation and prosecution of
those responsible for attacks on United Nations personnel.
Ensuring adequate medical facilities to provide a dependable 10-1-2 casualty
response on a 24/7 basis remains another critical task. The work to ensure that
medical standards in United Nations peacekeeping operations are met must be
given priority.
As the concept note (S/2021/432, annex) rightly points out, the safety and
security of peacekeepers are a shared responsibility of the international community,
especially the Security Council, the Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing
countries, finance-contributing countries and host countries. It is only through
concerted action that we can improve the situation in this domain.
In conclusion, the delegation of Ukraine would like to reiterate that it will
remain a reliable partner in the United Nations peacekeeping endeavour, including
in improving the safety and security of United Nations uniformed and civilian
personnel on the ground.

21-07011105/105
