UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR
,.’
th
MEETING:

1 AUGUST

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

. . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . , . . . . ,. . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda , , . , . . , , . . . , . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
((I) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162);
(h) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent Representatives of Egypt
and France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15316) ,,,.*,,..,..*.,.......*......,t..*.*,........*

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2386)

SlPV.2386

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters cornbined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions und
Decisions qf the Security Comcil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2386th MEETING
eld in New York on Sunday, 1 August 1982, at 12.30 p.m.
Prr.sidcnt:

Mr. Noel DORR (Ireland).

Pwwnt:
The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.

Provisional

agenda

2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at previous meetings on this itetn [237dth,
237Sth, 2377th md 2384th rnr~~ti~~~ys], I invite the representatives of Lebanon and Israel to take places at the
Council table: I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a place at
the Council table: I invite the representatives of Egypt
and Pakistan to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.

(SIAgendal2386)

1.

Adoption of the agenda

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
01) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15162);
(A) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives of Egypt and France to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/l53 16)

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT:
At this first meeting of the
Council for the month of August, as I take the Chail
as President, I should like on behalf of the Council
and on my own behalf to pay the warmest tribute to
my precedessor, Mr. Noel Sinclair, the Permanent
Representative
of Guyana, who presided over the
Council during the month of July. We are all in agreement that he showed the greatest diplomatic skill, tact
and courtesy in conducting the business of the Council
last month, and I would ask the representative
of
Guyana to convey our thanks to him.
Adoption of the agenda

in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162);
(b) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives of Egypt and France to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15316)

3. The PRESIDENT:
This me’eting of the Council
has been canvened at the urgent request, made during
the night, of the representative of Lebanon in view of
the new and serious outbreak of fighting in and around
Beirut. I should like to thank the members of the
Council. On their behalf, I should like also to express
warm appreciation to the members of the Secretariat
and the various services for the promptness with which
they responded, at very short notice, to the request
for a Council meeting which I as President had to call
in the early hours of this morning.
4. Members of the Council have before them dacument S/15330, which has been prepared in the course
of the Council’s consultations.
5. I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/15322,
containing the text of a letter dated 29 July from the
representative of Cuba to the President of the Council: S/l5324 and S/15326, containing the text of letters
dated 29 and 30 July, respectively, from the representative of Lebanon to the President of the Council;
and S/15328 and S/15329, containing the text of letters
dated 30 July from the representative of Jordan to the
President of the Council.

The situation

6. Members of the Council have also received photocopies of a letter dated I August from the representative of Jordan to the President of the Council. It will
be issued as a document of the Council this afternoon
under the symbol S/ 15332.
7. As I have already mentioned,
representatives
have before them document S/15330, dated I August,

which is a draft resolution that has been drawn up
following consultations earlier this morning. It is my
understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution.
Unless I hear an
objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote
now, and allow those representatives
who wish to
speak to do so after the voting.

from west Beirut lscc S//5329, ~lnnr.\-1. we were
surprised by a ferocious Israeli attack.
“Our already bleeding city was attacked from
land, sea and air. Unprecedented destruction was
caused and death was again pursuing the tortured
innocent citizens who were trying to flee with their
children from street to street and house to house,

8. Before we proceed to the vote, I should point out
a small error in the text, which will be corrected in
the definitive copy of the draft resolution. This is the
omission from operative paragraph 3 of five words that
were, as I understood it as President, agreed in the
consultations
this morning. The words omitted are
“as soon as possible and”. The difference is not a
substantive one, but the text should include those
words. I call now read out the correct version of operative paragraph 3:

“Our people are all asking one simple question:
Why?
“Why
the renewal of this vicious, ferocious
shelling, which comes while 600,000 Lebanese have
been trying to survive without water, electricity
and food, for no crime they committed save their
belonging to a civilized homeland whose history
testifies to its faith in moral values, the principles
of international law, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights’ and the Charter of the United Nations as an instrument that should govern the future
of nations, particularly the smaller States such as
Lebanon.

“RP~LWS~S the Secretary-General
to report back to
the Security Council on compliance with this resolution as soon as possible and not later than four
hours from now.”

9. The Council will now vote on the draft resolution
in document S/15330.

“I am addressing you this morning in the name of
the people of Lebanon, the men and the women,
the aged and the children, who were all surprised.
by the spectre of death at sunrise.
“I am addressing all the peoples of the world.
I am addressing this appeal to the heads of State
and Government, to the Secretary-General
of the
United Nations, to the President and members of
the Security Council, asking them all to come tO
Lebanon’s rescue and to save an aggrieved people
besieged in its own capital city, devoured by the
Israeli war machine, despite Security Council resolutions calling for a cease-fire, a lifting of the blockade and the withdrawal of all forces.

10. The PRESIDENT:
I now call on the representative of Lebanon, at whose initiative we are meeting
here today and who has asked to make a statement.
I I, Mr. TUENI
(Lebanon): I congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency for this month.
We would have preferred not to have you begin your
duties at such an early hour. Members are aware that
I awakened you shortly after you had gone to bed,
and I think that the marvelous way in which you responded and have taken action has already produced
results, Your country is a friend of my country and
your valiant soldiers have been in Lebanon ever since
the establishment of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
Some have been martyred in
the cause of peace, and we hope that under your
presidency the Council will steer this whole issue to
a fortunate conclusion,

“What is now needed is an act of deliverance, It is
asked from each and all, particularly from the United
Nations in accordance with its principles, as our
last resort.
“The people of Lebanon is today the victim of an
unprecedented tragedy. Lebanon has been for se
long the arena of various regional and international
confrontations.
Let Lebanon’s case be today a
victory for rights and a vindication of human values
and the worth of human lives.”

12. Although I should address my thanks to you and
to all the Council members for having voted in favour
of the present resolution, I have not asked to speak
for that purpose, but merely to read an appeal issued
earlier this morning by the Prime Minister of Lebanon and addressed to the Security Council and to
all the Governments of the world.

The appeal is signed by Chafik Al-Wazzan,
Minister, President of the Council of Ministers
Lebanese Republic.

Prime
of the

13. I think that this appeal has already been heard
-at least in part. There is a cease-fire, and we have
a resolution.

“At dawn today, and as we were getting ready to
start implementing
the arrangements
decided at
Jeddah concerning the withdrawal of armed forces

14. The PRESIDENT:
I assure the representative
of Lebanon that I shall always be ready during my
2

month as President to respond, as best I can, at any
time of the day or night, but, like him, I hope for the
sake of his country that the occasion will not arise
very frequently.

all its military forces forthwith and unconditionally
to
the internationally
recognized boundaries of Lebanon;
to ask all Member States which are in a position to do
so to bring their influence to bear upon those concerned so that the cessation of hostilities declared by
Security Council resolution 490 (1981) could be respected; and, finally, to request the Secretary-General
to undertake all possible efforts to ensure the imptementation of and compliance with the relevant resolutions of the Council and to report to the Council as
early as possible.

15. Mr. KAMANDA
wa KAMANDA
(Zaire) (inloFwnch): Allow me first of all, Mr. President, to congratulate you most warmly and sincerely
on your accession to the presidency of the Council
for the month of August. Being personally acquainted
with your outstanding qualities as a diplomat and a
statesman, and knowing the devotion and sense of
responsibility
with which you discharge your functions as a Council member, I have not the slightest
doubt that the work of the Council under your presidency will be effective and responsible in these turbulent times, when appeals to the irrational are unfortunately matched by intoxication
with violence and
destruction throughout the world.
pwt~~timfiwn

.18. Today, Sunday, I August, two months after the
adoption of Council resolution 508 (1982), we again
have a new resolution before us in which it is stated,
in the third paragraph, that the Council is alarmed by
the continuation
and intensification
of military activities in and around Beirut, and, in paragraph I, that
the Council “confirms
its previous resolutions and
demands an immediate cease-fire, and a cessation of
all military activities within Lebanon and across the
Lebanese-Israeli
border”,
because apparently
all
appeals to reason continue to fall on deaf ears, which
is most distressing indeed.

16. Allow me next, Mr. President, to pay a deserved
tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Sinclair, of Guyana,
for the competence,
devotion and seriousness he
showed during the conduct of the Council’s work
during July of this year.

19. Lately, the proclamations
of cease-fires-unobserved-have
been alternating
dramaticahy
with
breaches of the cease-fire, which tends to create the
impression that we are confronted by a routine matter
that we can go along with and should, in fact, get
accustomed to. The delegation of Zaire rejects that
notion: this is no routine matter and, precisely because of its huge responsibility,
the Council cannot
go along with it. That is why we particularly
appreciate the insertion in resolution 516 (1982) of paragraph 2, which authorizes the Secretary-General
to
deploy immediately,
on the request of the Government of Lebanon, United Nations observers to monitor the situation in and around Beirut.

17. Is there anyone with a heart and common sense
-indeed,
anyone at all-who would not be moved by
the situation now prevailing in Beirut and in Lebanon,
or by the political, socio-economic and humanitarian
problems resulting from it? So tragic is the situation
that it has already obliged us, the members of the
Council-first
of all, in humanitarian
terms-to
call
for respect for the humanitarian
principles of the
Geneva Conventions
of 19492 and the obligations
arising from the regulation annexed to the Hague Convention of 1907$ to ask that the rights of the civilian
populations
be respected without any discrimination
and to condemn the acts of violence against those
populations;
to demand that the Israeli Government
immediately
lift its siege of Beirut so as to make it
possible to send in supplies to meet the urgent needs
of the civilian populations and to allow the distribution of relief assistance by United Nations bodies and
non-governmental
organizations-in
particular,
the
International
Red Cross; to ask for restoration of
the normal supply of such essential services as water,
electricity,
food and medical provisions; to appeal to
Member
States to continue to provide the broadest
possible
humanitarian
assistance; and, finally, to
emphasize
the special humanitarian responsibilities of
the United
Nations and its agencies towards the
civilian
populations
and to call on all parties to the
conflict not to hinder the exercise of those responsibilities
but to contribute to the humanitarian
efforts
being undertaken.
Secondly, in basic political terms
and in view of the breach of peace, we were obliged
to call upon all parties to the conflict to cease immediately
and simultaneously
all military
activities
within
Lebanon
and across the Lebanese-Israeli
border and no later than 0600 hours, local time, on
Sunday, 6 June 1982; to demand that Israel withdraw

20. Council members having been unanimous
in
considering that as the only concrete measure which
we can take at this stage in order to cope with the
emergency, we went along with that opinion, and we
wish to believe that it will be a positive step towards
ending the cycle of intoxication
with violence in and
around Beirut, a step which will contribute to creating
favourable conditions in which to continue the negotiations under way. I have told the President that that is
the spirit in which the delegation of Zaire gave its
agreement to the draft resolution we havejust adopted.
21. The PRESIDENT:
tative of Israel.

I call now on the represen-

22. Mr. BLUM
(Israel): Permit me, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption some hours ago of
the presidency of the Council for this month of August.
We feel confident that you will discharge your onerous task with your customary skill, responsibility
and
devotion.
3

23, My Government
has repeatedly indicated in
recent weeks its readiness to maintain and observe
a cease-fire throughout Lebanon, provided that such
cease-fire is not a one-sided one and is in fact observed by all. As is well known, the terrorists repeatedly and consistently violated the various cease-fires
that went into effect in recent weeks. Most of these
violations occurred in the Beirut sector, while some
occurred in other parts of Lebanon, on the instructions of the terrorist command in west Beirut.

31.

I wish to pay tribute also to the performance of
the President of the Council for the month of July,
Mr. Noel Sinclair. His active, conscientious and wise
leadership has enhanced the Council’s
role and
standing, especially at this crucial juncture of world
developments.
32. While intensive Arab and international efforts
are being conducted with a view to dealing objectively
and positively with the dangerous situation in Reirut.
and amid some positive developments engendered by
the decisions of the Arab Foreign Ministers’ meeting
at Jeddah on 29 July [src S/1532Y, rrn/~j.u], Israel has
chosen to resort again to its policy of foiling whatever
options have been offered and closing doors about
to be opened.

24. In the course of yesterday, there occurred a
number of cease-fire violations by the terrorists in the
Beirut area. At first, the Israel Defence Forces did not
respond to these provocations.
Later in the day,
according to reports of news agencies from Beirut,
the terrorist chieftain in west Beirut told his followers
to prepare for an all-out Israel attack, which, he maintained, was imminent.

33. It is upon instructions from my Government
that I speak here today to condemn in the strongest
terms the new aggression by Israel against west Beirut
and its civilian population,
and against the PLO.
Pal-adoxically,
this aggression took place after the
PLO leadership announced in the clearest possible
terms its readiness to co-operate towards solving the
current situation in west Beirut; it is a party to the
Jeddah communiquk.
We wonder why Israel chose
to embark upon its all-out attack against the Palestinian and Lebanese people in west Beirut at this very
moment.
Was it because a glimmer of hope was
emerging? Or was it because the leadership of the
PLO has succeeded in its efforts and struggle to focus
on the central point of the whole problem: Palestinian
national rights and the unquestionable
right of the
Palestinians to self-determination?

25. It thus became clear that the terrorists were
deliberately
escalating the situation in the Beirut
sector. And, in fact, at 2 a.m., local time, last night,
they started a heavy shelling of the area held by the
Israel Defence Forces.
26. Since the terrorists had thus again ignored our
repeated warnings that there would be no one-sided
cease-fire, the Israel Defence Forces were instructed
to respond firmly to the terrorist violations of the
cease-fire. There was no intention-and
there is none
at this time-for
the Israel Defence Forces to move
into west Beirut. The Israel Defence Forces were not
advancing into west Beirut: they were merely responding to the terrorist violations and provocations.

34. In any case, we call upon the Council to take n
firm stand against the Israeli policies of aggression
and to give a firm warning that if such practices continue the Council will take the necessary steps. WC
firmly support the demand of the Council for an immediate cease-fire. We support the Council’s decision to
request the Secretary-General
to make immediate
contact with all the parties to the conflict to arrange
immediate and sustained compliance with the ceasefire, and to report to the Council today, and preferably on an hourly basis. We support the Council’s
authorizing
the Secretary-General
to use United
Nations machinery to help supervise the situation
and the implementation
of the cease-fire that has been
ordered.

27. Several hours ago, my Government proposed a
new cease-fire to go into effect at 5 p.m., local time,
corresponding to I I a.m., New York time, provided
that such cease-fire would be absolute and mutual,
However, should the terrorists or any other party
violate the cease-fire, the Israel Defence Forces will
return the fire directed at them.
28. According to the information
that reached me
from Jerusalem one hour ago, a cease-fire had in fact
gone into effect in the Beirut sector at 5 p.m., local
time, corresponding to I I a.m., New York time.
29. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

35. The hour is grave: the situation is serious. It calls
for action, not words. I am confident that the action to
be taken by the Council at this hour will be supported
by all peoples and Governments which are ready to
shoulder their responsibilities to peace and security in
the world.

30. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID
(Egypt): Mr. President,
it was with deep appreciation that we learned of your
response to the request to convene an urgent meeting
of the Council to consider the serious situation in
Beirut. Your prompt action and wise reaction reflect
your deep sense of duty and the efficiency for which
YOU are known. We wish you success as President
of the Council for the month of August.

36. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
fimn
Russitrn):
Allow me
to welcome you, Sir, to the post of President of the
Council for the month of August and to wish You
4

success in carrying out the responsible tasks involved
in guiding the work of the Council during this exceedingly complicated period.

Council demanding that Israel immediately
blockade of Beirut [r’rso/rrtio/? 5/5 (1Y82) 1.

lift its

“In this connection, the co-operation
between
Israel and the United States. which alone out of all
the members of the Security Council did not support the demand to lift the blockade and thereby
gave the ruling clique in Israel a free hand to storm
the Lebanese capital, has once again been particularly clearly demonstrated. The aggressor built up
its forces for this attack under the cover of the
‘peace-making’
efforts of the United States Administration.
All of these convincingly
demonstrate
that Washington, as well as Tel Aviv, bears the
responsibility for this crime.

37. We should like also to express gratitude to your
predecessor,
Mr. Sinclair, for his competent and
energetic guidance of the Council’s work during the
month of July.
38. The Council has been convened today in an
urgent meeting in connection with the new massive
aggressive action by Israel in Lebanon. In recent
hours, the Israeli forces have broken the eighth ceasefire agreement,
have subjected to harsh bombardment the city of Beirut, the capital of Lebanon, to
which they have laid siege, and have carried out
attacks on that city from many directions. According
to information
we have received, the Israeli occupiers
again made extensive use during this latest operation
of the most barbarous types of modern American
weaponry:
cluster and phosphorous bombs. Once
again, completely
innocent people are dying. The
blood of women and children and old people is being
shed.

“The criminal acts of the Israeli militarists
in
Lebanon, which are being carried out with the complicity of the United States, arouse indignation and
anger throughout the world, sow new seeds of hatred
and enmity in the Middle East, and deepen Ihe gulf
between Israel and the Arab Governments
and
peoples.
“The conscience of mankind, of all who cannot
remain indifferent to the grief and suffering of people, demands the immediate
halting of the mass
murders being committed by the savage aggressor
on Lebanese soil. Israel, through its crimes, is in
fact placing itself outside the international
community, whose will and demands it blatantly and
insolently defies.

39. ’ Israel’s actions constitute another, extremely
crude, violation of all the resolutions which have been
adopted by the Council from the moment the Israeli
forces invaded Lebanon. The ink on resolution 515
( l982), demanding that Israel lift the siege of Beirut,
had not yet dried when the Israeli war machine began
r7 new stage in its bloody war in Lebanon. That fact
speaks eloquently
for itself. It is testimony to Tel
Aviv’s
determination
to continue by any means its
Policy
of genocide against the Lebanese and Palestinian populations and physically to destroy the PLO.
It goes without saying that Ihe Zionist leadership of
Israel would not behave so brazenly and provocatively
if its protectors from abroad, from here in the United
States,
had so much as lifted their little finger to
prevent new Israeli aggression.

“The leading circles of the Soviet Union consider that it is no longer possible to postpone taking
effective measures to halt the aggression. The Security Council must urgently consider and take with
regard to the aggressor all the coercive measures
provided for in the Charter of the United Nations.
“The aggression
c1nncJ.v.]

40.
I should like to read out a statement from TASS
that has just been received by the Mission of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics to the United Nations:

must

be halted.”

[+S/1.5346,

41. The Soviet delegation supported the draft resolution that the Council has just adopted, which calls
for the adoption of immediate
measures to prevent
the further escalation of Israel’s aggressive actions in
Lebanon, including the sending of United Nations
military
observers to monitor the situation in and
around Beirut. The Council will have to ensure implementation of the resolution and its earlier decisions
by making use of the means available to it under
Chapter VII of the Charter.

“Israeli
forces have begun a large-scale attack
against besieged west Beirut. The assault forces
of the Israeli army-tanks,
aircraft, artillery, warships-have
been launched against the courageous
defenders of the city, The number of victims among
the peaceful population of the city is increasing,
apartment
blocks are being destroyed, even hospitals are being subjected to the criminal attack.
Artillery
fire is being directed at the areas where
foreign embassies are located. The Israeli barbarians in Beirut are now committing veritable genocide with regard to the Lebanese and Palestinian
peoples.

42, The PRESIDENT:
I now call upon the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
43. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
Mr. President, early this morning, almost I2 hours ago,
we were awakened-as
I am sure you were-and
deeply concerned and alarmed by news received from
Beirut about the situation in that city. That happened
only 2 hours after you had assumed the responsibility
of presiding over the Council for the month of August.

“The destruction of the capital of Lebanon is the
latest
monstrous
crime of the Israeli militarists,
which is being committed with cynical disregard for
the resolution
recently adopted by the Security
5

I do not know whether I should congratulate You,
but I can say with certainty that your stewardship of
the Council will lead it to assume its responsibilities
and adopt practical ways and means to bring this
misery and this war to an end.
44. On 29 July, the Council adopted a resolution
calling for the lifting of the siege of Beirut [~solr/lion
515 t/982)]. The Council was informed of an agreement reached in Jeddah [WC S/1533/, WWWS]. We were
all optimistic: we hoped that peace would again reign
in the area. But apparently
the developments
in
Jeddah, which observers considered to be very positive, were answered by the neo-Nazis with some
savage attacks which caught unaware scores of Beirut
civilians who had hoped to benefit from the relative
calm to secure basic needs. As a result of that mad
attack, undertaken with the blessing and support of the
United States, tens and maybe hundreds of Beirut
civilians were killed and wounded.
45. Israel’s response to the agreement in Jeddah
was demonstrated when Israeli forces around Beirut
launched their most vicious and murderous bombardment of the city’s western sector. The whole array of
United States weaponry at the disposal of the Israeli
forces was employed in attacks from land, sea and air.
46. The preliminary
estimate of the number of
bombs and shells of various calibres poured into west
Beirut on 30 and 31 July is in the order of 80,000, and
that clearly tallies with the scenes of destruction
wrought by Israel and witnessed in Beirut. Fires
raged out of control in many areas, and fire-fighters
were paralysed by the lack of water imposed on Beirut
by Israeli forces. We all know that on 29 July the
Council demanded the lifting of the siege. Yet the
fire-fighters had no water to fight those fires.
47. It was in the light of this attack and of further
information
that Chairman Yasser Arafat convened
the Palestinian and Lebanese freedom fighters and
defenders of the city of Beirut and told them of the
information and reports received from various world
capitals. Orders were issued to all commanders of the
military
sectors to reinforce and consolidate
the
defences of west Beirut, and that was a critical step
with far-reaching implications.
Thus the meeting of
the supreme command was not in preparation
fat
aggression but to confront aggression,

Nations,

New York

49. So it can be seen that the Israeli plan, design and
policy to burn out Beirut and to massacre in cold blood
hundreds of civilians there is continuing.
50. It seems that in our discussions here we are
completely forgetting the resolutions adopted by the
Council calling for the complete and unconditional
withdrawal of Israel from Lebanon. Again I wish to
repeat that the issue-the
main, real issue-is the
presence of 120,000 Israeli troops, forces of inv&ion,
on Lebanese territory. One really should not be misled
into concentrating only on Beirut but should be aware,
for certain, that there are 120,000 Israeli troops in Lebanon. As I said the other day, the issue is their wishdrawal and the sovereignty and independence
of
Lebanon. In the final analysis, the issue is the future
of the Palestinian and Lebanese peoples.
5 I. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
Israel, who wishes to speak in exercise of the right
of reply.
52. Mr. BLUM (Israel): I was profoundly impressed
with the fact that the representative of the Soviet
Union was good enough to read out a press statement
from TASS, which is well known for its independence. That was indeed a very substantial contribution, which added significantly
to his statement,
I wish to assure the representative of the Soviet Union
that his statement and the TASS statement carry the
same weight and credibility.
53. The PRESIDENT:
I should like again to thank
members of the Council for their prompt response to
my call for a meeting in the early hours of this morning
and for their co-operation earlier this morning here in
the effort to agree quickly on a response by the Council to a serious and urgent situation. I should also
like to thank again, on my own behalf and on their
behalf, the Secretariat and the staff of the various services associated with our work here for their co-operation in coming here on short notice and helping to
enable our meeting to take place.

48. The Beirut sector has been, and still is, constantly under fire and threat by the Israeli forces. This
morning the reports received by the leadership of the
PLO and the joint command that they would have to
defend Beirut proved to be true. Israeli forces around
Beirut broke the cease-fire again at 3 o’clock this
morning. Beirut time, and escalated their aggression
at 5 a.m., when enemy aeroplanes-Israeli
planes,
American planes piloted by Israelis-began
air strikes
against a number of areas, all of them civilian areas,
in Beirut. At 7.30 a.m. the Israeli attacking forces
stepped up their pressure against Beirut again. At
Litho in United

IO a.m. there were fierce battles raging along the
main axis of the Israeli assault against west Beirut and
they continued until late this afternoon. The combatants of the joint forces repulsed the sixth Israeli
attack on Beirut within hours, and fresh Israeli forces
were brought in at about 2.30 p.m. They amounted
to one mechanized brigade, which entered the battle,
Israeli aeroplanes continued their intensive support
missions in the area.

NOTES

’ General
Assembly
resolution
217 A (111).
2 United Nations,
T~trry SL&S,
vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
’ Carnegie
Endowment
for International
Peace,
T/Ic~ HtrW
C'ow~r~tionr
trnd
t.kc/ortrtion.~
qf IRYY md
16~07 (New
York,
Oxford
University
Press, 1915).
00300

X8-6098Y-June

IYHY--2850
