15 de-cem bre 1946

lOins, cet iJnCD..

La ad\-ma in:
me fo' de .
Jc:rgen~ d'
Id refugiea

1431

Soixante-septieme seance pteniere

States Memb ers of the United Nations, the certains pays
Membr es des Nations Unies; etant
fact that respon sible administrators in camps donne que le
personnel qui a ete designe pour
are not suited to their posts and a numbe r of administrer
ces camps ne convient pas et que
other causes which hinder the solution of the d'autre s causes
encore retarde nt la solution du
refuge e problem~ and also bearing in mind that probU:me
des refugies; considerant enfin que les
the repres entativ es of certain other States are representants
de certains pays essaient de
endea vourin g to challen ge these facts, the Soviet .contester ces
faits, la deh~gation sovietique a
delega tion consid ered it necessary to submit a juge necessaire de
proposer a l'Assemblee genepropos al to the Genera l Assembly to establish rale la
creation et I'envoi aupres des refugies
and to send to refugee assembly points, a special d'une commis
sion speciale composee de quelques
comm ission , consist ing of several persons, in- membres, notamm
ent de rcpresentants des pays
cludin g repres entativ es of the native countries dont les refugies sont
originaires. Cette commis·o{ the refuge es, in order that this commission sion devait avoir la
possibilite d'etudier soimight invest igate careful ly the actual situation gneusement, sur place,
la situati onreel le et de
on the spot and suggest the measures necessary proposer Ies mesures necessaires
pour contribuer
to promo te a solutio n of the refugee problem.
a
la solution du probleme des refugies.
Howe ver, this propos al also was not adopted.
Mais cette propos ition sovietique n'a pas ete
It is obviou s that not everyone wishes to in- acceptee non plus. On voit
que tout le monde
vestiga te the situatio n on the spot and to reveal n'est pas dispose a etudier
la situation sur. place
the true facts which, for some reason, are being et a mettre au grand jour les faits
que l'on
concea led from public opinion .
dissimule actuellement al'opinion publique~ pour
je ne sais queUes raisons.
Takin g into accoun t t.he urgency of the situaTenan t compte de la situation cntIque des
tion of displa ced persons and the obstacles personnes deplacees, des obstacles que 1'0n
which lie in the path of their repatriation, and accumule pour empecher leur. rapatri ement et
bearin g in mind the serious shortcomings of the des graves imperfections que comporte le projet
draft consti tution of the Refugee Organi zation, de constitution de l'Organ isation pour les refuthe Soviet delega tion voted against the adoption gies, la delegation sovietique s'est prononcee
of this consti tution and the relevant resolution contre l'adopt ion de cette constitution et de la
both in the Third Comm ittee and at the Gen- resolution correspondant e lors du vote qui a eu
~ral Assem bly, since that constitution does not lieu a la Troisieme Commission. Elle s'y oppose
ensure the solutio n of the problem of refugees egalement a l'Assemblee generale~ car cette
constitution est loin cl'assurer la solution du proand displa ced persons.
bleme des refugies et des personnes deplacees. .
La suite de la discussion est remise la seance
The contin uation of the discussion was adsuivante.
journe d to the next meetin g.
La seance est levee 19 h. 15.
The meetin g rose at 7: 15 p.m.

a

a

SIXTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING
H~ld on Sunda y, 15 Decem ber 1946, at 8.30 p.m.

Tenue le dimanche 15 decembre 1946,
20 h. 30.

a

TABLES DES MATIEa ES

CONTE NTS

I

SOJXANTE-SEPTIEME SEANCE PLENIERE

PGI'

P4 Z_S

205. Refug ees and displace.d persons: report
of the Third CommIttee: resolutIOns.
Financ ial and budgetary questions relating to the Interna tional .Refugee ~r­
ganiza tion: report of the FIfth CommIttee: resolution (continuation of the
discuss ion)
1432
206. Measu res to economize the time of the
, Gener al Assembly: report of the General Comm ittee: resolution
· .1454
207. Admis sion of Siam to membershiGP in
the United Nation s: report of the eneral Comm ittee: resolution
· .1158
208. Questi on of holding the second relgul~r .
session of the General Assemb y III '
Europ e
1459
209. Rules governing the. addmNissio.n of nAew
Memb ers to the Umte
atlons. ppointm ent of members to the Conumttee on proced ure
1166

205. Refugies et personnes deplacees. Rap.port de la Tro~siem~ Co~ission. Resolutions. QuestIons fmancleres et budgetaires concemant I'Organisation internationale pour les refugies. Rapport.de
la Cinquieme Commission. ResolutIon
(suite de la discussion)
1432
Mesure
s
destinee
s
a
econom
iser
le temps
206.
de l' Assemblee generale. Rapport du
.
Bureau. Resolution
1454
207. Admission du Siam a l'Organisation des
Nations Unies. Rappo rt du Bureau.
Resolut ion

\

1458

208. Question de la convocation en Europe
de la seconde session ordinaire de l' AssembIee generale
1459
Regles
pour
I'admis
sio~
de
nouve~
ux
209.
Membres de l'OrganisatlOn des NatIons
\
Unies. Nomination des membres de la
Commission de procedure
;
1466

Sixty-seventh PJenary Meeting

1432
PiZl6

210. Closing speeches.

Speeches by Mr.

Austin, representative of the :United
States of America; Mr. Trygve Lie, Sec·
retary-GeneraI; Mr. P.·H. Spaak, President of the Assembly
,.,
1467

15 December 1946

P.,6l
210. Ducours de cloture: M. Austin, Repre-

sentant des

Etats-Unis d'Amerique;

M. Trygve Lie, Secretaire general
M. P.-H. Spaak, President de l'Assem-

blee ...•. , ..••.•......••....•..... 1467

President: Mr. P.-H. SPAAK (Belgium).

President: M. P.-H. SPAAK (Belgique).

205. Refugees and dispJaced persons:
report of the Third Committee: resolutions (document A/265). Financial
and budgetary questions relating to
the International Refugee Organization: report of the Fifth Commiflee:
resolution (document A/275) (continuation of the discussion)

205. Refugies et personnes deplacees.
Rapport de la Troisieme Commission.
Resolutions (d«ument A / 2 6 5 ) •
Questions flnancieres et budgetaires
concemant l'Organisation intemaflonale pour les refugies. Rapport de IQ
Cinquit~me Commission. Resolution
(document A/27S) (suite de la disc-ussion)

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
According to the agenda we should continue
with the discussion of the reports of the: Third
and Fifth Committees on the refugee question
(annexes 96 and 97).

I call upon Mr. Martin, representative of
Canada.

Mr. MARTIN (Canada): Following as I do
the representative of the Soviet Union at this
rostrum, and after listening to his speech, I would
remind the Assembly not to forget the great
words of that great woman, Mrs. Roosevelt,
when she introduced the discussion which is now
under way. Everything that has been said by
the last speaker mayor may not be true, may
or may not be accurate, but it hardly touches
the issue which I think we are called upon to
deal with in considering the proposed constitution of the International Refugee Organization.

Le PREsIDENT: L'ordre du jour appelle la
suite de la discussion des rapports des Troisieme
et Cinquieme Comm' .ons sur la question des
refugies (annexes 96 et 9i).

Je donne la parole a M. Martin, representant
du Canada.

M. MARTIN (Canada) (traduit de {'anglair):
Comme je prends la parole apres le rcp~­
tant de l'Union Sovietique dont j'ai ecoute attentivement le discours, je voudrais demander
a ceUe Assemblee de ne pas oublier les fortes
paroles que cette femme de ca:ur qu'est
Mme Roosevelt a prononcecs lorsqu'dle a
ouvert la discussion qui se dcroule 3ctuclIement.
Tout ce que le demier orateur a dit peut tre
vrai ou faux, exact ou inexact, mais it n'a fait
qu'effieurer le probleme que, it. mon avis, nous
avons a traiter en examinant le projel de
constitution de l'OrganL'l3tion internationah:
pour les refugies.

Let us recall certain words of Mrs. Roosevelt,
Rappe1ons-nou.'l certaines paroles que Mme
speaking in the name of the United States. Roosevelt a prononcees au nom des f:tats-Unis.
This As.~embly has before it perhaps no greater Si 1'on envi'iage le; taches qui demandent, de la
problem requiring immediate action. The gl'eat part de l'Assemblee, radoption de: meclurts imissues of disarmament, the veto and th~ like mediates, il me semble que panni le<l problbno
have a long-term value and are of great import- dont eIle est sai.'iie, il n'y en a pent-ctre pas de
ance, but we are dealing now, immediately, as plus important que celui qui nous occupe. Lcs
she said, with one of the unfinished tasks of the grandes questions du d6armerncnt, le veto et
war and it would not do for us to debate this is- les autres problemes du meme genre garderont
sue much longer. Over a million people are longtemps encore leur importance, et leuT portb:
looking to us for some determined action to est grande; mais noUB avoIlS a traiter actueUedetermine their fate. As Mrs. Rooseve1t said, ment, immediatement, pour reprendre les lermc:s
we are not passing judgment on the plan to take de Mme Roosevelt. llne tache encore inach~'ee
care of refugees. That plan will be submitted parmi celles que la guerre nous a imJX*c:s; i1
for final approval, or rejection by Governments. ne convient done pas d'en prolons::cr trap longBut we have now had a long, interminable dis- temps la discussion. Plus d'un million de per-cussion on the constitution of the IRa, in which sonnes ant les yeux fixes sur nous, escompt:ant
those who have had varying views have had an de notre part une action pre.cise qui decidera de
opportunity of presenting them.
1eur sort. Mme Roosevelt I'a dit, uousne nous
pronon!,ons pas sur le programme ctabli pour
l'aide au.'C refugies, programme qui sera solunis
aux Gouvemements auxquels il appartiendra de
l'approuver ou de le rejeter de fa~on definitive.
En tout cas nom venous d'avoir nne tongue,
une intenninable discussion sur la constitution
de rOIR au COUI'S de laquelle les different.'!
points de vue ant pu s'cxprimer.

15 decembr.

Last Sep"1
Council, fa:
debated th

was debat{;
d I thin

ternationc
ecision an
this problel
immediate
t on its
the United
,oC that cou
the great
has regard

There i.J
proposed
right of v
sacredly a1
that right:
there shaI
refugee cl
Surely tho
repatriatic
no compl.:

which wo

internatio
nor is it

IRO, to
proved tl

\'antages l
camps. '"I
examinati
can be
traitors.

c.on.c;tituti
than to 1

relief to
world 'Wl
a.·;sembIy

I jOID<
Union a:
tries in "U
Kingdor
on an iJ
country
Canada.
that pIe:
,,,'hich ]
If ther<
relief a'
UNRR
follow .:<
that thi
should
. and in1

Our
the Tb
the va
and h::
so mu<
it is es
session

IRQ,

146

I'"

es.
)R.

I.
res
iDla

on
115-

la
me
des

iUlt

r) :
en·
atder

ies
'est
a

:nt.
:!re

:ait
)US

de
.ale

me

lis.
la

m·

les
de
,es
et
ot

er.

e·
es
ee

iI

7.

)

r·
It

.e

~

r

s

15 decembre 1946

1433

Last September, in the Economic and Social
Council, following the meetings in London, we
debated this constitution in great detail. It
was debated again in the Third Committee
and I think that, enjoying as we do in this
international Assembly the normal processes of
decision and bearing in mind the urgency of
this problem, we should be prepared to give it
immediate acceptance so that the IRO can
get on its way, and so, my country joins with
the United States and the distinguished citizen
of that country in urging this Assembly to realize
the great opportunity for deep service that it
has regarding this great issue.

Soixante-septieme seance pleniere

En septernbre dernier, au Conseil economi-:que et social, a la suite des reunions de Londres,
nous avons discute en detail cette constitution.
Elle a ete de nouveau discutee au sein de la
Troisieme Commission et j'estime que puisque
nous disposons a cette Assemblee internationale
d'une procedure normale de deliberation et que
nous connaissons le caractere d'urgence de ce·
probleme, nous devrions ctre disposes a donner
a cette constitution notre approbation immediate afin que l'OIR puisse ctre mise sur pied.
Mon pays se joint done aux Etats-Vnis, rei)fC~­
sentes ici par une personnalite eminente, pour
demander a l'Assemblee de comprendre que les
circonstances lui offrent la possibilite de servir
d'une noble maniere cette grande cause.
There is no question, in the IRO or in its
Il n'est question ni pour l'OIR ni pour la
proposed constitution, of interfering with the constitution proposee de tOJ,lcher au droit de
right of voluntary repatriation. That right is rapatriement volontaire. Ce droit est observe
sacredly observed; but on the other hand, while de fa~on rigoureuse, mais, tout en l'observant,
that right is observed, it ie; also insisted that on insiste, d'autre part, sur le fait que parmi
there shall be no group of people within the les refugies, aucun groupe de personnes ne sera
refugee class who shall be forcibly repatriated. contraint de se laisser rapatrier. Assurement,
Surely those two principles, the one of voluntary ces deux principes, celui du rapatriement volonrepatriation and the other that there should be taire et celui qui exclut le rapatriement obligano compulsory repatriation, are two principles toire, sont deux principes qui joueraient un rOle
which would be basic in the operations of any essentiel dans les travaux de toute assernblee
international assembly. There is no decision, internationale. Il n'y a, dans la constitution de
nor is it intended, . in the constitution of the l'OIR, aucune decision, aucune intention d'acIRO, to give to men and women who have corder les avantages generalement assures aux
proved themselves quislings or traitors the ad- personnes qui vivent dans les camps de re£ugies,
vantages enjoyed by other persons in the refugee a des hommes ou a des femmes qui se sont
camps. Those people will be subjected to proper reveles des quislings au des traitres; leur cas fera
examination to determine whether or not they l'objet d'un examen approprie en vue de decan be accused of having been quislings or terminer si l'accusation portee contre eux est ou
traitors. What it is proposed to do in this non fondee. L' objet de ceUe constitution est
constitution, in essence purely, is nothing more essentiellement et uniquement de resoudre le
than to meet the immediate problem of giving probleme immediat qui consiste a secourir le
relief to a million men and women in the million d'hommes et de femmes qui, dans le
world who have the right to ask an international monde, ont le droit de demander a une assembUe intemationale de ne pas oublier leur situaassembly not to overlook their position.
tion.
Je me suis joint aux representants de l'Unlon
I joined with the representative of the Soviet
Union and with a great number of other cgun- sovietique et d'un grand nombre d'autres pays
tries in urging the United States and the United pour demander instamment aux Etats-Unis et
Kingdom to set up a post-war relief organization au Royaume-Vni de mettre sur pied une organion an international basis. I do not think any sation de secours d'apres-guerre etablie sur une
country was more active in that plea than base internationale. Je doute qu'aucun pays ait
Canada. Is it too much that I should renew fait un appel plus pressant que le Canada. Est-cc
that plea to others in respect of another problem trop demander que de renouveler cet appel a
which requires, I think, international action? d'autres pays au sujet d'un autre probleme, qui,
If there was justification for urging post-war .le crois, necessite une action internationale? Si
relief after the cessation of the operations of les secours d'apres-guerre se justifient apres la
UNRRA, then international organization should cessation de l'activite de l'VNRRA, il faudrait
follow as a consequence. Is it too much to ask qu'a cette institution succedat une organisation
that this vital problem-and that is what it is- internationale. Est-ce trop demander que ce
should be tackled by international organization probleme vital- et c'est bien d'un probleme
vital qu'il s'agit:"'- soit traite par une organisaand international action?
tion internationale et suivant des mesures prises
sur le plan international?
Notre delegation a eu l'occasion, au sein de
Our delegation ·has had the opportunity, in
the Third Committee, of expressing its views on la Troisieme Commission, d'exprimer son opithe various articles of the IRO constitution nion sur les differents articles de la Constitution
and has done so. It is only because we attach de l'OIR et dIe n'a pas manque de le faire.
~o much importance to this subject that I think Seule l'importance que nous attachons a cette
It is essential that we state here, in this plenary question me fait dire qu'il est essentiel que nous
session, our reasons for voting in favour of the exposions a cette seance pleniere nos raisons
IRO, as we have done in the Committee and de voter en faveur de l'OIR, comme nous l'avons

J

Sixty-seventh Plenary Meetin~

15 December 1946-

1434

fait a la Commission et comme nous le ferom
a cette seance de l'Assemblee: De meme que le
representant des Etats-Unis, je suis en mesure
de declarer que mon Gouverfiement a donne
pldns pouvoirs a sa delegation pour signer la
constitution de I'QIR.
Au cours des longues discussions que nous
During the long discussions ~hich have. been
held in the Third and the FIfth CommIttees, avons eues au sein des Troisieme et Cinquieme
our delegation has consistently supported the Commissions, notre delegation n'a jamais cesse
establishment of the IRQ. I reIterate that de se declarer favorable a la creation de l'OIR.
again: our belief is that this matter should be Nous proclamons a nouveau notre conviction
dealt with as early as possible and on an in- qu'il faut regler cette question aussitot que
ternational basis. Hundreds of thousands of possible et sur une base internationale. 11 y a
people-and one cannot underline that. too. actuellement en Europe et en Extreme-Orient
much-hundreds of thousands of human bemgs, des centaines de milliers de personnes - on ne
now in Europe and in the Fat East, are watching saurait trop le repeter - des centaines de milliers
with vital interest the action which the United d'etres humains, qui attendent de connaitre les
Nations is going to take in this matter. I have mesures que vont prendre les Nations Unies a
used the word "vital" not as a mere figure of ce sujet, mesures qui presentent pour eux un
speech but in its true sense, for the very lives interet vital. J'ai employe le mot "vital" non
of many of these people may depend on what pas comme une simple figure de rhetorique, mais
course we adopt. This is true not only with en le prenant dans son vrai sens, car la vie meme
regard to the approval of the report but even de beaucoup de ces personnes peut dependre de
more so with regard to the willingness of Gov- la ligne de conduite que nous allons adopter.
ernments to implement these decisions by par- Ceci est vrai, non seulement qe l'adoption du
ticipating fully in the functions of the new rapport mais surtout de l'empressement des
Gouvernements a donner dret aux decisions
organization.
prises en participant pleinement awe fonctions
de la nouvelle organisation.•
Cette question a ete chaudement debattue
This question has been heateclly debated, in
many places. All points of view have been ex- en de nombteuses occasions. Tous les points de
pressed, and all Member Nations including a vue ont ete exprimes et toutes les Nations Memnumber of States who have indicated that they bres, y compris un certain nombre d'Etats qui
do not intend to vote in favour of the IRQ cons- ont fait connaitre leur intention de ne pas voter
titution, have had a hand in its drafting. Surely en faveur de la constitution de I'QIR, ont pris
it is now time for us to pass on from the stage part a sa redaction. Il me semble que le moment
of committees and sub-committees and drafting est venu pour nous de passer du stade des comsub-committees to the stage of positive action. missions, des sous-commissions et des comites
So far scarcely a single refugee has actually been de redaction, ce1ui de l'action positive. Jusqu'a
aided by the United Nations, despite the mil- present, malgre les millions de mots qui ont
lions of words which have been spoken saying ete dits sur l'urgence de ce probleme et la neceshow urgent and how necessary this problem is. site de le resoudre, aucun refugie, ou presque,
These words are true but they do not in them- n'a re~u en fait des Nations Unies une aide
selves solve anything. Enough words have been appreciable. Les mots qui ont ete prononces
spoken. Let us then get" on with the great social etaient justifies, mais ils ne resolvent rien par
task which is before us.
eux-memes. On a assez parle. Attaquons-nous
donc a la grande tache saeiale qui nollS attend.
Is our course of action as the United Nations
Y a-t-il un doute sur la ligne de conduite a
intended to deal with problems of an interna- adopter id par les NationsUnies en tant qu'ortional character not clear? The General' As- ganisation chargee de traiter les problemcs
semblymust first of all, and I am sure it will, internationaux? L'AssembIee generale doit tout
approve this report calling on Member Nations d'apord - et eUe le fera, j'en suis sur - adopto sign the constitution of the IRQ and the ter le rapport qui invite les Etats Membres
. protocol on interim arrangements. By voting signer la constitution de l'OIR et le protocole
favourably on this report we come nearer to the' relatif aux arrangements provisoires. En adopaction I have mentioned, but lying ahead' still . tant ce rapport, nous nous rapprocherons du
will be the difficult problem of having a suffi- moment Oll nous pourrons agir comme je l'ai dit,
cient number of States sign and approve the mais il restera encore a resoudre le diflicile proconstitution to bring it into force. In order to bleme qui consiste a obtenir la signature et
do so, as the constitution now stands, fifteen l'approbation de la constitution par un nombre
States, whose required contributions to part 1 d'Etats suffisant pour qu'elle entre en vigueur.
of the operational budget must not be less than Il faudrait, pour cela, selon le' texte actue1 de
seventy-five per cent of the total, must become la constitution, que deviennent parties a cette
parties to it.
constitution quinze Etats, dont les contributions
requises pour la Partie I du Budget d'execution
representent un montant au moins egal ~
soixante-quinze pour cent du total.

as we sh~ll do at this Assembly meeting. Like
the representative of the United States, I am
able to say that my Government has issued full
, powers to enable Canada to sign the constitution.

a

a

_· .... ·.:.c··,.l,···:l<.;...·,-

.·i. __

15 decel

We a
been ad,
General

waiting

should
implem
one wi
should
countr)
implerr
funetio
zation
after t
it? Wl
and d
period
during

ness a:

the pe
alread
If the

passir

that 1
bew<

impli

1
of tt:
prac1
the
won
the

V
Con

that
not
ing
lS

4,

sca

a,

wb

adl

vaJ
ob
in
ne
ga

p,

a]

te
tc

,
i"

19%

15 decembre 1946

":c:

-_.L!

.. ,

I

1435

We all know of cases where resolutions have
been adopted by overwhelming majorities in the
General Assembly only to have a long period of
waiting while Governments decide whether they
should take the necessary legislative action to
implement the Assembly's recommendations. No
one will advocate that the IRO constitution
should be hurried through the legislature of any
country without proper scrutiny. Yet its early
implementation is absolutely essential, if it is to
function at all. What use will it be if this organization comes into force eighteen months or more
after the General Assembly has recommended
it? What will be the condition of the refugees
and displaced persons themselves during this
period? Eighteen months is a long time, and
during this period who can believe that bitterness and cynicism will not infect the camps and
the persons in them? Many of these people have
already spent years in their present condition.
If the Member Governments delay action, after
passing this resolution, there can be little doubt
that the social consequences of such a delay will
be world-wide in their effect, and will have deep
implications for the United Nations.

Soixante-septieme seance IPleniere

Nous connaissons tous des cas ou des resolutions qui avaient ete adoptees a une majorite
ecrasante par l'Assemblee generale ont attendu
bien longtemps que les Gouvernements se decident a prendre les mesures legislatives necessaires pour donner suite aux recommandations
de l'Assemblee. Nul ne pretendra que le Parlement d'aucun pays doive adopter hativement la
constitution de l'OIR sans l'avoir etudiee comme
il convient. Cependant, si l'on veut que cette
constitution ait un objet quelconque, il est absolument indispensable qu'elIe entre en vigueur abref delai. A quoi servira-t-il que cette Organisation commence a fonctionner dix-huit mois
Oll plus apres la decision de l'Assemblee generale? QueUe serait pendant cette periode la
situation des refugies et des personnes deplacees?
Dix-huit mois, c'est bien long, et qui peut croire
que pendant cette periode l'amertume et le
scepticisme n'envahiront pas les camps et les
personnes qui s'y trouvent? Beaucoup d'cntre
eHes vivent depuis des annees dans leur condition
presente, Si les Gouvernements Membres tardent a agir, apres l'adoption de la resolution, il
est bien a craindre que les consequences sociales
de ce retard aient des repercussions dans le
monde entier et qu'cHes en aient aussi de profondes en ce qui concernc les Nations Unies.
1 have said enough concerning the urgency
J'ai suffisamment parle du caractere d'urof this problem and of the necessity for giving gence que presente ce probleme et de la necessite
practical implementation to the constitution and de donner effet dans le domaine pratique a la
the interim arrangements. I want to say one constitution et aux arrangements provisoires.
word about Canada's specific attitude towards J'ajouterai un mot au sujet de l'attitude particuliere du Canada a l'egard de la constitution
the constitution itself.
elle-meme.
Nous avons, a la Troisieme Commission, vote
We voted for the constitution in the Third
Committee, but in doing so we made it plain la constitution, roais ce faisant, nous avons prethat it contained certain clauses which we did cise qu'elle contenait ccrtaines clauses qui nous
not like and which we had spoken against dur- deplaisaient et contre lesqueHes nous nous etions
ing the Committee debates. One such clause cleves au cours des debats en Commission.
is the amendment to article X, paragraph Comme exemple d'une clause de ce genre, il y
f, providing that contributions to large- a l'amendement au paragraphe 4 de l'article X,
aux termes duguel les contributions des Etats
~cale resettlement expenditures shall be on
aux
depenses afferentes aux grands projets de
,l voluntary basis. This is against the principle
which the Canadian delegation hoped to see rcetablissement seront volontaires. Cette dispoadopted, that is, that contributions to all the sition est en contradiction avec le principe que
various budgets of the IRO should be on an la delegation canadienne esperait voir adopter,
obligatory basis according to the scales contained a savoir que les contributions aux divers budgets
in annex n. We stated then, and I again state de l'OIR devraient etre des contributions oblinow, that the new International Refugee Or- gatoires, Jeur montant etant determine par le
ganization will not be able to carry non-paying bareme qui figure a l'Annexe n. Nous avons
pac;sengers, and that each State which signs and declare a ce moment, et je tiens a le repeter
approves the constitution should be prepared maintenant, que la nouveHe Organisation pour
to contribute both financially and in other ways les refugies ne peut accepter des membres non
payants, et que tout Etat qui signe et approuve
to its implementation.
la constitutiondoit etre pret a contribuer, tant
financierementque par d'autres moyens, a sa
mise en reuvre.
C'est pour cette .raison qu'a l'article relatif
For this reason we put forward an amendment
co the article regarding the coming into force a l'entree en vigueur de la constitution, nous
of the constitution which would have prevented avions proppse un amendement dont l'objet
States from approving the constitution while· ctait de mettre les Etats dans l'impossibilite
making financial reservations. The Third Com- d'approuver la constitution tout en formulant
mittee saw fit to reject this amendment. We des reserves quelconques en'matiere financiere. '
believe this was a mistake but we shall, never- La Troisieme Commission a cru devoirrepousser
theless vote for the. constitution. For we are cet amendement. Nous sommes persuades que
aware 'that it is a compromise between fifty-four ,ce fut une erreur, mais nous n'en voterons pas
States and that on specific points many individ- moins la constitution, sachant qu'elle reprcsente

15 decembre 1
Sixty-seventh Plenary Meeting

1436

ual countries will have to accede to the wishes
of the majority. This is our conception of normal
international procedure.

15 Decemlbelr 1946

un compromis entre cinquante-quatre Etats et
que sur des points particuliers beaucoup de pays
auront a se plier a la volonte de la majorite.
C'est ainsi que nous concevons la procedure
'normale en matiere internationale.
Another amendment against which the
11 est un autre amendement contre lequella
Canadian delegation spoke, and which we delegation canadienne s'est elevee et qu'a notre
thought it was unwise for the Third Committee avis la Troisieme Commission a: eu tort d'adopto adopt was that which is now contained in ter; cet amendement est maintenant incorpore
annex I, paragraph 1 (g) concerning general a l'Annexe I, paragraphe 1 g) qui a trait £lUX
principles. This amendment would prohibit the principes generaux. Cet amendement empecheIRO from resettling or re-establishing refugees rait l'OIR de reinstaller ou de reetablir des
in Non-Self-Governing Territories if such plans refugies dans des territoires non autonomes au
were opposed by States adjacent to .the Non- cas ou un tel programme rencontrerait l'opposiSelf-Governing Territory concerned. The Cana- tion d'Etats qui ont une frontiere commune avec
dian delegation believes that the IRO should le territoire non autonome interesse. La delefunction in such a way as not to disturb gation canadienne estime que l'OIR devrait
friendly relations between the nations. Yet, with fonctionner de maniere a ne pas troubler les
regard to the clause I have just referred to, I relations amicales entre les nations. Cependant,
have some apprehension that its effect will be to en ce qui concerne la clause a laquelle je viens
greatly curtail the resettlement operations of the de faire allusion, j'ai lieu de craindre qu'e1le ait
pour resultat de restreindre considerablement
IRO.
les operations de reinstallation que pourra
effectuer l'OIR.
These are two examples of amendments
Voici done deux exemples d'amendements qui
which were adopted against what we thought ont ete adoptes, bien qu'a notre avis, il eut
would have been a wiser course. There are mieux valu agir autr~ment. Il y en a plusieurs
several others but it would be unnecessary to autres, mais il serait superflu de les enumerer
enumerate them at this time. Our position is en ce moment. N otre position est claire: comme
clear. Like nearly every delegation in the Third c'est le cas pour presque toutes les delegations
Committee there are certain things about the qui siegent a la Troisieme Commission, il y a
IRO and its constitution which we do not like. dans l'OIR et dans sa constitution certaines
Yet, in spite of this, we voted in favour of it be- choses qui ne nous donnent pas satisfaction.
cause we thought that it did provide machinery Neanmoins, nous avons vote pour cette constituwhich could and should be set lip to deal with tion parce que nous estimions qu'elle apportait
this tremendous humanitarian problem on an le mecanisme dont la creation etait possible et
international basis. Some other delegations took necessaire pour traitersur le plan international
a different line and stated that, in effect, because cet immense probleme d'ordre humanitaire.
their amendments had not been adopted, they D'autres delegations ont pris une attitude diffewould not approve the constitution. In my rente et ont declare que leurs amendements
view we cannot afford, in our deliberations, to n'ayant pas ete adoptes, dIes n'approuveraient
overlook the fact that any document and any pas la constitution. J'estime que nous ne pouvons
resolution approved by fifty-four States is a pas nous permettre, dans nos deliberations, de
compromise and that there will be parts of it negliger le fait que tout texte et toute resolution
which we may all dislike individually. But a qui ont ete approuves par cinquante-quatre
spirit of compromise must prevail if we are Etats sont le resultat d'un compromis et qu'ils
contiendront des elements qui peuvent ne pas
going to do the job.
donner satisfaction a chacun de nous en particulier. Si nous vDulons venir a bout de
notre tache, il faut que l'esprit de compromis
l'emporte.
Nous considerons que la constitution de l'OIR
We regard the IRO constitution as a guide
for future operations rather than as an un- est plut8t un guide pour nos activites futures
changeable text. The constitution provides for qu'un texte immuable. Aux termes de l'artiits own amendment under the clauses of article de XVI, la constitution peut €tre amendee; en
XVI. Meanwhile we conceive its proper role to attendant, nous considerons que le role qui lui
be that of a contract drawn up between friends revient est celui d'un accord conclu entre amis
to guide them in their joint efforts in dealing en vue de guider les efforts qu'ils font en comwith a great world social pI'Oblem. It is in this mun pour traiter un grand probleme social de
spirit that my country voted in favour of the caractere mondial. C'est dans cet esprit que
constitution before, and it is in this spirit that we mon pays a deja vote et votera encore aujourd'hui pour la constitution.
shall vote again today.
J'ai precise la position que ma delegation
I have made clear the position my delegation
prendra
et les raisons de notre attitude. Je n'ai
intends to tak~ and its reasons. I have only one
word to add. Above all, we want to emphasize plus qu'un mot a ajouter: nous tenons parthe necessity of making the IRO a reality and dessus tout, a souligner qu'il est necessaire de
not merely a legal fiction. Here is one way of faire de l'OIR une rt~alite et non pas une simple
dealing with a great international problem under Jiction juridique. Nous avons devant nous une

the auspices of
!terns to m.e a
I trust that w

The PRESll
leall upon M

'Mr. AMAI
French): Th

Refugee Org<
Committee, r
arduous effor
which will en
aheart-breal<
the material
rertain parts
drama, and i
(erlain dang'
,al misundeI
We have
I'iction that
created by t]
in the camp:
standings, ir
or unrest an

The pr~
nearly twcl
ment, as we
perfect. Bt
. I'iew have (
it would be
represents
wgnize the
origin that
nationals s
recognizes
and self-dt
being, Whl
languishes
In e.stab
delegation
principles.
priority m
painful P'
tions. Rv
cultural v
which ha'
ta claim:
of their I
reconstru
the const

The s
delcgatic
the re COl
;idents (
back atl
is the or
dissent i
product
is a fair
ing frO!
or saci,
and th

~ '.

15 Mcembre 1946

1437

Soixante-septieme seance pleniine

IS December 1946
t~ uatrt Etats tt

~ucoup de pa~

the auspices of an international organization. It
seems to me a great test for this Assembly, and
I trust that we shall pass it.

methode pour traiter lID grand probieme inter?ation~ sous les auspices d'une organisation
mternatlOnale. n me semble que ceci constitue
pO':,r .cette AssembIee une epreuve d'irnportance,
et J aJ. le fenne espoir que nous reussirons.

The PRESIDENT (translated from P,-ench):
i call upon Mr. Amado, representative of Brazil.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole
M. Amado, representant du Bresil.

'Mr. AMADO
(Brazil)
(translated from
French): The constitution of the International

M. AMADO (Bresil): La constitution de l'Organisation internationale pour les refugies, teIle
que la Troisieme Commission l'a adoptee,
marque la fin de longs et difficil~ efforts en vue
de la creation d'un mecanisme international de
cooperation ayant pour but la solution d'un probleme aussi poignant que les devastations materieIles dont 1'Europe et certainci parties de l'Asie
ont ete le theatre. n s'agit d'un drame humain,
dont la profondeur et l'amertume receIent des
elements dangereux conduisant a des malentendus politiques et, a des conflits economiques.
Nous sommes venus acette Assemblee avec la
conviction que tout retard dans l'assainissement
de la situation creee par le probleme des re£ugies
concentres dans les camps ne ferait que prolonger ces malentendus, aggraver les soup~ons et
maintenir un noyau de fermentation, d'instabilite au creur de l'Europe.
La presente constitution est le resultat de pres
d'un an de discussion. Qu'elle ne soit pas un
instrument parfait, nous ne le savons que trop.
Si tous les points de vue ne trouvent dans ce,
texte qu'une expression approximative, il ne serait pas juste de nier que cette constitution represente un effort serieux et honnete pOUf reconnaitre l'interet legitime des pays d'origine dans
leur desir de faire revenir dans leur territoire
le plus grand nombre possible de ressortissants.
En meme temps, eIle reconnalt les principes
fondamentaux de liberte, d'autodeteIlI).ination,
sans lesquels l'etre humain s'etiole et perit aussi
bien a l'interieur qu'au dehors de sa patrie.
Pour sa ligne de conduite, la delegation du
Bresil a voulu tenir compte de deux principes.
.D'abord, la reconnaissance de la priorite du rapatriement qui constitue la solution la plus naturelle de cc douloureux probleme de deplacements
de populations que la guerre a fait naitre.
Chaque etre humain represente pour sa patrie
une valeur economique et culturelle. Les pays
qui ont subi de graves devastations sont en droit
de reclamer et d'obtenir la cooperation du plus
grand nombre possible de leurs citoyens pour
l'reuvre vitale de la reconstruction. Ce principe,
la constitution le garantit.
Le second principe auquel la delegation du
Bresil a tenu a adherer, est la reconnaissance des
cas legitimes de dissidences politiques ou de
resistances sentirnentales qui necessitent et imposent l'emigration comme solution complementaire. La dissidence politique, sociale ou religieuse n'est pas un phenomene nouveau! ni un
sous-produit de cette guerre. Au conp-arre, elle
represente un phenomene historique assez frequent, consequence de brusq~es mut~~ons territoriales et des transformatlOns politiques et
sociales. La multiplicite des nations et la dis-

le de la majoriti.
om la Proc&l

!late.
Ult
It <,ootre lequcl b
~'~ et qu'a nO!rt
a eu tort d'adoJl'
?t~t inCOrpJ~
,) qUl a trait all'!
Idement ern~.

de reetablir des
on autonomes an
,ontrerait l'oP~'
~re commune aVe(
It&esse. La da~

1'0IR devrait

le

, pas troubler les

:ions. Cependan~
l 1.J.qucUe je vknl
r:lmdre qu'clle art
.consid&ablemenl
Jon que pourra

;arnendements qui
lotre avis, il ~nl
lyenapl_
de Ies 61UInhtr
ot claire: COIIlIIl
~)es~

..

il ya
;ti tution certaino
pas satisfaetioo.
)ur cene constituqu'dJc apportM

I ttai t P(~jble et

lhm in temationaI
:1rebumanitairt.
IIt( attitude dilI~
tn amcnckmentl
n' pprouvcraient
: nous ne pou'IIlIlS
dtlibmliom, de
1 toute rmIution
lnquanto-quant
nprom' et qu'ih
pcuvtDt De pal
d(' nous en par'
mir 1 bout de
1t de com~

de rOIR
cthitts futm'tS
wmr:s de rarti-

Ut lit

Ire ;un~itll

1(' e qui lui
I ",Iu mtrt ami!

Ir

',\$ fonl en C(IIlI
I

H<-mt social de
rt e5prit que
..

trr.l

enrort aU'

'1IlJd~
.lllilude. jd~
IlLS tc:DOllS par'
. de

O~,J,
1\ pJ.S unc IDI'I'"
IC\ t QOlIS one
,-

Refugee Organization, as adopted by the Third
Committee, marks the completion of long and
arduous efforts to set up international machinery
which will enable us to co-operate in solving such
a heart-breaking problem as the one created by
the material devastation wrought in Europe and
certain parts of Asia. We have here a human
drama, and in its depth and bitterness lie hidden
certain dangerolls factors which make for political misunderstandings and economic strife.
We have come to tIus Assembly with the conviction that any delay in remedying the situation
created by the problem of the masses of refugees
in the camps would only prolong these misunderstandings, increase suspicion and foster a source
of unrest and instability in the heart of Europe.
The present constitution is the outcome of
nearly twelve months' discussion. This instrument. as we realize onlY too well, is bv no means
,perfe~t. But although' all the variotis points of
view have only been put forward approximately,
it would be unjust to deny that the constitution
represents a serious and honest attempt to recognize the legitimate anxiety of the countries of
origin that the greatest possible number of their
nationals should return. At the same time, it
recognizes the fundamental principles of freedom
and self-determination without which a human
being, whether in his own country or abroad,
languishes and succumbs.
In establishing its line of conduct, the Brazilian
delegation has endeavoured to bear in mind two
principles. First, that repatriation must be given
priority as being the most natural solution of this
painful post-war problem of displaced populations. Every human being is of economic and
cultural value to his native land. The countries
which have been seriously laid waste are entitled
to claim and obtain the co-operation of as many
of their nationals as possible in the vital task of
reconstruction. This principle is guaranteed by
the constitution.
The second principle to which the Brazilian
delegation has felt bound to subscribe is that of
t~e recognition of bona fide cases of political disSIdents or of people whose objections to going
?ack are very strong. In such cases emigration
lS,the only alternative. Political, social or religious
dissent is not a new phenomenon, nor is it a byproduct of the recent war. On the contrary, it
~ a fairly frequent historical phenomenon resultmg fr~m sudden territorial changes and political
or SOCIal upheavals. The multiplicity of nations
and the spread of various types of culture are

~

..
'"

.,

[!

,I "

I'

c,::, "1;
.: ~' .

.
,

"

i

~.. ~ .

,

•••. 1

:,

',,:,
::

I

':,,'

'Sixty-seventh Plenary Meeting

1438

simply the direct result of political, religious or
social clashes. '

lS December 1946

semin~tion des cultures ne sont que le resultat

direct d'entrechocs politiques, religieux ou
sociaux.
C'est a ce nombre important de refugies et de
It is to this large mimber of refugees and displaced persons who, for sentimental or political personnes deplacees qui eprouvent une repureasons, feel a natural disinclination to re-adjust gnimce naturelle provenant de considerations soit
themselves to a radically changed social en- affectives, soit politiques a se readapter a un
vironment, those human beings shaken by milieu social profondement remue, c'est a co
violent and painful upheavals and now anxious etres humains eprouves par des bouleversemerits
to start a new life far from all acute social con- violents et poignants, anxieux de reprendre une
flicts, it is to those people, those human beings vie nouvelle loin des conflits sociaux aigus, c'est
to whom the United Nations Charter refers as ,a ces hommes, aces ctres auxquels la Charte de.,
having indefeasible human rights, that the draft Nations Unies fait allusion, ayant des droits
constitution now before us, on which we are humains inalienables, que le projet de constituabout to vote, offers the possibility of settling in tion que nous avons devant nous et sur lequel
other homes, in' other countries which are able to nous allons voter, offre la possibilite de 'se reinsreceive them. and anxious to help solve this pre- taller dans d'autres foyers, dans d'autres pays
eminently international problem:. It is to these capabIes de les recevoir et desireux de collabore,r
homeless ones, these unfortunate people whose a. la solution de ce probleme international par
sufferings are beyond human endurance, that excellence. C'est a ces hommes sans foyer, a
the new countries with vast unpopulated areas ces malheureux dont les souffrances vont au dela
and enormous potential wealth-such as, for de l'endurance humaine, que les pays nouveaux,
instance, Brazil-have thought of throwing open disposant de vastes territoires depeuples et d'une
their doors and of assuring them a welcome.
richesse potentielle enorme, comme le Bresil par
exemple, ant pense ouvrir leurs portes, en donnant a ces malheureux l'assurance qu'ils seraiem
hien accueillis.
On a dit, au sein de la Commission, que cerIt has been said in the Committee that certain
receiving countries were anxious to take advan- tains pays d'immigration voulaient profiter des
tage of these circumstances in order to obtain circonstances pour obtenir une main-d'reuvre
cheap labour and enrich themselves by exploiting bon marche et s'enricher en exploitant le travail
the refugees. It has been said that the refugees des refugies. On a fait allusion a des paradis
have been lured by the mirage of a false para- mensongers que ,1'0n aurait fait iniroiter devant
dise to induce them not to return to their native les yeux des refugies pour les empecher de reveland. It has been said that in these so-called nir dans leur patrie. On a pade de vie errante
attractive new countries a wandering life in the dans les savanes broussailleuses, faussement atbush was all that awaited the unfortunates un- tirantes, pour les malheureux qui ne veulent pas
willing to return to their own soil.
regagner leurs territoires nationaux.
Brazil is not guilty of this propaganda. We
Le Bresil n'est pas coupable de cette propaapproached this problem with the modesty and gande. Nous avons aborde ce probleme avec la
discretion characteristic of our attitude in inter- modestie et la discretion qui caracterisent notre
national affairs. We were very cautious in cal- attitude dans les questions internationales. Nom
culating the number of refugees we could take, avons ete tres reserves dans les calculs du nombre
because we did not want them to exchange an de refugies que nous etions a meme de recevoir.
unhappy situation for an insecure one. We are car nollS ne voulions pas faire passer le refugie
preparing homes, building houses and arrang- d'une situation miserable a une situation incering residential centres where these new-corners taine. Nous preparons des foyers, nous contnrlcan settle down and begin a new life. The one sons des maisons, nous amenageons des centro
thing we could not do was to remain indifferent de residence Oll ces nouveaux venus pouITont
to the fate of these human beings, these refugees s'installer et commencer une nouveIle vie. Cc
and displaced persons. Who, indeed, in this. que nous ne pouvions pas faire, c'etair de rester
Assembly could remain indifferent to this tragic indifferents au sort de ces ctres humains, de cC!
post-war situation?
refugies, de ces personnes deplacees. Qui d'ailleurs, dans cette Assemblee, pourrait rester indifferent devant cet aspect tragique de l'apres..
guerre?
C'est dans ce sens que le Gouvernement du
These, then, were the motives by which the
Government of Brazil was actuated when it of- Bresil s'est oriente lorsqu'il a offert d'accueillir
fered a home to refugees wishing to start life les refugies qui desirent recommencer leur vie
afresh in new surroundings and signified its dans un milieu nouveau et lorsqu'il s'est montre
readiness to collaborate with the International pret a collaborer avec l'Organisation intemaRefugee Organization.
tionale pour les refugies.
Nous admettons la hierarchie des fonctions atWe recognize the order of priority of the work
assigned to the International Refugee Organiza- tribuees a l'Organisation internationale pour les
tion: repatriation is its main task; the resettle- refugies: le rapatriement comme tache princi.
ment or erni,gration of individuals is the first pale; le reetablissement ou l'emig'Tation indivi·
stage of the alternative solution; and large-scal~ duelle comme premier terme de l'alternative. la

15 decel

coloniza'
principll
atitution
We 1
principll
istrative
in part
he met
whereas
scale rCl'
voluntal
Fifth C<
and rei
efforts.
The]
ment to
ture on
voluntaJ
practica
of prim
contain!
is likely
of refu

would 1

operatic
the car]
tremely
is obvi(
rapid sc

The
by the 1
Govern
study n
point
adoptio
pulsory
Nevl
don.
adopt,
orate i
problel
any re
are re:
and so
them!
again
We
Unitel
will se
its wc
the te
Budgt
will j
tion. ,
of a I
In
count
provi r
shelte
reaso:
T~

I cal
Ukra

15 D.(e~ber 194i
~e. sont que le IiluI.

lJuq~ rdigieux:
ortant de ti{u~~etlt

eprouvent une '
1t. de cOnsid6ationsre:
a se readapter a 1IIJ
:nt rtmu~ c'est a et!

~r dts boulev~/liu
u~ux d~ reprendre IJIlt

nIts SOClaux aigus, t'll!
. uxqueb la Chartedtl
on J ayant des droitJ
J: le projet de COl1!tiru.
'am nollS et sur lequd
I possibilite de 'se reim,
'~. dans d'autrtl pa~
I d6ircux de collabora
,le-me inlemation~ pal
hommes sans foyer,l
uuffrances vant au ddl
que k:s pays nouvealll,
)ir~ depeuples et d'nn!
1(, comrne le Brrsil p'J
ir kurs portes, en dOff
lIrallce qu'ils ser~e.o!
Co~D,quew.

\"oulaient profiter ~~
nir une main-d'M
en aploitant le tram
I

all .on a de; pardi
it fait miroiter dWell
f le! empeeher de rtI~
I a parle de vie erranl
~1I(USt.S, faussanent I'
reult qui ne veulent ~
nat.ionaux.
llpable de cette p~'
-del cc probleme avecb
;1

qui caracterisent notrl

I

11

inlcmationales. Nom
I .calculs du nombn

'11$

a m€me de -

rtf,

r:lire ~ le
. a une situation ~
,c fo -as. DOllS contni·
lm~nagcons des cenllll
J\"r ux venus ~I

une nOlwdle vie. (i
fai~ c'~tait de rd.d
c(res humainl, lit CI'l

~ d~plac~ Qui ~

k pourrait reste~ '.
t tragiqut de laprb

r le GouvemeD1ent ~
It'i! 3 affect d'accu~
rt'romm enCCT leur 1'1/
rt lorsqll'il ,S'est. Jl1on~

l'Or}taWsallon )lIten\1

1t
rare hie des fonctiolll I~·

r:

inmnationale ~ .

t (omme t~~e

cm rtmi~bon ~ )
'iITIt de l'al

15 decembre 1946

1439

Soixante-septieme seance plhnlere

colonization the second, in accordance with the colonisation massive comme second terme de
principles and restrictions laid down in the con- l'alternative, conformement aux principes et aux
limitations etablis dans la constitution.
stitution.
We regret, however, the adoption of the
Nous regrettons-cependant l'adoption du prinprinciple of sele~tive financing, w~ereb~ admin- cipe de financement par selection, suivant lequel
istrative expendIture and expendIture mcluded les depenses administratives et celles qui figuin part I of the operational budget will have to . rent dans la premiere partie du budget d'execube met compulsorily by all Member States, tion incomberaient obligatoirement a l'ensemble
whereas expenditure in connexion with large- des Etats Membres, tandis que les depenses affescale resettlement schemes is to be financed on a rentes aux grands projets de reinstallation
voluntary basis. This principle, proposed by the seraient financees sur une base volontaire. Now
Fifth Committee may, we fear, hamper the IRO craignons que ce principe, accepte par la Cinand reduce the international scope of our quieme Commission, ne vienne mutiler l'OIR
et reduire la portee internationale de nos efforts.
efforts.
La delegation bresilienne s'est opposee a
The Brazilian delegation opposed the amendment to the effect that contributions to expendi- l'adoption de l'amendement tendant a rendre
ture on large-scale re-settlement should be on a volontaires les contributions aux depenses affevoluntary basis. Our objections were based on rentes aux grands projets de reinstallation. Nou.'!
practical grounds as we~l .as on .considerations avons fonde notre opposition acet amendement
of principle. In our opmlOn, thIS amendment sur des considerations de principe et d'ordre
contains a disintegrating factor for the IRO: it pratique. A notre avis, cet aniendement renis likely to lessen the goodwill of the countries fcrme pour l'OIR un germe de desagregation;
of refuge as regards the financial help they il est susceptible de diminuer la bonne volor#
would be prepared to give under part I of the des pays d'accueil quant la. l'aide financiere
operational budget; its effect would be to make qu'ils seraient disposes la. donner a la premiere
the carrying out of resettlement operation'i ex- partie du budget d'execution; il aboutirait
tremely doubtful and precarious, and this work rendre extremement douteuse et precaire l'exeis obviously essential if we are to arrive at a cution des operations de reinstallation, qui sont
rapid solution of the refugee problem.
evidemment indispensables la. une solution rapide du probleme des refugies.
Les changements introduits par la Cinquieme
The changes in the draft constitution made
by the Fifth Committee will compel the Brazilian Commission dans le projet de constitution forceGovernment to reconsider its position and to ront le Gouvernement bresilien a examiner de
study more closely the practical effects, from the nouveau sa position et a etudier plus attentivepoint of view of the IRO's' work, of the ment les consequences d'ordre pratique qui readoption of a budget consisting partly of com- sulteront, pour l'activite de l'OIR, de I'adoption
pulsory and partly of voluntary contributions. d'un budget constitue par des contributions en
partie obligatoires et en partie volontaires.
Le Bresil. vote cependant pour constitution.
Ne~ertheless, Brazil will vote for the constituQuelle
que soit l'attitude que nollS venions a
tion. Whatever attitude we may eventually
prendre,
mon Gouvernernent continuera d'apadopt, my Government will continue to collaborate in the hope of finding .a solution to !he porter sa colhlboration dans I'espoir de parveproblem. It re-affirms its intention of she1tenng nir la. une solution du probleme. n affirme de
any refu~ees who wish to come to Brazil and nouveau son intention d'accueillir les refugies
are ready to adapt themselves to our political qui desireront venir sur son sol et s'adapter a
and social institutions. We believe we can offer ses institutions politiques et sociales. Nous penthem satisfactory conditions enabling the~ once sons pouvoir offrir la. ces re£ugies des conditions
again to lead a happy and prosperous exIstence. satisfaisantes et favorables la. la reprise d'une vie
prospere et heureuse.
Nous esperons que les quinze Membres des
We hope that the fifteen Members of the
Nations
Unies necessaires pour donner corps
United Nations required to set up the IR~
will soon come forward and enable it to begm a l'OIR seront bientot rassembles pour la mettre
its work. I feel· sure that when it has studied en reuvre. ]e suis convaincu qu'apres etudedu
the text of the constitution as submitted by the texte de la constitution, tel qu'il nous eSt pre.
Budgetary Committee, the Brazilian Govern~ent sente par le comite budgetaire, le 'Gouvernement
will join the International Refugee Orgam~a­ bresilien se joindra a l'Organisation internation. This is more than the mere expresslOn tionale pour les refugies. Par la, je veux
exprimer plus qu'un espoir.
of a hope.
En' concluant, je declare que le BresilJ terre
In conclusion, I wish to say that Brazil, a
d~avenir,
sera heureux de pouvoir etre des la.
country with a future, will·be glad to be able to
present
le
foyer ,de,sir~ble pour ce~ refu,gie~ sans
provide desirable homes immediately for these
toit
dont
la
destmee mgrate constltue 1obJet de
she1terless refugees, whose unfortunate fate is the
notre
vote.
reason for the vote we are about to take. .
Le PRESIDENT: La parole est au Dr Medved J
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
representant
de la Republique socialiste sovieI call upon Dr.· Medved, representative of the
tique
d'Ukraine.
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist·Republic.

'j",

,

.~

, I

. "

a

la

~

I ..

15 December 1946

15 decembre 1~

Dr. MEDvED (Ukrainian So~et Socialist Republic) (translated from Ruman):. ~he l.!krainian delegation expressed, in detaIl, Its pomt
of view with t'egard to the problem of refugees
and displaced persons during the general discussion of this question in the Third Committee
of the present Assembly, nalpely, the Committee
on Social Questions. During the discussion we
also commented on the different articles of the
constitution of the International Refugee Organization and submitted a number of amendments.
Our point of, view is as follows: we consider
the problem of refugees and displaced persons
, extremely important and urgent. This problem
is of international importance and should be
solved in a spirit of genuine international cooperation. Hundreds of thousands of unfortunate suffering people, driven from their homes
under the German-fascist occupation, should be
given the possibility of returning as soon as
possible to normal conditions of life, to their
relatives, friends and homelands. We have repeatedly expressed our sympathy for these 'unfortunate suffering people who, as a result of the
war, are outside their countries, away from their
homes, separated' from their relatives and near
ones, their friends and acquaintances.

Dr MEDVED (Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine) (traduit du russe): Au cours de la
discussion generale au sein de la Troisieine Commission de la presente Assemblee - Commission
des Affaires sociales - la delegation ukrainienne a deja expose en detail son point de vue
sur la question des refugies et des personnes deplacees. D'autre part, nous avons presente nos
observations lorsqu'on examinait, article par article, la constitution de l'Organisation des refugies, et nous avons propose une serie d'amendements a cette constitution.
Notre point de vue est le suivant: nous estimons que le probleme des personnes deplacees et
des refugies est tres important et tres urgent. Ce
probleme, qui a une portee internationale, doit
etre resolu dans un esprit de collaboration internationale sincere. Il faut aider des centaines de
milliers d'hommes, epuises par les souffrances et
qui avaient ete deportes par les fascistes alle.
mands, a revenir le plus rapidement possible aux
conditions de vie normales, it rejoindre leurs
proches et leurs amis, a retrouver leur patrie.
Nous avons exprime plus d'une fois nos sentiments de sympathie it l'egard de ces hommes
malheureux et cpuises qui, par suite de la guerre,
ont ete arraches a leur patrie a leurs foyers, et
separes de leurs parents, de leurs proches et de
leurs amis.

by the countri
displaced perso
into considerati
which would
Constitution of
ments and ad<
solution of this
deed, this attit
countries of or
placed those cc
in such a posit
ested than an
problem, votel
tion of the IR<
in the solution
Brazil or Can:
we are anxiou
cemed that tl
be rightly sol
constitution nl

From this rostrum I stress once again that we
consider this problem an important one. We
stand for the solution of this problem in the
spirit of sincere international co-operation and
complete mutual understanding. Moreover, we
realize that there should be co-operation and
mutual understanding above all between those
countries which have now become the absolute
masters and arbiters of the fate of the refugees
and displaced persons, namely those States
which have armies of occupation in territories
where there are camps for refugees and dis,placed persons on the one hand, and the countries of origin of these displaced persons on the
other.

Du haut de cette tribune, je tiens souligner
une fois de plus que nous sommes les premiers a
reconnaitre l'importance de ce probleme. Nous
estimons qu'il faut le resoudre dans un esprit de
collaboration internationale sincere et de complete comprehension mutuelle. Nous nous rendons parfaitement compte que cette collaboration et cette comprehension doivent etre etablies,
avant tout, entre les pays d'origine des personnes
deplacees et les pays qui, du fait qu'ils entretiennent des troupes d'occupation dans les territoires
ou se trouvent les camps de refugies et de persoones deplacees, sont les maitres absolus du sort
de ces personnes.

Sixty-seventh Plenary Meeting

1440

As is known, the occupation troops belong
mainly to the United States of America, Great
Britain and France. It is also knoWn that the
main mass of displaced persons are citizens of
the Soviet Union, Poland, Yugoslavia and the
Ukraine, and only a small minority come from
other countries. That is why I fully agree with
Mrs. RooseveIt's ~ppeal for co-operation and
mutual understandmg. We stand for the fullest
co-operation and mutual understanding, especially in solving the important problem of our
citizens, the problem of the so-called "refugees"
and "displaced persons".

As a result of the discussion and study of the
documents which have been submitted for our
consideration, we should note one fact which is
not without interest. A nurriber of very important and very serious desires were expressed

a

On sait que ce sont surtout les Etats-Unis

d'Amerique, la Grande-Bretagne et la France
Iqui
entretiennent des troupes dans les pays
occupes. On sait d'autre part que la plupart
des personnes deplacees sont citoyens de l'Union
sovietique, de la Pologne, de la Yougoslavie et
de I'Ukraine et qu'il n'y a panni dIes que tres
pe,u de ressortissants d'autres pays. Je me range
done entierement a l'avis de Mme Roosevelt,
qui a fait appel id, a la collaboration et a la
comprehension mutuelle. Nous sommes partisans
d'une collaboration d'autant plus etroite et d'une
comprehension d'autant plus grande, qu'il s'agit
la de regler la situation de nos citoyens, de
resoudre le probleme, tres important pour nous,
des individus que l'on appeile "personnes deplacees" et "reiugies;'.
'
Apres avoir etudie et discute les documents qui
nous ete soumis, nous ne pouvons nous empecher
d'attirer votre attention sur un fait intl~ressant.
Je veux'vous rappeler que les pays d'origine des
pers~nnes deplacees ont exprime nombre de

,Mrs. Roose
ence of an el
displaced peTS
relations betw
problem has
That is true
agree. The p
of the IROrecdy - in tl
us, does not
operation am
what Mrs. :F
Nor does it I
collective sec
How can
propaganda '
on daily am<
in camps cor
operation an:
ganda again
Nations, aga
gees and di:
strengthenin/
How ,can t]
slandering, C
slandering 0
and displace
co-operation
to say that (
fere in the
proper une
slandering 0
on'in the t
meet with I
and I woul.
The com
not provide
ganda in <
delegations
in camps, t
States Mer
rejected.
As the
Mr. Grom

15 decembre 1946

1441

Soixante-septieme seance plenh~re

desiderata d'une tres grande importance. On n)a
pas tenu compte de leurs desirs. On a rejete
une serie d)amendements et d'additifs qui
avaient pour but d'ameIiorer considerablement
la constitution de 1)Organisation Internationale
pour les refugies et cl'assurer une meilleure solution de ce probleme. C'est justement cette attitude a l'egard des propositions faites par les
pays d'origine des personnes deplacees qui a force
ces pays) et en particulier l'Ukraine - plus mtcressee que qui que ce soit resoudre ce probleme
- a voter contre le projet de constitution de
1'Organisation mternationale pour les refugies
que 1'on nous prcsente maintenant. Je repete
que nous sommes plus interesses a resoudre ce
probleme que le Bresil ou le Canada) par exempIe. Parce qu)i! s)agit de nos citoyens) parce que
nous souffrons de les voir dans la situation ou
its se trouvent: nous sommes interesses a ce
que 1'0n trouve une solution equitable a cetle
question des re£ugies. Aujourd'hui aussi) nous
voterons contre ce projet s)il n'est pas modifie.
Mrs. Roosevelt has rightly ~aid that. the existMOle Roosevelt a eu raison de remarquer ici
ence of an enllrmous number of refugees and que la presence d)un grand nombre de rCfugies
displaced persons may interfere with the proper et de personnes deplacces peut troubler les relardations between individual countries. that this tions entre les Etats et que ce problcme interesse
problem has a bearing on roJIccti\'c security. la securite collective. C'est exact, c'est un axiome)
That is true; it is an axiom and J entirely et je suis tout a fait de cet avis. Mais le fait
agree. The point is that the draft constitution est que la constitution de l'Organisation interof the IRO--,-I beg you to understand me cor- nationale pour les refugiCs, que nous sommes en
rectlv - in the form in which it is !'ubmitted to train d)exanllner - comprenez-rnoi bien) je parle
us) does not help toward.'l strengthf.ning co- du projet de constitution clans sa forme actuelle
operation among State.'l) and does not promote - ne contribue pas a renforcer la collaboration
what Mrs. Roosevc1t ha.'l appealed to u,<; for. entre les Etats ni atteindre le but indique par
Nor does it contribute to the strengthening of MOle Roosevelt) pas plus qu'il ne contribue a
renforcer la securite collective. '
collective security.
How can the unbridl<'ll, hostile pro-fascist
La furieuse propagande pro-fasciste, que I'on
propaganda whkh is being shamele:-sly carried mene avec impudence jour apres jour, dans les
on daily among refugees and displaced persons camps de personnes deplaceeset de refugies)
in camps contribut to the l'trengthcning of co- peut-cl1e contribuer a reniorcer la collaboration
operation amon~ States~' How can daily propa- entre les Etats? Une propagande incessante diriganda against Stat~ Members of the United gee contre des Etats Membres de l'Organisation
Nations, i.lg;tin~t the l'lluntnes of origin of refu- des Nations Unies, contre les pays d)origine des
gees and dL'lpla[(:d permms, contribute to the personnes deplacees et des rCfugies, peut-elIe
strengthening of internaucmal co-operation? contribuer a renforcer la collaboration internaHow can the slanderin~ of our country, the tionale? En calomniant notre pays, et en partislandcrin~ of my Republic in particlllar, the culier la Republique que je represente id, en
slandering of the countries of origin of refugees calomniant les pays d'origine des refugies et des
and displacC'ci person~ str 'n~hcn international personnes deplacees) renforce-t-on la collaboraco-operation? I think it would be more correct tion internationale? J'estime qu'iJ serait plus
to say that all thili is interf('J"ing, and will inter- juste de dire que tout cela entrave et continuera
fere in the future, with proper relations and d'entraver les relations normaIes et la compreproper unde~tanding tH'twc("JI States. The hension mutuelle entre Ies Etats. Les calomnies
slandering of my country which L" being carried que ran repand l)etranger contre mon pays ne
on in the territorY of another countrY cannot peuvent etre accueillies avec approbation ni par
meet with my approval Of that of m~' people, mai, ni par mon peuple - je veux que vous le
compreniez bien.
and I would like vou to realize thi~.
Cependant la constitution de l)Organisation
The constittltio;l of th(: IRO. however. does
not provide for the prevention of ho.<;tiJe propa- internationaIe pour Ies rCfugics ne prevoit rien
ganda .in camps. Propos.ds by a IllImhcr of pour interdire cette propagande hostile dans les
~elegatIOns to put an end to ho.'\tile propaganda camps. Plusieurs delegations avaient propose
m camps, to put an end to propa~anda al~ainst de faire cesser cctte propagande que ron mene
States Members of the United • ·ationl'. \\'ere dans les camps contre certains pays, Membres
rejected.
des Nations Unies, mais la proposition a ete
repoussee.
~ the representat.ive of th Soviet Union,
~elon la remarque tres juste du Delegue de
Mr. Gromyko) already vcr)' ril{htly remarked. , I'Union sovietique) M. Gromyko) c'est en mvo-

by the countries of origin of the refugees and
displaced persons. These de..c;jres were not taken
into consideration, and a number of amendments,
which would have considerably improved the
Constitution of the IRa) a number of amendments and additions aiming at a more proper
solution of this problem) were not accepted. Indeed this attitude towards the proposals of the
countries of origin of the displaced persons has
placed those countries) in particular the Ukraine)
in such a position that we, who are more interested than anyone else m the solution of this
problem, voted against the proposed constitution of the IRQ. I repeat) we are more interested
in the solution of this problem than, for example)
Brazil or Canada) because they are our people)
we are anxious about these people, we are concerned that the problem of these people should
be rightly soh'cd. Wc shall vute against the
constituli<lI1 now if it is not altered.

a

a

a

I

Sixty-seventh Plenary Meeting

1442

the proposal was rejected on the grounds of
freedom of speech. I would like to observe here,
that when we proposed including in the constitution, a paragraph providing that representatives of the countries of origin, representatives of
States Members of the United Nations, should
have freedom of access to the camps, this para-,
graph was also rejected on the grounds of freedom of speech. It is an odd freedom of speech,
however, which permits fascists, war cr~inals
and collaborationists to operate freely In the
camps and forbids the admission of represe~ta­
tives of the Government. Under the constItution, I, for example, may not go to a camp and
have a chat with my fellow citizens, whilst war
criminals and fascists may. What sort of freedom of speech is this? I think that phrases
such as freedom of speech are always used when
serioUs arguments are lacking, just as people
talk about democracy when they have no real
genuine convincing argumentS.

15 December 1946

quant la liberte de parole qu'on a repousse
cette proposition. Je voudrais rappeler que l'on
a egalement invoque la liberte de parole pour
rejeter un article que nous avions propo~e d'introduire clans la constitution et qui stipulait que
les representants des pays d'origine des personnes deplacees, pays qui sont Membres des
Nations Unies, seraient admis a visiter librement
les camps. Mais c'est une curicuse liberte de
parole que ceIle qui laisse aux fascistes, aux
criminels de guerre et aux coHaborateurs la
liberte de parler dans les camps mais qui interdit
I'accCs de ces camps aux representants des
Gouvernements interesses. Ainsi, d'apres la
constitution, je ne puis penetrer dans un camp
et m'entretenir avec mes concitoyens, alors que
les criminels de guerre et le!! fascistes peuvent
le faire. Est-ce la la liberte de parole, je vous
le demande? Je crois que I'on n'invoque la
liberte de parole que lorsque 1'0n est a court
d'arguments serieux, de meme on ne parle de
democratie que lorsque 1'on manque d'arguments reels, solides et convaincants.
Our simple and clear proposal for free access
Notre proposition, nette et cIaire, d'accorder
to the camps by representatives of the countries le libre accCs des camps aux representants des
of origin of displaced persons met with opposi- pays d'origine des personnes dcplacees s'est
tion. It Was rejected. I do not understand why. heurte a l'opposition la plus violente. ElIe a ete
torpillee. J e ne vois pas pourquoi.
Nor do I understand such freedom of speech
Je ne con~ois pas non plus la liberte de parole
when institutes of public opinion, for instance, comme elle existe dans certains pays ou les
have firmly established the fact that in some instituts pour le sondage de l'opinion publique
countries 99 per cent of the population do not etablissent clairement que 99% de la population
want war. Governments also declare from the ne veut pas la guerre, ou les Gouvernements
rostrum that they desire peace, while in these declarent solennellement qu'iIs ne la desirent pas
countries, under the pretext of freedom of non plus, mais ou. cependant, sous pretexte de
.speech, a small group of adventurers carries on liberte de parole, une petite clique d'aventuriers
daily w~rpropaganda. Is it because this small mene chaque jour une propagande d'incitation
group has great freedom of speech and is able a la guerre. Cette clique d'aventuriers disposeto drown the voice of a whole nation of many rait donc de plus de liberte de parole, sa voix
millions and its Government? No, there is porterait plus loin que celIe de millions de
something wrong with that argument. Genuine citoyens appuyes par leur Gouvernement? Non,
freedom
. . of speech protects, above all, the i1 y a la quelque chose qui ne va pas. La
genume mterests of the people and if the ma- veritable liberte de parole doit defendre avant
jority of the. people do not want war, war tout les interets veritables du peuple, et la Oll
propaganda IS not the result of freedom of la majorite de la population ne desire pas la
speech.
guerre, la propagande beIIiciste ne nait pas de
la liberte de parole.
In the same way freedom of speech cannot
De meme, on ne saurait invoquer la liberte
be a reason for refusing to admit government de parole pour interdire aux representants des
representatives to the camps. The interests of Gouvernements interesse.<; I'accCs des camps.
genuine security demand the immediate re- Pour assurer vraiment la securite, il faut immemoval of war criminals from the camps. The diatement eloigner des camps les criminels de
interests of genuine security demand the im- guerre; iI faut dissoudre sans tarder les organisamediate disbanding of fascist or pro-fascist mili- tion militaires de caractere fasciste et pro-fasciste
tary organizations which fought on the side of qui ont combattu aux cotes de l' Allcmagne, aux
Gennany and the German fascists and are now, cotes des fascistes aHemands, et qui, on ne sait
for some reason, undergoing military training. pourquoi, re~oivent maintenant une instruction
They are welcomed, some definite work is being militaire. On accueiIle ces organisations, on tracarried out with them, stakes of some kind are vaille avecelles, on mise sur eIles; j'ignore ce que
being placed upon them. What hopes are con- l'on attend d'eHes.
.
nected with them, I am unable to say.
The resolution adopted in London on 13
Par la resolution votee le 13 fevrier 1946 a
February 1946 states clearly that the General Londres, l'AssembIee generale "recommande que
Assembly "recommends that Members of the les Membres des Nations Unies prennent immeUnited Nations forthwith take all the necessary diatement toutes les mesures pour que ·ces crimimeasures to cause the arrest of war criminals nels de guerre ... soient arretes et ramenes dans
. . • . and to cause them to be sent back to the les pays ou ont ete perpetres !eurs forfaits afin d'y

15 decembre 1946

1443

countries in which their abominable deeds were
done, in order that they may be judged and
punished according to the laws of those coun-

Soixante-septhlme seance pleniere

ctre juges et punis confonnement aux lois de ces
pays".

tries".
Indeed, eight months have now elapsed
since the adoption of the resolution, but in the
British zone only lO per cent of the displaced
persons have been screened. Screening in the
remaining camps has not been carried out.

En fait, comme vous le savez, huit mois se
sont ecoules depuis que cette resolution a ete
adoptee. Cependant, 10 pour 100 seulement des
personnes deplacees ont ete trices dans la zone
britannique. Dans les autres camps, le triage n'a
pas ete effectue.
I do not know how the representative of
Je ne sais sur quoi s'appuie le representant du
Canada, my great friend Mr. 1:fartin, can say Canada, mon grand ami M. Martin, Iorsqu'il
that the facts put forward by 111". Gromyko affinne que les renseignements communiques
and by myself are not proved. The representa- par M. Gromyko et par moi-meme n'ont pas
tives who oppose us do not produce any facts. ete prouves. Quant aux representants qui s'opAt the same time, in British Military Adminis- posent a nos arguments, ils n'apportent aucun
tration dowmcnts of 1;) October, it is stated fait. Cependant, on peut lire dans les docuthat the screening of Gunps had revealed that ments du gouvernemcnt militaire britannique,
10 per cent were war <:riminahi; that in other i en date du 15 octobre, que ce gouvernement
camps in the French zone 27 per cent were war militaire a procede a un triage dans les camps
criminals; and in camps {or refugees and dis- et qu'il y a trouve la pOUf lOO de criminels de
placed persons in the American zone 7 per cent. guerre; quedans certains camps de la zone
These are your own figures. Why, in reply fransaise, il y a 27 pour 100 de criminels de
to our statement, do you ten us that this is j guerre; que dans les camps de rCfugics et de
not in conformitv with the facts? It would be l personnes dcplacees, situcs en zone amcricaille,
better if it wer~ not in confonnity with the on a dcmasque 7 pour 100 de crimincls de
facts! That is precisely why we arc anxious. guerre. Cc sont vos propres chiffres. Des Iors,
I will say frankly that SO long as a single comment pouvez-vous nous repondre que teUe
murderer of our people remains in refugee n'est pas la rcalitC? Certes, il vaudrait mieux
camps, so long as one murderer of our old. qu'il n'en soit pas ainsi; mais c'est justement la
people and children, or one incendiary or one situation rcelle qui nous inquicte. ]e vous dirai
destroyer of our villag<'.'> remains in the camps, franchement que tant qu'il restera dans les
we will not rest and we will not he put off camps de refugies un seul assassin de nos concitoye05, tant qu'iI y restera un seul assassin de
by any talk about freedom of speech.
nos vieiIlards et de nos enfants, un seul de ceux
qui ont detruit et incendie nos villages, nous ne
nollS calmerons pas, et ce n'est pas au nom de la
liberte de parole qu'on pourra nous eI11pecher
de parler.
Je rcrete que la securite et l'interet des NaI n~peat, it is in the imere."t.<; of security and
of the United Nations that criminals should be tions Unies exigent que taus Ies crimineIs, sans
screened to the la..'lt man and removed from tbe exception, soient dcmasques et eloignes des
camps.
camps.
Nous avons cite nombre de faits, nollS avorul
We have quoted many facts and named many
places where military fOnl13tions are being ere" dCsigne beaucoup d'endroits Oll 1'on forme des
ated. We are told this is untrue. But everyone unites militaires, mais tout le monde declare que
knows about Northern Italy. It is common c'cst inexact. Or, il y a I'Italie du Nord, cela
knowledge al'«l that there is a town there called tout le monde le sait; il y a la, comme on le sait
Cizenattino, where Camp 5S is situated. The aussi, une petite vilIe nommee Cizenattino: c'est
British occupation authoriti~ there have re- la que se trouve le camp 55. Les autorites
formed a di,,'ision of former citizens of the d'occupation britannique ont reconstitue la une
Ukraine Government who fought in various division composee d'anciens citoyens ukrainiem
fascist fornlations on the side of the German qui avaient combattu aux cotes des envahisseurs
invader. I do not think that the British would allemands dans le cadre de diverses formatiorul
have fnn1l(~d a Ukrainian division in order fascistes. Je ne crois pas que les Anglais aient
that it should fight against the British. I do forme cette division d'Ukrainiens pour qu'elle
not think either th;lt this division of foreign combatte l'Angleterre. Je ne crois pas non plus
nationaL~ Wit'! created in mdcr to guard a melon que cette division, composee de citoyens etranfield or a garden. It is thi~ that makes us gers, ait ctc crece uniquement pour monter la
wonder. In spite of our having given the ad- garde autour d'un jardin ou d'un champ de
dress of tht'Sc fonnat.ion::; we arc told that the melons. Tout cela nous fait rcflcchir. Nous
Whole thing is int·ornprehCIl~ible. The result is avons indique les endroits ou ces formations ant
that we are not allowed to visit them and yet I ete constituees, mais, malgre cela, on nous demyself read in a newspaper that, in Canada, clare que tout cela est inconcevable. En fin de
there is a certain nationalist c.alled Kushnir who compte, on nous empeche de visiter ces formaleads a Ukrainian pro-fa.'iCist or~anization. He tions et cependant j'ai lu moi-meme dans Ies
was allowed to visit this camp. He was received joumaux qu'un certain Kouchnir, nationaliste,

,I
I

.1·

,.

l

Sixty-seventh Plenary Meeting

15 December 1946

1444

qui se trouve a la tete d'une organisatio? u~ai­
nienne pro-fasciste au Canada, a pu, !~, VlSiter
librement ce camp. 11 y a ete accueilli par le
General britannique Cray et par un certain
Dolinsky, un fasciste qui, en qualite de Colonel
d'une division S. S., avait combattu aux cotes des
Allemands contre ses compatriotes. On a re~u
Kouchnir et on lui a permis de decla.x:er: il
s'est ecoole vingt-cinq ans entre la premIere et
la deuxieme guerre mondiale, mais, e!ant donne
le progres de la technique, la prochame, gu~e
ne se fera pas attendre plus de quatre ou cmq
ans.
Can we remain calm when fascists are al-:
Pouvons-nous rester calmes lorsque noUB
lowed to go to camps and agitate in favour voyons que ran autoris~ l«;s f~cistes a visitc: lea
of war against my country, against my people camps et a. faire de 1agItation en vue d un~
who have suffered so much? But you are un- guerre contre mon pays, contre mon peuple qw
willing to admit us or our mixed co~ons. a tant souffert? Pourtant, -vous ne voulez pas
The only right solution of this problem IS. to nous laisser entrer dans les camps, vous ne voolez
send mixed, commissions: military occupation pas y laisser entrer des Commission~ mixtes 9-ui,
autp.orities, representatives of the co~ntries con- seoles pourraient resoudre la questIon des re£ucerned and of those countries which are not gies d'une fa~on .equitable. Je ~'adresse awe audirectly concerned. Let us create su~h. commis- torites d'occupanon, awe representants des p~ys
sions; let us go and see. Such commISSIOns must interesses ainsi qu'awe pays que la questIOn
be created and we guarantee that what we say n'interess~ pas directement, et je les invite a
will be confirmed.
creer ces Commissions. Rendons-nous sur les
lieux, voyons ce qui s'y passe.
. Il faut ereer ces
Commissions: nous garanbssons que ce que nous
disons se trouvera alors confirme.
We, the countries of origin, sincerely wish to
Nous, les pays d'origine des personn~ deplahelp in the capturing of war criminals. We cees 'nous desirons sincerement contnbuer a
know best who committed crimes in our de~asquer les criminels de guerre. ~ous conn~
countries and where they committed them. And sons mieux que personne ceux qUl ont comrrus
. we can help to catch these crintdlals. How- des crimes dans notre pays et le lieu de leurs
ever, the proposal of the Ukrainian delegation crimes. Nous pouvons donc aider a retrouver ces
that lists of displaced persons should be com- criminels. Cependant, lorsque la delegation
piled and handed over to us was rejected.
ukrainienne a propose que 1'on dresse des listes
des personnes deplacees et qu'on nous les communique, on a rejete cette proposition.
Thus the constitution of the IRO in the form
Ainsi, la constitution de l'Organisation interin which it is presented does not guarantee the nationale pour les re£ugies, teUe qu'eUe a ete
apprehension of war criminals. Furthermore, presentee, n'assure pas la capture des criminels
the constitution of the IRO in its present form d~ guerre. Bien plus, cette constitution, dans
disregards the interests of the countries of ori- son texte actuel, ignore les interets des pays ..
gin, that is to say, it disregards the real interests
d'origine des personnes deplacees, c'est-a.-dire les
of the .iisplaced persons themselves. That is interets veritables des personnes deplacees eUeswhy we, who are interested in the right solution memes. Nous sommes interesses de tres pres
of the problem of refugees and displaced perce que l'on trouve une solution equitable au prosons, cannot vote for a constitution which does
bleme des personnes deplacees et des refugies, et
not guarantee this. We voted against this con- c'est pourquoi nous ne pouvons voter pour une
stitution and shall continue to do so.
constitution qui n'offre pas de garanties a ce
point de vue. Nous avons vote contre cette
constitution et nous voterons encore contre elle.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Le PRESIDENT: J e donne la parole cl
I call upon Mr. Bartos, representative of YugoM.
Bartos, representant de la Yougoslavie.
slavia.
there by' the British General. ~~ay and ?y
Colonel Dolinsky of a;n S.. ~'. dIVlSI.on, a fasCISt
who fought in a fasCISt dIVlSIon Wl~h the Germans against his own people. .This man. was
received and given the opportumty of making a
speech to the effect that twenty-five years had
elapsed between the first and.secon? world wars
but with present-day t~chmque It would be
only four or five years before the next war.

a.

Mr. BARTOS (Yugoslavia) (translated from
M. BARTOS (Yougoslavie): La delegation
French): The Yugoslav delegation finds itself
yougoslave se trouve dans l'obligation de faire
compelled to make a statement on the problem
une declaration sur le probleme des personnes
of displaced persons and refugees now under
deplacees et des refugies que nous etudions, en
consideration. Everyone knows that the Yugoce moment. Chacl.!-n sait que le Gouvernement
slav Government and the delegation of our
yougoslave, et les delegations de notre pays
country whose duty it is to study this problem,
chargees de l'etude de ce probleme, ont toujours
have always been most active and have made
ete tres actifs et ont procede a des etudes approan exhaustive investigation of this question. We
, fondies de ceUe question. Nous l'avons traitee du
have dealt with it from a political, a technical
p~int de vue politique, du point de vue techand above all a humanitarian point of view.
~que, et surtout du point de vue humanitaire.
,-';':.'.

.!'/'" A_

15 d

It

if~

• who)
man
placl
lion

T

but
ques
beeIJ
peol
serio
tion
allief
lead

s(

diff(
in S

beeti
resp
are 1

Eng:
refu;
refu,

of s

beell

11

we 1
refu,

tai.ri
slav

inI
subI

v
try
trea

ma')
whc
han
duri
\Ver,

is (

yeal
tabl
in
pal'l
or (

I
int
the
thei
tiol
Thl
lay;

per:
the

can
Wc
ton
fOll

log

eU

15 decembre 1946

1445

Soixante-septieme seance pJeniere

It has been asked why the Yugoslavs whoif we exclude the fonner Yugoslav nationals
who during the war, declared themselves Germar: nationals-have no more than 40,000 displaced persons, should want to have this question considered and thoroughly examined.
This is the desire not only of our Government,
but also of our peoples. The way in which the
question of refugees and displaced persons has
been raised and handled is inconceivable to our
peoples. They cannot understand how it is that
serious misunderstandings on the refugee question have arisen between Yugoslavia and her
allies, some of whom, during the war, were our
leaders in the fight that led to victory.

On g'est demande pourquoi les YougosIaves
qui-si on fait abstraction des anciens citoyen.s
yougoslaves qui ont optc pendant la guerre pour
la nationalite allemande-n'ont pas plus de
40.000 personnes deplacees, demandent que
cette question soit examinee et approfondie.
Ce n'est pas seulement le desir de notre Gauvernement, mais ce1ui de nos peuples. La question des refugies et des personnes deplacees, telle
qu'elle est posee et traitee, est inconcevable pour
nos peuples. Pourquoi? lis ne peuvent pas
comprendre que des malentendus serieux se
soient eleves, a propos de la question des refugics entre la Yougoslavie et ses allies, dont certains, pendant la guerre, etaient nos chefs dans
la Iutte qui s'est terminee par la victoire.
Some people may possibly think that we have
Certains trouveront peut-etre que nous avons
different ideas of liberty. But in Yugoslavia and des conceptions differentes de la liberte. Mais,
in Serhia a law on the right of sanctuary has en Yougoslavie et en Serbie, il existe depuis
been in exi$tence since 1848. We have always 1848 une loi sur le droit d'asile. Nous avons
respected this law. You can ask the Jews who toujours observe cctte regIe. Vous pouvez deare now professors in the universities of America, mander aux Juifs qui sont maintenant profesEngland or Australia where they first found scurs dans les universites d'Arocrique, d'Anglerefuge after the advent of Hitler. Their first terre ou d'Australie, Oll its ont trouve le premier
refuge was Yugoslavia. In our country the right asile apres l'arrivce de Hitler. Leur premier reof sanctuary is an in~titlltion that has always fuge fut la Yougos1avie. Pourquoi? Parce que
chez nous le droit d'asile est une institution qui
been r<~$pc('ted.
a toujours tte respectee.
If we respect this right of sanctuary, why are
Or, si nous respectons ce droit d'asile, pourwe now opposed to this integral solution for all quoi nous opposons-nous maintenant a cette
refugees and all di$pIaccd persons? There is cer- solution intcgrale pour tous les rCfugies et toutes
tainly a reason. It was explained by the Yugo- les personnes deplacees? Il y a certainement une
slav delegation not only at the General Assembly raison a ceIa. Quelle est-eBe? EBe a ete exposee
in London but previously, in certain memoranda par la delegation yougoslave, non seuleroent a
submitted to governments.
l'Assemblee generale de Londres, mais auparavant, dans certains memoires qui ont ete presentes aux Gouverneroents.
We do not object to those who left our counNous ne nous opposons pas a ce que soient
try because of their political opinions being consideres comme refugies ou personnes deplatreated as refugees or displaced persons-there cees ceux qui ont quitte notre pays a. cause de
may be such people. But we do not wish those ,leurs opinions politiques; peut-ctre y en a-t-il
who left our country with weapons in their clans ce cas. Mais nous ne voulons pas que ceux
hands to join the enemy ranks; those who qui ant ··tte notre pays les annes a la main,
during four yc.'U'S of fighting and occupation pour se rendre dans les rangs ennemis, ceux qui,
were the protagonists of the "new Europe", that pendant quatre annees de luttes et d'occupation
is of fascism; those who, during the terrible ont ete les protagonistes de la "nouveBe Europe"
years wc lived through in Europe, strove to es- c'est-a-dire du fascisroe, ceux qui, pendant les
tablish the "new order" that coot so many lives terribles annees que nous avons vecues en
in Europe and caused such upheavals in all E urope, ont voulu assurer 1",orcl re nouveau»
part~ of the world, to be regarded as refugees qui a coOte tant de victiroes a l'Europe et tant
or displaced persons.
de bouleversements au monde entier: que ceux-Ia
soient consideres comme refugies ou personnes
deplacees.
But now the people who left their country
Mais aujourd'hui les gens qui ant quitte leur
in the company of the GerinaIlS are treated by pays aux cotes des Alleroands sont traites par les
the Allies as refugees; they are placed under Allies comme des refugies; ils sont places sous
their protection, that is to say, under the protec- leur protection, c'est-a-dire, sous la protection
tion of States Members of the United Nations. de pays Merobres des Nations Unies. lis sont
They are even favoured in comparison with the mem.e favonses par rapport aux fiIs fideIes de
loyal sons of our country who have fought notre pays qui ont toujours lutte pour la cause
persistently for the cause and the purposes of et les buts des Nations Unies. C'est une chose
the United Nations.. This is something that we
cannot understand. There is a reason for it. que nous ne pouvons pas comprendre. Il y a la
We have endeavoured to study this new his- une raison. Nous avons voulu etudier ce phe..
torical phenomenon of which no trace is to be nomene historique nouveau, dont on ne trouve
found throughout the ages. It was the psycho- pas trace au cours des ages. Plus que le cote
logical rather than the material aspect of the materie1 de l'existence de ces "re£ugies" c'est le
existence of these "refugees," that led our Gov- cote psychologique qui a conduit notre Gou-

'f'

!
1; "

1,
. "
: . ~
;,

}f '/
j ..

"
I'

!"

Sixty-seventh Plenary Meeting

ernment and public opinion in our country to
undertake an exhaustive study of the problem.
ThOi'ie who took part in the work of the Refugee Committee in London tast April and May,
in the work of the Economic and Social Council
and more recently in the work of the Third
Committee, will remember the efforts made by
Mr. Mattes, the member of the Yugoslav delegation who was instructed, not by the Government, but by Yugoslavia, to study this m.atter.
Mr. Mattes who, I would point out, lS an
electrical engineer, showed himself in the unanimous opinion of the members of the Third
Committee, to be a specialist on the refugee
problem.
From the very start we realized that this
question had both a humanitarian and-as Mrs.
Roosevelt pointed out-a political aspect. From
the very first day we were among those who
maiJ)tained that the problem was within the
comprtence of our O~anization.
Undouhtedlv it i! within our comprotence. Wt
must solve it, in such a way that the needs of
humanity may be satisfied by giving assistance
to those who deserve and require it.

I

lS December 1946

1446

I

The right of sanctuary is one question. The
right to assistance is another. In both these
fieldll .yugoslavia has never failed to make her
contribution.
But how is it possible to help people who have
left their country? We have aJwaysheld the
opinion, and still do, that the first and most
natural fonn of assistance is to help displaced
persons to return to their own country. Voluntarily, not forcibly. You are perhaps surprised!
Why have they not returned? Because, we assert,
and have on many occasions furnished evidence
in support of our contention, they have been
prevented from doing so.
During -the war I spent four years in concentration camps. My eyes and ears witnessed
what happened there. From the first day, the
Allied authorities singled out the prisoners and
deportees of certain countries (France, Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands) who
were returned to their countries willy-nilly. As
for the others they were advised by what I
might call the village and camp bosses, not to
return to their country of origin.
Certain trains proceeding to Yugoslavia were
stopped several times by the British or American
authorities, who repeatedly asked everyone if
he wished to return of his own free will. This
operation was repeated at the frontier. Everyone was I ap;ain asked separately whether he
wished to return to his country or not. Then,
before everyone, certain persons--unfortunately
of high military rank, colonels and ~enerals who
had collaborated with the Germans--were interrop;ated 50 that they mi~ht publicly and
audibly announce their unwillingness to return
to their country. This, to say the least, constitutes what may be called agitation. The people

a

vernement et notre opinion publique lle livrer
une etude approfondie.
Ceux qui ont pris part aux travaux du Comit~
des refugies Londres, en avril et mai derniers
du Conseil economique et social et, actuell~
ment, de la Troisieme Commission, se rappeUent
les efforts deployes par M. Mattes, membre de
la delegation yougoslave, qui a ete char~e~ je
puis dire non pas par le Gouvernement mais par
la Yougoslavie, d'etudier la question. U, Mattes
- qui, je le souligne, est ingenieur electricien s'est revele, de I'avis unanime des membres de
la Troisicme Commission, un specialiste du proa
bleme des refugies.

a

a

Des le premier jour, nom avon!! Vll que cette
question avait un aspect humanitaire et Mme Roosevelt y a fait allusion - un aspect
politique.
le premier jour, nous avons
panni ceux qui soutenaient que le probleme
etait de la competence de notre Organisation.
Certes, il est de notre competence. NOli!
somme.el trnu!! de le resoudre. Comment le rb
soudre? De tel1e maniere que ]e.<l exigence.el hu·
manitaires soient satisfaites. Comment peuventdIes' ctre satisfaites? En donnant aide
tolLS
ceux qui le mentent et en ont besoin.
Le droit d'asile constitue une premiere question. Le droit l'assistance en est une seconde.
Dans ces deux domaines, la Yougo,c;lavie n'a
jamais manque d'apporter son concours.
Mais comment est-il possible d'assister des
personnes qui ont quitte leur pays? Nous avons
toujours ete d'avis - nOllS le sommes encoreque la premiere forme d'assistance, la plus normale, consiste aider les personnes deplaceeg en
vue du retour dans leur patrie. Volontairement,
non par la force. Vous €tes peut-ctre etonnes!
Pourquoi ne sont-eUes pas rentrees? Parce que
- nous l'affirmons, nous en avons donne
maintes reprises la preuve - dIes ont ete empcchees de le faire.
J'ai passe, durant la guerre, quatre annees
dans les camps de concentration. J'ai ete temoin
de auditu et de visu des phenomenes qui se sont
produits. Les autorites aUiees, des le premier jour,
ont fait la distinction entre les prisonniers et deportes de certains pays (France, Belgique,
Luxembourg et Pays-Bas), qui ont etc, volens
nolens, emmenes dans leur pays et leg autres,
auxquels il etait conseille - par si je puis dire,
des coqs de village, des coqs de camp - de ne
pas rentrer dans leurs pays d'origine.
Certains trains diriges sur la Y ou~os1avie furent, plusieurs reprises, arrctes par leg autorites
britanniques ou americaines en cours de route
pour demander et redemander a chacun s'il avait
bien la volonte, la libre volonte de rentrer. Ce~tc
operation etait repetee la frontiere. 11 etait de
nouveau demande chacun, separcment, s'il entendait ou rion retoumer dans son pays. Puis,
devant tout le monde, on interro,geait certainCll
personnes - de haut rang militaire, malheureusement: colonels et generaux ayant collabore
avec les Allemands - afin qu'elles declarent
voix haute qu'dle se prononpubliquement
c;aient contre le retour dans !eur pays. Cela

Des

ere

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

a

15 .ueembre 1946

tat tbcn taken to C

lIIf..ron to were pt

of thc formrr Y

\ftJ" officered t h("
~ Germans in our

Jwill mention only
lid I Groat. so-calle
clsid' of the edic C'~
I~orw r;

Ilia amount of coli

&dbCl' with certain Y,
ID the shame of our

dJat Nurcmbn"g dec
lkDcc in Hitler and
rJycs at his de ~l. .
lllt to Bd~de whl

JdW11 post of Pen

Nr.dic, our quisling.
mand of this camp .a

Another example:
I

c01onei in the ero

IWians arrived he e

Pavditch who prom

~ Accordin~ tl

!he Allied J,uthoritio,

d!e Croatian Army
Amrj. In this capaci

Cloaban amI)' ordl"r.'
i that th

gentlCll

iqIlbUtions.
We could gh'e 01
IIlII1d be too long I
1lMvcr, I c n tell \'
iBbt of the BclJ.:i. n'
~ have been ble tl
IkI in camps in Gcr
Iriving cmJ)' in E

, rep;tuiatro throuj
but I
ncre are me un
msted by the c m
the c mps in ...
~ were co 'dered
ft inacdib e,

, At fint .....c though

~ We anrihuled

I

lIlitude of the eomm
WIowcd by governm
We first of all drc'
"llIch filets, requc
lie allowed to TC:mr.
Ilk! submint'd the c
-

Meanwhile t

!he situation is ~lI(h
to study the matlc
~ to arri\'cat ,
and reasonable.
, Wc think it migt
IJlll:mational C'omm
IbouId be sati.·died w

~ w<l;S made by I

forogn Affain. i

~don of which M
Qlk pan in the dcli

1S decembre 1946

1447

were then taken to certain camps. There these
unfortunates were put under command of officers of the former Yugoslav army, who during
the war ofIicered the quisling army formed by
the Germans in our country.

de
fO.

Cd
~

me .
on.
OIlS

Tt,

hu~.

0Ul

:It!-

Ide.
n'a
do
'OIl!

:-

rn·

itls

lute

..ait
~.tte

de
en·
uis,
ncs

eu'

ed

ent
on·

tIa

I will mention only two names, those of a Serb
and a Croat, so-called generals. Damnjanovic,
chief of the Nedic Cabinet during the war, was
a prisoner of war; as such, he carried on a certain amount of colIaborationist agitation; together with certain Yugoslav officers he signedto the shame of our history and our peoplethat Nuremberg declaration expressing confidence in Hitler and in which they put themselves at his disposal. This Mr. Damnjanovic was
sent to Belgrade where he was given the important post of Personal Assistant to General
Nedic, our quisling. He was placed in command of this camp and is still there.
Another example: that of Mr. Matija Parae,
a colonel in the Croatian army. The day the
Italians arrived he entered the service of Mr.
Pavelitch who promoted him to the rank of
ge:q.eraI. According to documents confirmed by
the Allied authorities, he is now in command of
the Croatian Army of the Royal Yugoslav
Army. In this capacity he is authorized to issue
Croatian army orders. What is incredible to us,
is that these gentlemen decide ancL authorize
repatriations.
We could give other examples but the list
would be too long and we have too little time.
However, I can tell you that thanks to the. foresight of the Belgian and French Governments
we have been able to discover cases of soldiers
held in camps in Germany making their escape,
·arriving secretly in Belgium or France and being repatriated through Germany. These things
. are incredible, but they are nevertheless true.
There are some unfortunates who were first
arrested by the camp guards, because, having
left the camps in which they were detained,
they were considered deserters.

At first we thought there was misunderstanding. We attributed this state of alTairs to the
attitude of the commandants and not to a policy
followed by governments.
We first of alI drew attention to the existence
of such facts, requesting that they should not
be allowed to recur. We subsequently protested
and submitted the question to the United Nations. Meanwhile the practice continues and
the situation is such that we have been obliged
to study the matter and ask that means be
found to arrive at a solution that is both just
and reasonable.
We think it might be necessary to send an
international commission of enquiry, and we
should be satisfied with that solution. This proposal was made by Mr. Bebler, Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs, in the Special Committee in
London of which Mr. McNeil was Chairman. I
took part in the deliberations of this Committee.

Soixante-septieme seance pleniere

constitue pour le moins ce qu'on peut appeler
de l'agitation. Les gens etaient alors emmenes
dans certains camps. La, ces malheureux etaient
places sous le commandement d'officiers de
I'ancienne armee yougoslave, qui formcrent pendant la guerre les cadres de l'armee quisling
constituee par les Allemands dans notre pays.
Je ne citerai que deux noms, ceux d'un Serbe
et d'un Croate, soi-disant generaux. Damnjanovie, pendant la guerre chef de Cabinet de Nedic,
fut prisonnier de guerre; en tant que tel, il se
livra a une certaine agitation collaborationniste;
iI signa notamment avec certains officiers yougoslaves - c'est la honte de notre histoire et de
notre peuple - cette declaration de Nuremberg
dans laquelle ils exprimaient leur confiance en
Hitler et se mettaient asa disposition. Ce Damnjanovic fut emmene a Belgrade OU il exerr;a les
hautes fonctions de chef du Cabinet du general
Nedic, notre quisling. Il a ete place a la tete
d'un camp et iI y est encore maintenant.
Un autre exemple: celui de Matija Parae,
colonel de l'armee create. Le premier jour de
I'arrivee des Italicns il s'est mis au service de
M. Pavelitch, qui I'a promu general. Selon des
documents qui sont confirmes par les autorites
alliees, il est maintenant commandant de I'annee .
croate, dans I'armee royale yougoslave. En cette
q ualite, il est autorise a etablir les ordres du jour
de l'armee croate. Chose qui pour nous est incroyable, ces messieurs decident et autorisent les
rapatriements.
Nous pourrions citer d'autres exemples, mais
la liste en serait trop longue et nous avons trop
peu de temps. Je puis cependant dire que, grace
a la clairvoyance du Gouvemement beige et du
Gouvemement franc;ais, nous avons pu voir des
exemples de soldats retenus dans des camps en
Al1emagne, reussissant a s'en echapper et a arriver c1andestinement en Belgique DU en France
et qui ontete rapatries en traversant l' Allemagne. Ce sont des choses incroyables mais cc
sont pourtant des faits. Il y a des malheureux
qui ont d'abord ete arretes par les patrouilles des
camps, parce qu'ayant abandonne les camps
dans lesquels ils etaient detenus, il etaient consideres eomme deserteurs.
Nous avons d'abord pense qu'i1 s'agissait d'un.
malentendu. Nous avons attribue eet etat de
choses a I'attitude des commandants et non a
une politique poursuivie par les Gouvemements.
Nous avons d'abord attire l'attention sur l'exis-tence de faits de ce genre en priant de bien vouloir eviter les repetitions. Nous avons ensuite
proteste et soumis la question aux Nations Unies.
Cependant, la pratique de ces faits se prolonge
et la situation est tel1e que nous avons cte obliges
d'etudier la chose et de demander qu'on trouve
un moyen pour arriver a une solution qui soit
a la fois juste et raisonnable.
Nous pensons qu'il serait necessaire, et nollS
nous contenterions de cette solution, d'envoyer
une commission internationale d'enqucte. Cette
proposition a ctc faite par M. Bcbler, ministre
.adjoint des Affaires etrangcres, a la Commission
speciale de Londres que presidait M. McNeil.
J'ai assiste aux dcbats de cette Commission.

. ~.

,

.',:

.

I

i'

. ; ~

Sixty-seventh Plenary Meeting

1448

15 December 1946

Apres que M. Bebler eut fait cette proposi.
Mter Mr. Bebler had made his proposal, Mr.
McNei1 replied: "Very well, I will think it tion, M. McNeil lui a repondu: "Bien, je vais
over". The next day Mr. McNeil made use of y reflechir." Le lendemain, M. McNeil a fait
the Chairman's veto and said: "This motion usage du veto presidentiel et a dit: "Cette mocompromises certain Allied States and as Chair- tion compromet certains Etats allies et, en ma
qualite de President, j'en interdis la discussion."
man I forbid its discussion."
M. Bebler s'est enerve, a proteste, mais la disMr. Bebler was annoyed and protested, but
the discussion was closed. It was purely and cussion a ete close. C'etait la manifestation pure
simply a manifestation of the United Kingdom et simple de la non-acceptation par le GouverneGovernment's refusal to accept an international ment britannique de l'enquete internationale tenenquiry to ascertain the truth of the facts alleged dant a prouver la veracite des faits allt~gues par
le Gouvernement yougoslave.
by the Yugoslav Government.
Dans notre pays, cette affaire a rec;u une tres
In our country this matter received wide
publicity. Everyone is convinced that the quis- grande publicite. Tout le monde est convaincu
que les quislings se sont mis sous la protection de
~gs have put themselves under the protection
of certain countries and-I admit that this is certains pays et que - ce n'est pas exact, je le
not true-that the Refugee Organization has reconnais -I'Organisation des refugies a ete
been created to cover these cases. I accept the creee pour couvrir ces cas. J'accepte la these
view that there are political refugees from every qu'il y a des refugies politiques de tous les pays,
country, even from Yugoslavia. But we are not comme il y en a meme de Yougoslavie. Mais il
concerned here with refugees who wish to be or ne s'agit pas, ici, des refugies qui veulent, qui
who can be repatriated; we are not concerned peuvent, etre rapatries, il ne s'agit pas des refuwith political refugees, but with quislings and gies politiques; il s'agit des quislings, des crimiwar criminals including Mr.. Pavelitch himself. nels de guerre; il s'agit meme de M. Pavelitch.
We gave the registration number of Mr. Pa- Nous avons donne le matricule du caissier de
velitch's treasurer, who was discovered by the M. Pavelitch qui a ete retrouve par le haut-comInter-Allied High Command in Paris. He was mandement interallie a Paris. I1 a ete arrete,
artested, but as the result of an error, he escaped. mais par suite d'une faute il s'est echappe. ImaImagine Petain being arrested in Gennany and ginez que Petain ait ete arrete en Allemagne et
se soit echappe de sa prison. C'est une chose
escaping from his prison. That is incredible.
incroyable.
Nous avons insiste pour que soit creee une orWe have insisted that an organization should
be established, but that screening should be ganisation, mais qu'on fasse un triage au moyen
carried out by means of an international enquiry, d'une enquete internationale, qu'on utilise des
and that standardS should be adopted. We can criteres. Nous pouvons nous entendre sur la defiagree upon the definition of war criminals and nition des criminels de guerre, sur celle des quisquislings. When this definition has been accept- lings. Cette definition acceptee, les personnes qui
ed, persons covered by it should not receive as- tomberont sous le coup de cette definition ne
sistance. The amendments proposed for this devront pas recevoir d'assistance. Les amendepurpose have been watered down so much that ments qui ont ete proposes dans ce sens sont tellethey have lost their true character.
ment reduits qu'ils ont perdu leur vrai caractere.
It is the political side of the question the fear
C'est le cote politique de la question, c'est la
of seeing misunderstandings arise bet.:.veen the crainte de voir des malentendus s'elever entre les
Allies and between the United Nations, that Allies, entre les Nations Unies, qui nous empeche
pre;rents us from joining the new organization d'adherer a la nouvelle organisation, telle qu'elle
m Its present form. It is mainly for this reason est con~ue. C'est pour cette raison, principalethat we cannot accept the report that has been ment, que nous ne pouvons pas adopter le rap- ,
drawn up or the draft constitution.
port elabore et le projet de constitution.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Le PRESIDENT: Trois orateurs ont defendu la
Three speakers have supported the resolution resolution, et trois autres ont parle contre. Quatre
and three have spoken against it. I still have representants ont encore demande la parole pour
four speakers who wish to explain their vote. justifier leur vote. Il s'agit des representants du
They are the representatives of Chile, El Sal- Chill, du Salvador, du Liban et du Royaumevador, Lebanon and the United Kingdom. I Uni. Je propose que la parole leur soit accordee,
propose to call upon them and that their mais que leur declaration soit limitee a cinq
speeches be limited to five minutes.
minutes.
I call upon Mrs. Labarca, representative of
J e donne la parole a Mme Labarca, repreChile.
sentante du Chili.
Mrs. LABARCA ( Chile) (translated from
Mme LABARcA (Chili): Depuis les premieres
French): Ever since the first steps' taken in demarches qui ontete faites a Londres, et la
London and the communication from the Sec- communication adressee par le Secretaire general
retary-General regarding the establishment of au sujet de la creation d'une organisation intemaa?- international institution for refugees and tionale pour les refugies et personnes deplacees,
displaced persons, our Government desirous of notre Gouvemement, souhaitant contribuer a la
helping to lessen the sufferings of millions of diminution des souffrances de millions de malunfortunate beings, has collaborated to the best heureux, a collabore dans la mesure de ses forces,
of its ability in solving this problem.
a la solution de ce probleme.

15 et'cembre 1946

ID the Economic :l.I
it the Third d Fi rt
. n took an •
Ibis question upholdi
~ between the
ni
!be establishment of a
~ costly nd too con
last longer t h n was e

Although we ded:
tbe establishment of
approvee:I th t 0 f a (
the auspices of lite F..c4
When the I [ler idea
riIm made • rt.SC.rv:.

CllUDtJy would adopt

~tion. \\"hl'tl i

rDDlined in the Fift
tXm of Chile and Pc;
wbich would enable I
Iabonte with the Inte
iDrlon, even if the'
the constitution at lhi
Lastly, in the \'Olt~

our ddc~ation
Ultion be ren

~ e lIterdorc IOn.,
l8at it ~ tll~ dlll~'
hnkly lit t the:: C'ltIIOUlI organiz"ltion. te
atimatc:s nd the . ~ .te
not permit u: 10
at present.

cvtrthd

w(" nr

with ,the pri
the Intematiol
ilounded. W me: 11
4 our ability, in soh'i:
lid dispI ced pcrsor1
hmpitaJil)' in Oll
b do cvc:rything
.
to Ye them fr
. Iivdibood.
IICDt

We bdie'\'t that lit
of the
• if not th
them, for it tends to
victims citizens '
poitic.aJ rreedom po
pllIIibilitia of «on,
~ercd them in OUl

'~ a wann wclco
Accordin~ly, Chil'

The PRF.SlDP.:"T '

I caJ! upon M r. ?v:

ltbanon.

Mr. MAl.1K (Let
whv t
wiII vote r~r the' re
~ brien...

lttnatiooa! Rdu~l'e
!ntion of last Febru;
11 recognized as a 12
~ problem, am
~~pe and charac
~ ~d solved b}

'-WllOQUc and So<

15 decembre 1946

1449

In the Economic and Social Council, and also
in the Third and Fifth Committees, the Chilean
delegation took an active part in the debates on
this question, upholding the principle of solidarity between the United Nations and opposing
the establishment of a body which might become
too costly and too complicated, and which might
last longer than was originally intended.
Although we declared ourselves opposed to
the establishment of an autonomous body, we
approved that of a commission to work under
the auspices of the Economic and Social Council.
When the latter idea was rejected, our delegation made a reservation on the position our
. country would adopt in regard to the future
organization. When article 10 of this draft was
examined in the Fifth Committee, the delegations of Chile and Peru introduced amendments
which would enable these two countries to collaborate with the International Refugee Organization, even if they found it difficult to sign
the constitution at the outset.
Lastly, in the vote on this constitution as a
whole, our delegation abstained, requesting that
the abstention be recorded.
We therefore consider, for the time being,
that it is the, duty of our delegation to state
frankly that the establishment of an autonomous organization, together with its budgetary
estimates and the system of contributions set up,
do not permit us to sign the draft convention
at present.
Nevertheless, we are wholeheartedly in agreement with the principles of solidarity on
which the International Refugee Organization
is founded. We mean to contribute, to the best
of our ability, in solving the problem of refugees
and displaced persons, and we wish to offer
them hospitality in our country. It is our desire
to do everything possible, in the future as in the
past to save them from distress and to ensure
their livelihood.
We believe that this form of assistance is one
of the best, if not the best, which can be given
them, for it tends to make of these unfortunate
war victims citizens enjoying the full civic and
political freedom possessed by our people. All
possibilities of economic development will be
offered them in our country, which will give
them a warm welcome.
Accordingly, Chile will abstain from voting.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Malik, representative of the
Lebanon.
.
Mr. MALIK (Lebanon): I wish to indicate
very briefly why the delegation of Lebanon
will vote for the resolution establishing the IntematioI)al Refugee Organization. By the resolution of last February, the problem of refugees
is recognized as a great present problem, as an
urgent problem, and as one that is international
in scope and character. Therefore, it has to be
faced and solved by the comity of nations. The
Economic and Social Council and the Third

Soixante-septieme seance plen!lm~

Au Conseil economique et social, ainsi qu'au
sein des Troisieme et Cinquieme Commissions,
la delegation du Chill a pris une part active aux
debats qui se sont deroules sur cette question en
appuyant le principe de solidarite entre les Nations Unies et en s'opposant a la creation d'une
organisation qui pourrait devenir trop couteuse
et trop compliquee et dont la duree pourrait
depasser celle qu'on avait envisagee au debut.
Si nous nollS somrnes prononces contre la creation d'un'e organisation autonome, nous approuvions celle d'une commission qui aurait travaille
sous les auspices du Conseil economique et social.
Quand cette derniere idee a ete fejetee, notre
delegation a fait une reserve sur l'attitude
qu'adopterait notre pays vis-a.-vis de la 'future
organisation. Lorsque l'article 10 de ce projet
fut etudie au sein de la Cinquieme Commission,
les delegations du Chill et du Perou introduisirent des amendements qui devaient permettre a
ces deux pays de collaborer avec l'Organisation
intemationale pour les refugies, meme s'il leur
etait difficile au debut de signer la constitution.
Finalement, au moment du vote sur l'ensemble de la constitution, notre delegation s'abstint
en faisant prendre acte de son abstention.
C'est pourquoi nous considerons pour le moment qu'il est du devoir de notre delegation de
declarer franchement que la constitution d'une
organisation autonome, ses previsions budgetaires et le systeme de contributions etabli ne
nous permettent pas, pour l'instant, de signer
le projet de convention.
Neanmoins, nous voulons apporter notre
adhesion cordiale aux principes de solidarite qui
sont a la base de I'Organisation internationale
pour les refugies. Nous entendons contribuer
dans la mesure de nos forces a la solution du
probleme des refugies et personnes deplacees, et
nous voulons leur offrir l'hospitalite dans notre
pays. Nous desirons faire dans l'avenir, comme
nous l'avons fait dans le p~, tout ce que noW!
pouvons pour qu'ils echappent a la misere et
pour leur assurer I'existence.
NoW! pensons que cette forme d'assistance est
une des meilleures, sinon la mci1leure qu'on
puisse leur apporter, car elle tend a. faire de ces
malheureuses victimes de la guerre des citoyens
jouissant de toutes les libertes civiques et politiques dont jouissent les citoyens de notre pays
et a qui toutes les possibilites de developpement
economique soient offertes dans notre pays qui
les accueille amicalement.
En consequence, le Chili s'abstiendra de voter.
Le . PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole
M. Malik, representant du Liban.

a

M. MALIK (Liban) (traduit de l'anglais):
Je desirerais exposer brievement les raisons pour
lesquelles la delegation du Liban votera pour la
resolution tendant a creer l'Organisation internationale pour les refugics. Par la resolution qu'elle
a adoptee au mois de fcvrier demier, l' Assemblee
generale a reconnu que le probleroe des refugies
est un grand probleme d'actualite, qu'une
extreme urgence s'y attache, que sa portee et
son caractere sont d'ordre international. C'est

j,
: ; ~.

:'

Sixty-seventh Plenary Meeting

1450

donc par accord entre les Nations qu'il doit
ctre traitc et resolu. Le Conseil economique et
social et la Troisicme Commission de l'Assemblee generale ont passe la majeure partie de leur
temps a discuter ce problcme et a elaborer la
constitution qui nous est soumise aujourd'hui.
Ce document est le resultat de compromis et de
concessions reciproques.
La delegation du Liban a participe a l'elaboThe delegation of Lebanon participated in
the genesis of this document. We submitted our ration de ce document; eUe y a apporte sa part
own quota of amendments, some of which were d'amendements, dont certains ant ete acceptes
accepted, some modified and incorporated, some quelques-uns modifies et incorpores dans l~
rejected. The result of hundreds of hours of texte et d'autres ecartes. Des centaines d'heures
debate and discussion is the present constitution. de discussions ant abouti a la constitution qui
Admittedly, it is not perfect, but at least it is nous est presentee. De l'aveu general, eIle n'est
something to start with, something to go by. I pas parfaite, au mains est-ce une base de laquelle
fed, therefore, that because this problem is ur- on peut partir, un trace a suivre. j'appuierai
gent and cannot wait for human perfection, or donc cette constitution, estimant que l'urgence
the perfection of human products, I will support du probleme ne laisse pas le temps d'attendre
que I'homme - ou son ~uvre - ait atteint la
the present constitution.
perfection.
J'estime en outre qu'il serait grand dommage
.I feel further that if the enormous amount
of labour that has gone into this work should que l'enonne somme de travail que represente
now be wasted and nothing should be set up to ce document soit perdue, et qu'il ne sorte de
grapple with this great problem, it would be a tout cela rien qui permette de s'attaquer au
great pity. The General Assembly entrusted the grand probleme qui nous occupe. L' AssembIee
Economic and Social Council with the task of generale a canfie au Conseil economique et
examining this problem and 3Olvin~ it. It has social la tache d'etudier ce probleme et de le
examined this question most minutely, and now, resoudre. Le Conseil s'y est applique avec la
it is submitting back to the General Assembly plus grande attention et il presente maintenant
a l'Assemblee les resuItats de ses efforts.
the fruits, such as they are, of its labours.
Du point de vue du Conseil cconomique et
From the point of view of the Economic and
Social Council, as such, apart from the limited social, en tant que tel, et independamment du
perspective of anyone delegation, these labours, champ de vision limite de chacune des delegaI submit, cannot now be wasted. Naturally, the tions, j'e.stime que cette somme de travail ne
support I am giving thi.s constitution does not doit pas ctre perdue. L'appui que je donne a
mean either that I am wholly pleased with it la constitution ne signifie pas, bien entendu,
or that thereby I commit my Government to join que je la trouve enticrement satisfaisante et ne
t.he International Refugee Organization. I re- constitue pas, pour le Gouvernemcnt du Liban
serve my Government's complete liberty of action un engagement de faire partie de I'Organisation
regarding the joining' of the International Refu- internationale pour les refugies. Je reserve la
complete liberte d'action de man Gouvernement
gee Organization.
en ce qui concerne sa participation a I'Organisation internationale pour les refugies.
.By my support now, I am only expressing the
En appuyant aujourd'hui la constitution dont
WISh that the IRQ should arise and work and iI s'agit, je ne poursuis qu'un objectif: voir
assume responsibility. For the very life blood of l'OJR mise sur pied, commencer a fonctionner
international organizations, and certainly of the et a assumer ses responsabilites. En dfet, le prinUnited Nations, is the promotion of the spirit cipe vital qui anime les organisations internaof mutual confidence. If we do not trust one tionales, et certainement ceUe des Nations Unies,
another even, and especially, in the ultimate c'est l'esprit de confiance rcciproque. Si nous
ddicate matters, there will be no healthy inter~ n'avons pas confiance les uns dans les autres,
national life. He who begins the process of trust mc~e et surtout lorsqu'il s'agit de questions
has a double reward. For my part, J am willing ~mmemmcnt delicates, il ne peut y avoir de vie
to trust in advance, in spite of the evident risks mternationalc saine. Cclui qui, le premier, donne
~volved, that the IRO wiII be big enough to sa .confiancc est doublement recompense. Pour
nse. above. every possibility of abuse, that it will ma part, je suis pret, malgre les risques evidents,
be ImpartIal and just enough not to endanger a admettre d'avance que l'OIR s'clcvera a un
the basic interests of my country. We must never niveau teI qu'cHe ne puisse commettre aucun
forget that it will' always be subject to the ulti- abw;, et qu'eHe sera assez impartiale et equitable
mate control of the Economic and Social Coun- pour ne pas compromettre les intercts fondacil. If those who will be put in charge of it are mentaux de mon pays. 11 ne faut pa." oublier
of the same morale calibre as that of those with que l'OJR sera toujours soumise, en fin de
whom I had the honour to collaborate in the compte, a l'autorite du Conseil economique et
Economic and Social Council, I am sure it wiII social. Si ccux qui auront la charge de la·
never be put to any abuse.
dinger sont moralement .de la mcme qualitc que
ceux avee qui j'ai eu I'honneur de coUaborer
au Conseil economique et social, je suis certain
Committee of the General Assembly have spent
the better part of their time discussing this proband elaborating the present constitution.
This constitution is the result of compromise and
oon~on from every direction.

lem

1946

15 December 1946

The PauIDItNT (trtl
J aD upon Mr.

j(

lJDited Kin dom.

Mr. BE WICK (Unilt'
kre to expl in m)' \'Ol
pamcd our \'Ote t ufTi
~ I do
. 1. ha\\'(
..en1, I modcsc mmdr
p for t~ time t Ate

A-mbJy. Onc excuse I
,. adopted procedure

1fT friend Dr. Mcd~.
if( up I litllc more um

I wish to mo\"e, that
I,ID amendment t 01

" hich, un(ortun. trly
made on the end ~
~ followinR words hI
• the General Coun i1

At the moment. und
aDds, the 0
niu lic
it« hc.adq~rters in P
agreed to in the
Cmncil. Ithou$:h it Wl
that • fixtd place .....
wIJcn it WtlS uncert. in
aatilUte tM Gme:. I (
tilL llu~rc wrrc m.l
to

pen up th
but
& • ode
ndinst. thl
"the pproprlAtc Corr
miu~.

.le.

Frun m ny poinll 0

rDnJy if
co uht'd
'I:Dicnce of the reprOlt
i vicw--t.hc f ir ci(y

However. co .dc:n tion
!be choice of Gen a f

IKrW exist, and there .

~n
qaartcrI of ~ United

mr specialized

WadqlWteTa. In th~ p
be ID especial ad v n I
qtI2ltm of the I ntema

!&l in the same city a
Red Cross Socictic:s, w
be a good d of colh
Howc\'CI', this tUnl'OJ
amendment. It is d '
Council a little more f
.~ I am sure thl
iDclin«J tow rd P ri.~
conclusion that Il
~ suitahlc office
bve the balance
aboold like to lea\'e
tboice. J hope, Wet
will accept thia amcrn

or

15 decembre 1946

Soixante-septieme seance plenier.,

que cette organisation n'en viendra pas a cornmettre des abus.
Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a
M. Beswick, representant du Royaume-Uni.

.t
:t
l-

if

a

i.
le
).

11:
~,

le
'es
ui
~t

lIe
:ai
lCe
Ire
la

1ge
Ite
de
au
h~e

et

le
la
ant

; et
du
gane
e
du,
ne

a

ban

:ion
: la
lent

mi-

lont
voir

tner
rin'na-

lies.

IOUS

lre5,

iortS
~e

nn e
~our

:n ts,

un
cun

:tble
Ida-

,lief
de

~

1451

et

laq1J e

ofef

ta iJt

0

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Beswick, representative of the
United Kingdom.
M. BESWICK (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de
Mr. BESWJCK (United Kingdom): I am not
here to explain my vote. I think we have ex- l'anglais): Ce n'est pas pour donner les raisoIUf
plained our vote at sufficient length in the Com- de man vote que je prends la parole. ]e croi8
mittee. I do wish, however, to move an amend- m'etre suffisamment explique Ia-dessus devant
ment, a modest amendment, and I must apolo- la Commission. Je desirerais cependant presenter
gize for the time taken in doing this at this un amendement, de peu d'importance d'ailleurs.,
Assembly. One excuse I might offer is that had et je m'excuse de prendre, pour ce faire, le
our adopted procedure allowed me to answer temps de l'Assemblee; je puis peut-etre invoquer
my friend Dr. Medved, 1 might have been tak- 'une circonstance attenuante: c'est que, si la
procedure que nous avons adoptee m'avait
ing up a little more time.
permis de repondre a mon ami le Dr Medved,
j'aurais retenu encore plus longtemps votre attention'l
I wish to move, that in article 11, paragraph
Je desirerais proposer, pour le premier para1, an amendment set out in document A/238/ graphe de l'Article 11, un amendement contenu
to which, unfortunately, no reference has been dans le document A/238 1 et qui, malheureusemade on the agenda be inserted. I wish to insert ment, n'a pas ete mentionne dans l'ordre du
the following words after "Paris": "or Geneva, jour, a savoir: inserer, apr~s le mot "Paris':"
as the General Council shall decide."
les mots "ou a Geneve, suivant la decision du
Conseil general".
At the moment, under the constitution as it, . Aux termes de la Constitution, sous sa forme
stands, the Organization is committed to seek- actuelle, 1'OIR est pour rinstant tenue d'etablir
ing headquarters in Paris. This commitment son siege a Paris. L'accord s'est fait sur ce point
was agreed to in the Economic and Social au Conseil economique et social, bien que ce
Council, although it was with some reluctance ne soit pas sans hesitation que 1'on ait designe
that a fixed place was decided upon at a time un endroit determine alors qu'on ne savait pas
when it was uncertain which members would encore de quels Btats Membres se co:rp.poserait
constitute the General Council of the Organiza- le Conseil general de fOIR. De nombreux
tion. There were many representatives who representants desiraient rouvrir la question a la
wished to open up this matter again in the Troisieme Commission, mais, par suite d'un
.Third Committee, but unfortunately, owing to malentemlu, 1'amendement presente a la Coma'misunderstanding, the amendment submitted mission competente a ete malheureusement
to the appropriate Committee was ruled out of ecarte pour la raison qu'il n'avait pas ete pr6date.
'
sente dans les limites de temps prescrites.
From many points of view-and almost cerA de nombreux egards - a. tous les egards
tainly if one consulted only the personal con- presque certainement, si ron ne tenait compte
venience of the representatives, from all points que de la commodite personnelle des rcpresenof view-the fair city of Paris would be ideal. tants -la belle ville de Paris. serait un endroit
However, considerations which operated against ideal. Tq~tefois, les considerations qui, au debut
the choice of Geneva earlier in the year do not de eerie annee, s'opposaient a cc que Genevt
now exist, and there is an advantage in having fUt choisie n'existent plus aujourd'hui, et il y a
,our specialized agencies either at the head- avantage a ce que les institutions specialiseOl
quarters of the United Nations or at its regional des Nations Unies se trouvent, soit au siege cenheadquartefs. In this particular case there would tral de 1'Organisation, soit a son siege regional.
be an especial advantage in having the head- DaDs' le cas particulier qui nous occupe, il )'
quarters of, the International Refugee Organiza- aurait un interet special a fixer le siege de 1'0....
tion in the same city as the headquarters of the ganisation internationale pour,les refugies dans
Red Cross Societies, with which body there may la ville ou les Societes de la Croix-Rouge ont
les leurs, car it est possible queJ'OIR soit amen&
be a good deal of collaboration.
a. collaborer avec el1es dans une grande mesure..
Toutefois, 1'amendement dont il s'agit a un
However, this amendment is only a pennissive
amendment.' It is designed to give the General caractere facultatif. Il a pour but de donner an
Council a little more freedom of choice, and, al- Conseil general une Iiberte un peu plus grande
though I am sure that they will be favourably dans son choix et, bienque je sois convaincu que
inclined toward Paris, should they come to the ses membres inclineraient vers Paris: s'ils en
conclusion that all consideration~inc1uding venaient a la conclusion que toutes les considerations reunies - notamment celle de locaux
more suitable office accommodation~would
leave the balance of advantage with Geneva, we plus appropries - font pencher la balance du
should like to leave them free to make that cote de Geneve, nollS aimerions que le Conseil
. choice. I hope, therefore, that the Assembly soit libre de faire porter son choix sur cette ville..
J'espere donc que YAsscmblee adoptera cet.
will accept this amendment.
amendement.
'See annex 97•• '

~ Voir l'annexe 91a.

Sixty-seventh Plenary Meeting

1452

15 December 1946

15 cUcambre 194

a

'I'he Pusm ro
The document
wiat is dated 10
December. TIle a

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Broustra, representative of
France.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole
M. Broustra, representant de la France.

Mr. BROUSTRA (France) (translated from
French): I must confess that this amendment,
presented at a moment when the Ass~mbly is
about to disperse, has somewhat surprISed the
French delegation. There is already a decision
taken by the Economic and Social Council, by a
large majority, at its last session. This decision
has been ratified without opposition by the
Third Committee, and the United Kingdom
delegation proposed no amendment in this matter during the long weeks of discussion. Naturally, it is for the Assembly to take the final decision, but the French delegation will abstain
from voting. If, however, the Assembly's decision corresponds to that of the Economic
and Social Council, I can once again give you
the assurance that the French Government will
be glad to welcome this organization, and will
make the necessary arrangements to facilitate
the accomplishment of its delicate task.

M. BROUSTRA (France): Je ne cache pas que
cet amendement, depose au moment ou I'Assemblee va se separer, surprend quelque peu la delegation fran~aise. Nous sommes en eifet en
presence d'une decision prise par le Conseil
une forte majorite
economique et social,
d'ailleurs, lors de sa derniere session. Cette
decision a ete ratifiee sans opposition par la
Troisicme Commission, et la delegation britannique n'a depose aucun amendement a ce sujet
pendant les longues sc:maines de la discussion.
Naturellement, il appartient a l'A'iSembl€e de
decider d'une fa~on souveraine, mais la delegation fran~aise s'abstiendra dans cc vote. Cependant, si la decision de I'Assemblce est conforme
a cdle du Conseil economique et social, je peux
une fois de plus YOUS donner l'as.c;urance que le
Gouvernement fran<;ais sera heureux d'accueillir
cette Organisation et prcndra les dispositions
necessaires pour lui faciliter l'accomplissement de
sa delicate mission.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We will now vote on the United Kingdom
amendment to insert the words "or at Geneva,
as the General Council shall decide" after the
word "Paris" in the first line of article 11 of the
Constitution of the International Refugee Organization.
I call upon Dr.. Medved, representative of the
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.

Le PRESIDENT: Nous alIons maintenant mettre aux voix l'amendement britannique qui
consiste a inserer a la premiere ligne de I'article
11 dans la constitution de 1'0rganisation internationale pour lc:s refugies, apres le mot "Paris"
les mots: "ou a Gencve, suivant la decision du
Conseil general".
Je donne la parole all Dr Mcdved, representant de la Rcpllbliquc socialistc sovietique
d'Ukrainc.

a

Dr. MEDVED (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist ReDr MEDVED (Republiquc socialistc sovietique
public) (translated from Russian): The Ukrain- d'Ukraine) (tradttit du russe): La delegation
ian delegation has referred to a number of sub- ukrainicnne a deja signale tous les amendestantial and serious amendments which it pro- ments de bicn plus d'importance qu'elle avait
posed and which were rejected. In order to fa- proposes et qui ont ete rejetcs. Min de permettre
cilitate a rapid conclusion of the work of the a I'Asscmblee generale de terminer rapidement
Assembly the Ukrainian delegation did not in- scs travaux, notre delegation n'a pas insiste pour
sist upon its amendments being discussed again. que ces amendements soient soumis ici a un
here.
nouve! examen.
I consider it wrong that the United Kingdom
restime egalement que la delegation britandelegation did not follow this principle like the nique a eu tort de ne pas suivre l'exemple de
rest of us, but submitted its amendment which toutes les autre.c; delegations et de proposer un
had been rejected.
amendement qui avait deja ete rejet6.
The question of the location of the IRa was
Nous avons discute tres longuement sur la
discussed at great length. As a result of the question du siege de l'Organisation internatiolengthy discussion we decided upon Paris. If we nale pour les refugics. Nous avons finalement
now decide to reconsider this question I would optc pour Paris. Si maintenant nous d6cidions
ask also for a reconsideration of the Ukrainian d'aborder a nouveau cette question, je demanproposal concerning the lists of displaced per- derai egalement de soumettre a un nouvel exasons.
men l'amendement ukrainien relatif aux !istes.
If we decide not to accept any amendment, I
Si toutefois nous d6cidons de ne pas accepter
will insist nevertheless upon my proposal and ask d'amendement, j'insisterai neanmoins ~r ma
for a vote on our amendments, which are very proposition et jc demanderai que I'on vote sur
important, concerning the prohibition of propa- nos amendements qui portent sur la question tres
ganda in camps.
importante de l'intcrdiction de la propagande
clans les camps.
I am not speaking of this because I am against
Si je fais ces remarques, ce n'est pas que je
Geneva, but if we decided on Paris, that decision m'oppose au choix de Geneve, mais c'est parce
should stand. My speech therefore refers to the que, ayant choisi Paris, nous devons nous en
method of conducting our meeting.
tenir a notre decision. Mon intervention porte
donc sur la procedure de nos debats.

plitted in due time

kshould not be V

Dr. Mrovro (1

public) (/ra 1ulnl
mitted our aJT}c:nd

.'The PRESIDEI':

That is a vu)' .....

We are not con

mitted to nnd re j

are concerned \V
mitted to the Gt
mcnt was submit
lion.

We shall now
amendment.
.4 vo~ was toAt
Decision: The
adopt d by
ItMlle6n obstenli,
Mr. AOftNID S
n:prcsentativc 01 t
c:xmplctelyaU the
to the Third ('.om
fiuous for me, am
in less convincing

has dQne so e10qt
two observations~

ClIlStitution of t h(

amtributions. The
carry with it an (
pemmenl to ad
lily financial cont
9dt said, by apprc
Mion we should
judgment upon a

1lltiana1 Refugee ~

Secondly, on be
submittbe repon
ment A/275 (an
and approval of t

himadr has done
the ruolutions.

The PR£!;IDr.~

We shall vot~ 011
documents A ~(j~
A llOle was lak
The result of tl
Votes f"': Bel
Denmark,

Don

~Greece, (
NAU, Lebanon, :
petherbnch, Ne\
U~ Paragu

·ruon of $out
United States of

15 decembre 1946

1453

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The document submitted to me by the Secretariat is dated 10 December 1946. Today is 15
December. The amendment, therefore, was submitted in due time. I do not see any reason why
it should not be voted on.
Dr. MEDVED (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) (translated from Russian): We submitted our amendments on 4 November.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
That is a very witty remark but it is not true.
We are not concerned with amendments submitted to and rejected by the Committee. We
are concerned with an amendment duly submitted to the General Assemblv. No amendment was submitted by the Uk'rainian delegation.
We shall now vote on the United Kingdom
amendment.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
Decision: The United Kingdom amendment
was adopted by eighteen votes to eleven with
seventeen abstentions.
.
Mr. AGHNIDES (Greece): The distinguished
representative of the United States has covered
completely all the ground allotted in this respect
to the Third Committee, and it would be superfluous for me, and perhaps improper, to repeat
in less convincing terms what Mrs. Roosevelt
has done so eloquently. I shall limit myself to
two observations: one, approval of the draft
constitution of the IRO, including the' scale of
contributions. The provisional budget does not
carry with it an obligation on the part of any
government to adhere to the IRO or to make
any financial contribution to it. As Mrs. Roosevelt said, by approving the report and the resolution we should merely have passed expert
judgment upon a plan for setting up the International Refugee Organization.

Secondly, on behalf of the Fifth Committee I
submit the report and the resolution in document A/275 (annex 97) for the consideration
and approval of this Assembly, as our President
himself has done in joining the two reports and
the resolutions.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall vote on the two reports contained in
documents A/265 and A/275.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
The result of the voting is· as follows:
Votes for: Belgium, Canada, China, Cuba,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
France, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland,
.Iran, Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexico,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippine Republic,
Union of South Africa, United Kingdom,
United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela.

Sobcante-septleme seance pleniine

Le PRESIDENT: Le document qui m'est soumis par le Secretariat est date du 10 decembre
1946. Nous sommes aujourd'hui le 15 decembre.
L'amendement a done ete presente clans les delais reguliers. Il n'y a aucune raison pour que
je m'oppose a sa mise aux voix.
.
Dr MEDVED (Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine) (traduit du russe): C'est le 4 novembre que nous avons propose nos amendements.
Le PRESIDENT: C'est evidemment one remarque tres spirituelle mais ce n'est pas exact.
Il ne s'agit pas d'amendements soumis a la Commission et rejetes par elle. Il s'agit d'on amendement regulierement depose devant l'Assemblee
generale. Aucun amendement n'a ete depose
par la delegation de l'Ukraine.
Nous alIons done voter maintenant sur l'amendement du Royaume-Uni.
Le vote a lieu main levee.
Decision: L'amendement du Royaume-U11.i
est adopte par dix-huit voix contre onze, et dixsept abstentions.
M. AGHNIDES (Grece) (traduit de l'anglais) :
L'eminent representant des Etats-Unis a expose
de fa~on tres complete a la Troisieme Commission, toutes les questions qui se posaient dans
ce domaine; il serait done de ma part superflu,
et peut-etre deplace, de repeter, dans des termes
qui ne pourraient pas etre aussi convaincants, ce
que Mme Roosevelt a exprime avec tant d'eloquence. Aussi me limiterai-je a deuX observations: la premiere porte sur l'.approbation du
projet de constitution de l'OIR, y compris le
bareme des contributions. A cet egard le budget
provisoire ne comporte pas l'obligation, pour un
Gouvernement, d'adherer l'OIR ou d'apporter
a cctte organisation une contribution financiere
quekonque. Comme Mme Roosevelt l'a dit,
l'approbation du rapport et de la resolution, qUi
nous est demandee, ne represente qu'un avis
d'expert que nous fournirons sur le projet ten-'
dant a l'etablissement de l'Organisation internationale pour les refugies.
En second lieu, je viens soumettre a l'examen
et a l'approbation de I' Assemblee, au nom de la
Cinquiemc Commission, le rapport et la resolution figurant au document A/275 (annexe 97),
comme d'ailleurs notre President l'a deja fait en
groupant ensemble les deux rapports et les resolutions.
Le PRESIDENT: Nous alIons voter sur les rapports figurant aux documents A/265 et A/275.

a

a

II est prodde au vote par appe1 nominal.
Voici le resultat du vote:
Votent pour: Belgique, Canada, Chine, Cuba,
Danemark, Republique Dominicaine, Equateur,
France, Grece, Guatemala, Honduras, Islande,
Iran, Liban, Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexique,
Pays-Bas, .Nouve1le-Zelande, Nicaragua, Norvege, Panama, Paraguay, Perou, Republique d~
Philippines, Union Sud-Africaine, RoyaumeUni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique, Uruguay, Venezuela.

-

SIxty-seventh Plenary Meeting

1454

15 December 1946

.15 decQtnbre 19

Votes against: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Poland, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Yugoslavia.
Abstentions: Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Czechoslovakia, Egypt, Ethiopia, Haiti,
India, Iraq, tlaudi Arabia, Sweden, Syria,
Turkey.

Votent contre: Republique Sbcialiste sovietique de Bielorussie, Pologne, Republique socia~
liste sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques, Yougoslavie.
S'abstiennent: Afghanistan, Argenrine, Aus.tralie, BoUvie, Bresil, Chili, Colombie, CostaRica, Tchecoslovaquie, Egypte, Ethiopie, Haiti,
Inde, Irak, Arabie saoudite, Suede, Syrie,
Turquie.

dation. The de
to restrict. freed
,det;l<;>cracy in
POliCIes is free
ideas, bu t. in a c
unrestrict.ed lib
tained W'ithout
~d bringing iI
tional deliberati

Decision: The tlt/a reports were adopted by
(kiTty votes to five with eighteen abstentions.

Decision: Les deux rapports sont adoptes par
trente voix contre cinq, et dix-huit abstentions.

206. Measures to economize the time of
the General Assembly: report of the
General Committee: resolution (document A/279J

206. Mesures destinees a economiser le
temps de I' Assemblee generale. Rappor~ du Bureau. Resolution (document
A/279)

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):

Le PRiSIDENT: Nous allons discuter maintenant le rapport du Bureau relatif aux mesures
destinees a economiser le temps de l'Assemblee
generale (annexe 98).
Je donne la parole a M. Martin, representant
du Canada.

We shall discuss the General Committee's report
an measures to economiz-e the time of the Geneca! Assembly (annex 98).
I call ,upon Mr. Martin, representative of
Canada.

Mr. MA.RTIN (Canada;): I am going to ask
;ill the Members of the Assembly to be very in-

M. MARTIN (Canada) (traduit de l'anglais):

Je sollicite de tous les Membres de I'Assemblee

la plus grande indulgence. Je desire faire une
tres breve declaration car ma delegation estime
que cette question est importante; il pourra peutctre sembler un peu paradoxal d'occuper le temps
de l'Assemblee a presenter une motion qui aurait
pour dfet de lui faire gagner du temps. Mais si
cette motion re~oit l'attention qu'elle merite et
la suite qu'eU~ comporte, nous pourrons sans
doute vraiment economiser du temps.
La delegation canadienne espere que I'adopThe CanadilUl delegation hopes that the
4doption of the resolution now before the As- tion de la resolution dont r Assemblee est actuelsembly will result in the accomplishment of the lement samie permettra d'atteindre le but que
aim which mv Government had in view when mon Gouvernement avait en vue lorsqu'il a preit made its oiiginal proposal last September in sente sa premiere proposition, en septembre
it letter addressed to the Secretary-General. That
dernier, dans une lettre adressee au Secretaire
aim was that there should be introduced at the general. Cette resolution avait pour objet d'inbeginning of the next session of the Assembly, troduire, au debut de la prochaine session de
opening next September, reforms in the practices l'Assemblee qui s'ouvrira au mois de septembre
and rules of procedure of the Assembly so that proehain, des modifications dans les methodes
we would not at the next session waste as much et dans le reglement interieur de l'Assemblee,
time aB I think, on occasion, we have during de teUe sorte que lors de cette proehaine sesthe present session. On the face of it, it might sion, nous ne perdions pas autant de temps que
!eem that thill resolution now before the As- nous I'avons fait parfois, me semble-toil, au cours
tembly is not of great importance. I would sub- de la presente session. A premiere vue, on pour.mit that the action which this Assembly might rait croire que la resolution soumise a l'Assemtake today by adoptin~ this resolution might in blee en ce moment n'a pas une grande impora year's time, or two years', be considered as one tance. Or, j'estime qu'en adoptant aujourd'hui
of the constructive decisions of this first session. cette resolution, l'Assemblee prendrait une mesure qui, dans un an ou deux, pourrait etre
consideree comnie l'une des decisions construetives de cette premiere session.
Lorsqu'elle a presente cette proposition pour
'The delegation of Canada was charged, when
it first introduced this proposal, with the hidden la premiere fois, la delegation du Canada s'est
aim of preventing long speeches at the General vue accusee de chercher insidieusement a interAssembly, limitin~ freedom of speech and hin- dire aux representants de prononcer de longs
dering the criticism of a number of draft .r;esolu- discours a l'Assemblee generale, a restreindre la
tions submitted to the Assembly. The Canadian liberte de parole et a empecher que l'on puisse
proposals were labelled as having an anti-demo- critiquer certains projets de resolutions soumis
cratic character. Anyone who knows anything a I'Assemblee. Les propositions de la d6legaabout my country, about the people of my coun- . -tion canadienne ont ete q ualifiees de. propositr:y, knoW! that these charges can have no foun- tions visalit a. limiter la Iiberte d'expression et
c!u1gent with me. I want to make a very brief
statement because my delegation does consider
this matter to be one of importance, and it may
,lfeem perhaps a little unorthodox if I seemingly
take time to suggest a motion which would have
the effect of economizing time, but it may be
that if this motion is fully appreciated and acted
'Ipon we may really save time.

.}.
...•

.• .\K, ,

~

\

.

Each 'Memb
to express his ,
to exercise thi
del'ltroy the riRJ
of one Memb
others and by
cratic Assembl
contend that tt
unrt"1'ltri ctl'rl f r~
of Suppression,
strated that a]
begins with u
ends by operat
limiting the le]

One thing:
that my GOV(
the sessions of
unnecessarily
opinion of the
as necessary 1
&ions 0 f the A
ened by elimi:
cedure and u]
by the careft:
ventions and
committee cl:
the highest s1
and integrity
will rnoreovel
gations. It '\\
the ~1ember
adequate del
AssclTl bly if
the time of
necessarily.

"Tht repr<
to sce at th
lIOns whose i
101vc pressin
hOJTle with 1
of these me:
interest that
is not mere
Assembly r
important'
ciently use 1

IS-a. .

rts

/a.r

15 decembre 1946

Soixante-septieme seance pJenier.

1455

dation. The delegation of Canada does not wish
to restrict freedom of discussion. The basis of
democracy in international as in domestic
policies is freedom of expressing all political
ideas. but in a deliberating body of this character
unrestricted liberty of discussion cannot be attained without running the risk of frustrating
and bringing into contempt the whole international deliberative process.

revetant un caractere antidemocratique. Or;
quiconque est un peu au courant de ce qui se
passe dans mon pays, quiconque connait un peu
les Canadiens, sait que ccs accusations S9nt
denuees de tout fondement. La delegation du
Canada n'a pas l'intention de restreindre la
liberte de discussion. En politique internationale
aussi bien qu'en politique interieure, la libert~
d'expression de toutes les tendances politiques
est une condition essentielle de la democratie;
mais dans une assemblee deliberante comme la
notre, la liberte de discussion ne saurait ctreaccordee sans restriction si rOD veut eviter qu~
l'ensemble des debats de politique internationale
perde toute portee et tout prestige.

Each Member of the Assembly has the right
to express his view fully, but no Member ought
to exercise this right in a way which would
destroy the rights of other Members. The rights
of one Member are limited by the rights of
others and by the just requirements of a democratic Assembly. It is, moreover. unrealistic to
contend that the Assembly has to choose between

Chaque Membre de I'Assemblee a le droit
d'exprimer son opinion de fa~on complete, mais
aucun Membre ne devrait exercer ce droit d'une
maniere qui reduirait a neant leg droits des
autres.. Les droits d'un Membre sont limites par
les drOlts des autres et par ce qu'exige legitime.
ment le -fonctionnement d'une Assemblee
mocratique. C'est, en outre, manquer du sens
des realites que de soutenir que I'Assemblee doit
choisir entre une liberte de discussion illimitee
et le systeme qui consiste a supprimer la discussion. L'experience montre en effet qu'au m~­
ment ou une conference internationale qui a
commence sous le regime d'une compl(~te liberte
de discussion, se tennine: la longuer et le nombre des discours y sont limites par les regles les
plus strictes.

'I~

unrl'i:trict('n frl't"nom of cii!'l'lli'.<:.ion anci a sYStem

of suppression of speech. Experience has demonstrated that an international conference which
begins with unrestricted freedom of discussion
ends by operating under the most rigid rules for
limiting the length and number of speeches.

One thing I wish to make perfectly clear is
that my Government has never su.~gested that
the sessions of the General Assemblv should be
unnecessarily curtailed. They sho~ld, in the
opinion of the Canadian Government, be as long
as necessary for us to do the work. The sessions of the Assembly, could, however, be shortened by eliminating ~tnne~essary debates on procedure and unnecessary repetiti.on of arguments,
by the careful drafting of resolutions and conventions and by recognizing, in the election of
committee chairmen, the necessity for securing
the highest standards of efficiency, competence,
and integrity. Unnecessarily protracted sessions
will moreover affect the calibre of national delegations. It will become increasingly difficult for
the Members of the United Nations to send
adequl'lte delegations to sessions of the General
Assembly if it is demonstrated that much of
the time of the representatives is taken up unnecessarily.

de-

Il est une chose que j~ tiens exposer diune
tres claire. Mon Gouvernement n'a
jamais suggere de reduire sans necessite la durt~e
des sessions de I'Assemblee generale. De l'avis
du Gouvernement canadien, ces sessions doivent
durer tout le temps necesSaire a l'accomplissement de notre tache. Elles pourraient, toutefois,
etre abregees si 1'0n supprimait les debats de
procedure superflus et l'inutil~ repetition des
arguments, si l'on redigeait avec soin le texte des
resolutions et des conventions et si 1'0n tenait
compte, lors de l'election des presidents de
Commissions du fait qu'il est necessaire de
choisir des personnes possedant les plus hautes
qualites de travail, de competence et d'integrite.
En outre, la prolongation injustifiee des sessions
aura sa repercussion sur la valeur des delegations nationales. Le jour OU il apparaitra qu'une
grande partie du temps des representants est
absorbe vainement, les Etats Membres de notre
Organisation eprouveront de plus en plus de
difficultes a envoyer aux sessions de I'AssembIee
generaIe des delegations propres cette tache.
fa~on

I;: '

-: .,~; i
it'

a

a

The representatives and advisors we all want
to see at the sessions of our Assembly are persons whose services are needed at home to help
solve pressing domestic problems. and to deal at
home with problems of foreign policy. The time
of these men is precious. It is not in the general
interest that they should be wasted. The problem
is not merely one of unnecessary protraction of
Assembly meetings. There is the much more
important problem of how we can more effi.
ciently use the time at our disposal. This session

r;:

Les representants et les conseillers que nOlffi

souhaitons tous voir sieger a notre Assemblee
sont des personnes dont !eur pays a le plus grand
besoin pour resoudre des problemes interieurs
urgents et pour traiter, dans leur pays meme, des
problemes de politique etrangere. Le temps de ces
hommes est precieu;K. et il est de l'interet general
qu'il ne soit pas gaspille. Le probleme a resoudre
ne se limite pas a la question de la longueur exageree des reunions de l'Assemblee: il y a egalement le probleme beaucoup plus important qui

"

:.1

.:.

j

:

~

14

iN
~~

,

.~

...

J~

,
)

','

"

-. .~;

'y,

Sixty-seventh Plenary Meeting

1456

15 December 1946

of the .General Assembly, has followed, I am consiste a determiner comment nous pourrons
afraid, the same pattern as has almost every u!iliser plus rationnellement le temps dont nollS
other international conference, large Or small, dIsposons. La presente session de l'AssembIee a
which has been held during the past few years, suivi, j'en ai peur, l'exemple de presque toutes
in spite of the fact that we have as our presiding les autres conferences intemationales, grandes ou
officer here, I am sure, the ablest man that we . petites, qui se sont tenues all cours des dernieres
could possibly have obtained to do the job.
annees, et cela en depit du fait que nous avons
pour President un homme qui, j'en suis certain,
est le plus capable de ceux que nous aurions pu
choisir pour remplir ces fonctions.
'The first five or six weeks of this Assembly
Les cinq ou six premieres semaines de cette
were a prolonged debauch of unorganized dis- Assemblee ont ete caracterisees par une profusion
cussion. During the first three quarters of this de discussions desordonnees. Pendant les trois
second part of the first session, we accomplished premiers quarts de cette seconde partie de la
only about one-quarter of our work. That made premiere session, nous n'avons accompli qu'enviit necessary for us to try to get through the ron un quart de notre travail; cela nous a mis
remaining three-quarters of our work in the dans la necessite de tenter de liquider les trois
quarter of the time which remained to us be- autres quarts pendant le dernier quart du temps
fore the Queen Elizabeth sailed. It has been qui nous restait, avant le depart de la Queen
auggested in the General Committee that it Elizabeth. On a dit, au Bureau de 1'Assemblee,
would be sufficient if the Secretariat were to qu'il suffirait que le Secretariat preparat des
.draft proposals for reforms in the practices and propositions de modifications des methodes et
roles of procedure of the Assembly and to pre- du reglement interieur de l'Assemblee et qu'il
sent these proposals to the next session, of the presentat ces propositions a la prochaine session.
Assembly. The problem, however, of persuading Or, la maniere dont on persuadera la prochaine
the next session of the Assembly to adopt im- session de l'Assemblee d'adopter des amelioraprovements in its practices and rules, falls into tions a ces methodes et a ce reglement souleve
two parts: the drafting of the necessary reforms un double probleme: iI faut, d'une part, que les
and the acceptance of those reforms by the As- reformes necessaires soient precisees par un texte
sembly. The chances of the Assembly, next et, d'autre part, que I'AssembIee se ralHe a ces
September, accepting the necessary reforms will reformes. Les reformes necessaires auront beaube much better if the proposals are not from the coup plus de chances d'etre adoptees par 1'AsSecretariat but from a committee of the Mem- semblee de septembre prochain si les proposibers of the Assembly, and that is not intended tions, au lieu d'emaner du Secretariat, provienas a reflection on our very efficient Secretariat. nent d'un comite compose de Membres de
l'Assemblee - ceci dit sans aucun esprit de
critique a regard de nOtre excellent Secretariat.
r am confident that the committee on proJ'ai bon espoir que le comite pour les quescedure and organization which we are appoint- tions de reglement et d'organisation que nous
ing today, will present to the Assembly next allons designer presentera a l'AssembIee en
September most valuable recommendations for septembre prochain des recommaridations tres
reform. I hope that the Assembly next Sep- precieuses sur lei> reformes a accomplir. J'espere
tember will be willing to adopt unanimously and qu'en septembre prochain, l'AssembIee voudra
without debate on the opening day of the next bien accepter ces recommandations, a l'unanist,.'<lSion the committee's recommendations and to mite et sans debat, le jour meme de I'ouverture
apply them provisionally throughout that second de ses travaux, et qu'elles seront appliquees, a.
scs;iLm. The Canadian delegation has set forth titre provisoire, tout au long de la session. Dans
at length in its memorandum of 29 November, son 'memorandum en date du 29 novembre, la
it:; specific suggestions for reforms in the practices delegation canadienne a presente en detail les
and rules of procedure of the Assembly.
modifications qu'elle propose d'apporter aux
methodes et au reglement interieur de l' Assemblee.
La delegation canadienne espere que tous Ies
Membres de 1'Organisation accueiIIeront favorablement 1'invitation que contientla resolution
actuellement soumise al'AssembIee et feront connaitre sans retard au Secretaire general les
mesures qu'ils suggcrent pour economiser le
temps de l'Assemblee et modifier son reglement
provisoire. Tous les Etats Membres des Nations
Unies ont interet a ce que cette AssembIee
adopte des methodes rationnelles· et tous ici
souhaitent voir l'Assemblee generale des Nations
Unies travailler avec dignite, et aussi avec dili:.
gence.
. . , ..
.
Et maintenant, MonsIeur le PreSIdent, il me

The Canadian delegation hopes that all Mem-.
hers of the United Nations will respond to the
invitation contained in the resolution now before
us, and will forthwith forward to the SecretaryGeneral their suggestions for economizing the
time of the Assembly and for revising the provisional rules of procedure. The streamlining of
this Assembly is a question of common concern
to all Members of the United Nations. All of
us wish to see the General Assembly of the
United Nations operate with dignity as well as
despatch.
And now, Mr. President, let me thank you in
"

~ ' __ l-.

~d.tembre 1946,

game of my dele
d,gteat way in wh
lent' of this meeting
ced very consid
ly.

Mr. GROMYKO (l
pililics):

The dele

ctpressed its opinio
:Olllse of the meeting
Tie are in favour oJ
part of this reso
with the proposal
ph of the resoluti
"ask you to put to
paragraph of the re

The PRESIDENT
You have heard the
~tion, which doe:
Illf<tgraph. Consec
the resolution, e
md afterwards on t

Mr. GROMYKO (1
publics) : May I !
!he reasons why wc
paragraph? We con:

~ successfully card

The PRESIDENT
We shall vote on
paragraph.

A vote was takl
Decision: The
, agraph, was UT
The PRESIDEN'I
We shall vote ot
!Q()lution.

A vote was tak
Decision: The
~Ol'l

was adoptu
rlith six abstentio
The

FRESIDEN

We shall vote on
A vote was tal
Decision: The
;., forty-three vo
The PRESIDE]
For the Comm
Sfteen:
Argentina, B,
Denmark, Franl
~'1 Soviet Sociz
rnited States c
dalist Republic

Decision:
tdopted.

15 decembre 1946

:~
~a

que tou.tQ
~dcsou

s dtrnieres
lOOS avons
llscertain,

aurions pu
~ de cette
I: profusion

It lea troi!
utie de la

>!i qu1enviflOUsa tnis

1457

la Quern
'~blee,

iparit des

lethodo et
lee et qulil

line seWeD.
l~e

s amaiora·
entaouleve
oart, que la
tar un tcxte
rallieAces

reste vallS remercier, au nom de ma delegation,
d'avoir rempli vos fonctions avec tant de competenceet de dignite, au cours de cette session, cc
qui a contribue rehausser considerablement le
prestige de cette Assemblee.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics): The delegation of the Soviet Union
expressed its opinion on this question in the
course of the meetings of the General Committee.
We are in favour of all provisions listed in the
first part of this resolution, but we cannot agree
with the proposal contained in the last paragraph of the resolution. Therefore, I would like
to ask you to put to the vote separately the last
paragraph of the resolution.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit de l'anglais) : La delegation de l'Union sovietique a exprime S011
opinion
ce sujet au cours des seances du
Bureau de l'Assemblee: nous sommes partisans
de toutes les dispositions de la premiere partie
de la resolution, mais nous ne pouvons admettre
la proposition contenue dans le dernier paragraphe de celle-ci. En consequence, je demanderai que le dernier paragraphe de la resolution soit rnis aux voix separement.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
You have heard tlit: statl';;l-':dl Df the Soviet delegation, which does not agree with the last
paragraph. Consequently, we will vote first
on the resolution, excluding the last paragraph,
and afterwards on the last paragraph.

Le PRESIDENT: Vous avez entendu la declaration de la delegation sovietique qui n'est pas
d'accord sur le dernier paragraphe. En consequence, nous voterons d'abord la resolution
l'exclusion du dernier paragraphe, puis le dernier
paragraphe.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics): May I say a few words to explain
the reasons why we cannot agree with the last
paragraph? We consider that such functions can
be succ~fuIly carried out by the Secretariat.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit de l'anglais): Puis-je
expliquer en quelques mots les raisons pOUf
lesquelles nollS ne pouvons admettre le dernier
paragraphe? NollS estimons que le Secretariat
peut parfaitement s'acquitter d'une tache de ce
genre.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French) :
We shall vote on the resolution excluding the
last paragraph.

Le PRESIDENT: NollS allons voter sur la resolution jusqu'au dernier paragraphe non compris.

uront beau~ par 1'As10 propOOat, provien·
lembres de
I c:sprit de

Secretariat
Ilr lea

qutS-

A vote was taken by show of hands.

Decision: The resolution, excluding the last
paragraph, was unanimously adopted.

5Wlblee en
daUOI1$ tds
lir. Jespbt
)Iee voudra

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall vote 011 the last paragraph of the
resolution.

l'unani-

\'tmbre, la

n detailles

porter aux

de l'~.

Iut tollS ItS

rront Cava-

J risolution

!eron! con·

!:~ncral Ies
:nomi.e.tr le
I reglement
des Nati()lL'l

.~~

rt toUS lCl

1es Nati~~
. .,.,. dill·
~ a......

jent, il pie

a

a

a

<j'

:4
.'

a main levee.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall vote on the report as a whole.

Le PRESIDENT: NollS allons voter sur rensemble du rapport.

Le vote a lieu

A vote was taken by show of hands.

amain levee.

Decision: The report as a whole was adopted
by forty-three '{IDles to eight.

Decision: L'ensemble du rapport est adopt!
par quarante-trois voix contre huit.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
For the Committee I propose the following
fifteen:

Le PRESIDENT: Je propose de constituer le
Comite des representants des quinze pays suivants:
Argentine, Belgique, Canada, Chine, Cuba,
Danemark, France, Grece, Haiti, Perou, Republique
socialiste
sovietique
d'Ukraine,
Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique, Union
des Republiques socialistes sovictiques, Yougoslavie.

Argentina, Belgium) Canada, China, Cuba,
?enmark, France, Greece) Haiti, Peru, UkrainIan Soviet Socialist Republic) United Kingdom,
United States of America) Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Yugoslavia.

President's proposal

;l

Le PRESIDENT: Nous alions voter sur le
demier paragraphe de la resolution,

Decision: Le demier paragraphe de la resolution est adopte par trente-quatre voix contre
cinq, et six abstentions.

The

I.,

a main levee.
Decision: La resolution, a l'exclusion du
demier paragraphe, est adoptee a l'unanimite.

Decision: The last paragraph of the resolution was adopted by thirty-four votes to five
with six abstentions.

Decision:

.'

.'

Le vote a lieu

A vote was taken by show of hands.

adopted.

• r

Le vote a lieu

it que DOUJ

I'ouverture
)pliq~ !
s:sion. Dans

a

the name of my delegation for the very efficient
and great way in which you have acted as Presi~
dent of this meeting, and as a result have enhanced very considerably the prestige of this
Assembly.

er res trois

t du ttm~

Soixante-septieme seunce pleniere

was

Decision: La proposition du President est
adoptee.

~.

. ~.

Sixty-seventh Plenary Meeting

·1458

15 December 1946

207. Admission of Siam to membership in
the United Nations: report of the
General Committee: resolution (document A/264)

2()7. Admission du Siam c·I'Organisation
des Nations Unies. Rapport du Bu~
reau. Resolution (document A/264)

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):

Le PRESIDENT: Le Bureau de J'Assemblee a
ete saisi d'un Icttre du Conseil de sccurite lui
faisant savoir que· la candidature du Siam avait
ete acceptee par le Conseil a. l'unanimite.

The General Committee of the Assembly has
received a letter from the Security Council informing it that the Council had agreed unanimously to accept Siam's application for membership.
]n order to speed up proceedings, the General Committee did not consider it necessary
to refer the question to a special committee,
but proposes the following resolution to the
Assembly direct:
"The General AssemblYJ
ul! aving taken note of the application for
membership submitted to the Organization of
the United Nations by Siam,
"And of the reconimendations of the Security
Council on the admission of Siam to membership in the United Nations,
U Decides J therefore:
"That SlAM be admitted to membership in
the United Nations."
Mr. Wellington KOD ( China): China, as a
close neighbour and asa sister nation in Asia,
with many ties of culture and tradition, cherishes
a profound sentiment of sympathy and friendship for Siam and the Siamese people.
We of the Chinese delegation sincerely believe
the Siamese nation has its part to play in this
world Organization for peace and happiness.
'We arc, therefore, gratified that Siam's application for membership in the United Nations has
come before us with the unanimous recommendation of the Security Council. and we hope that
likewise it will be unanimously approved by the
General Assembly.

Afin d'acceIerer la procedure, le Bureau n'a
pas juge necessaire de renvayer la question
une commission speciale, et propose directement
a. l'Assembh~e la resolution suivante:

a

UL'AssembUe generale,
UAyant pr"is note de la deinande d'admission
adressee a. l'Organisation des Nations Unies par
le Siam,
"Et des recommandations du Conseil de recurite sur l'admission du Siam comme Membre
des Nations Unies;
«Pour ces motifs, decide:
"Que le SIAM sera admis comme Membre des
Nations Unies."

M. Wellington Koo (Chine) (traduit de ['anglais): La Chine, que de nombreux liens
culturels et traditionnels unissent au Siam, Etat
voisin et nation sreur d'Asie, nourrit un pro·
fond sentiment de sympathie et d'amitie pour
cc pays et pour le peuple siamois.
Les membres de la delegation chinoise sont
sincerement convaincus, que le peuple siamois
a son rOle a. jouer dans cette organisation mandiale dont l'objet est d'instaurer la paix et le
bonheur. Naus sommes .donc tres heureux d'apprendre que la demande faite par le Siam en
vue d'ctre admis dans I'Organisation des Nations Unies a ete transmise a. I'Assemblee avec
la recommandation unanime -du Conseil de securite et nous esperons ·qu'elle sera egalement·
approuvee, a l'unanimite, par l'AssembIee generale.
.

1·fr. }YfENoN (India): The delegation of
India, on behalf of the people and the Government of India, is very happy to associate itself
with the observations made by 'the representative
of China and to record its support of the decision reached by the Security Council.
We look forward to a happy association with
our neighbour with whom we have been connected over many years, and we also think it a
happy augury, that Siam may be the first of our
neighbours preceding the Republic of Indonesia
and Burma, to join us as equal partners in this
Assembly.

M. MENON (Inde) (traduit de ['anglais);
La delegation de l'Inde est heureuse,· au nom
du peuple et du Gouvernement de I'Inde, de
s'associer aux observations faites par le representant de la Chine et d'appuyer ,la decision
prise par le Conseil de securite.
Nous esperans travailler en bonne harmonie
avec ce pays voisin avec lequel nous avons des
liens depuis de nombreuses annees; nous pensons que son admission est d'un bon augure et
precede la venue parmi nous, sur un pied d'egalite, d'autres voisins, la Republique d'Indonesie
et la Binnanie.

Mr. ROMULO (Philippine Republic): The
Philippine Republic welcomes the application of
Siam for mert1bership in the United Nations. The
relations between the people of the Philippines
and the people of Siam have been for centuries
of a most friendly and mutually bene·ficial character. As one of the few countries of Asia which
have been able to retain some measure of

M. ROMULO (Republique des Philippines)
( traduit de l'anglais) : La RepubEque des Philip;
pines accueille avec joie la demande d'admission
du Siam comme Membre des Nations Unies. Les
relations entre le peuple des Philippines et le
peuple du Siam ont eu, pendant des siecles, un
caractere des plus amical et des plus profitable
pOUT lesdeux p~uples. L'~n des rares pays d'Asie
'I·

,

~atio~al indepe
1D;lpenal expam
enters the wor!
do~ .with a res]
asprrmg to part
Nations.

We ask for tl
application faJ
Nations.
The

PRESID

You have the c
If there is n<
admitted to me

DeCision: S
agreement to
lions.

The PRESID
As it '-'Vas not
matic f ormaliti
receive the Si
officially_ I am
ing for the er
Siam on her a
will be with
she will partic
mternational u

208. Questior
lar sessi
in EuroF

The PRESID
You 'Will dou!:
.ian delegation
tary-General 1
Asse.xnbly of (
in Europe. VI
that this que:
hea.dquarters
before you toe
containing the
ian representa
I call upon
Ukrainian So

Dr. MEDVl
public) (trar
of the Ukra
submitted to
General Assl
posal of the (
Socialist RC!
the second I
sernbly in Eu
I would I
made at a I
the questior
United Nati
Ukrainian
favoured th
headquarter
'lork area,

~btl'l946

15 decembre 1946

oniscltion .

national independence through the centuries of
imperial expansion through the Far East, Siam
enters the world scene today, an ancient kingdom with a respected culture of its own, eagerly
aspiring to participate in the work of the United
Nations.

1459

Soixante-septieme seance pleniere

mite.

We ask for the unanimous approval of Siam's
application for membership in the United
Nations.

qui aient ete capabIes de maintenir, dans une
certaine mesure, leur independance nationale
au cours des siecles d'expansion impCriale en
Extreme-Orient, le Siam, ce royaume ancien
possedant en propre une ,culture tres renommee,
entre aujourd'hui sur la scene du monde et
aspire ardemment a participer a l'reuvre des
Nations Unies.
Nous demandons que soit unanimement acceptee la demande cl'admission du Siam a 1'0rgani.'iation des Nations Unies.

Burtau n'a

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
You have the draft resolution before you.
If there is no objection, I shall consider Siam
admitted to membership in the United Nations.

Le PRESIDENT: Vous avez le projet de resolution clevant VOllS. S'il n'y a pas d'objection; je
considererai que le Siam est admis comme Membre des Nations Unies.

Deci:-ion: Siam was (1dmitted by unanimous
agreement to mernbership in the United Nations.

Decision: Le Siam est admis l'unanimite
comme iUembre des Nations Unies.

The PlmSIlJlmT (translated from French);

Le PRESIDENT: Les formalites diplomatiques
n'ayant pas pu etre remplies aujourd'hui, il ne
sera pas possible de recevoir officicllement la
delegation siamoise parmi nons. Je suis cependant certain d'ctre l'interprete de l'Assemblee
tout enticre en felicitant le Siam pour son admission et en souhaitant qu'il. puisse sieger parmi
nous la prochaine fois. Je suis sur qu'il prendra
part a nos travaux dans un esprit de comprehension et de concorde internationales.

r1 du.b.
t A/2641

!1embl& a
l6:urite lui

Siam avail

qutstion a

WrectemtDl

d'udntission
s Unies par

llSC11 de ~
ne lembre
~fembredo

duil d, f411brtux

liem

Siam, Eta!
Tit un prooiImitie pour

hino'

S1lnl

Jple ~
:tlKm monpaCt die

rurtUX d'ap-

le Siam en
, n des Na·
cmbl~ a\tc
nscil de seI~t

b!Cege.

r f (Jt~gl4iJ) :

l3C, au nom

e I'lnde, de
llU' le reprb
la decwon

harnJonie

le
JS avollS des

;ncus pen'

~n augurt et

I pied d'ega'

cl'lndonCsie

a

As it was not possible to complete the diplomatic formalities today, we shall not be able to

receive the Siamese dele~ation in our midst
officially. I am sure, howe\..er, that I am speaking for the entire A~sembly in congratulating
Siam on her admission and in hoping that she
will be with us next time. I am sure that
she will participate in our work in a spirit of
international understanding and harmony.

I

208. Question of holding the second regu- 208. Question de la convocation en Europe
de 10 seconde session ordinaire de
lar session of the General Assembly
in Europe (document A/281)
I' Assemblt~e generale (document AI
28H
The PRESmJ~NT (translated from French):
You will doubtless remember that the Ukrain.ian delegation addressed a letter to the Secretary-General proposing that the next General
Assembly of our Organization should be held
in Europe. We decided at an earlier meeting
that this question would be settled when the
headquarters site had been chosen. You have
before you today document A/281 (annex 100)
containing the proposal summarizing the Ukrainian representative's letter.

I call upon Dr. Medved, representative of the
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.
Dr. MED'VED (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) (translated from Russian): The head
of the Ukrainian delegation, Mr. Manuilsky,
submitted to the General Committee and the
General Assembly, for examination, the proposal of the Government of the Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic regarding the convening of
the second regular !icssion of the General Assembly in Europe.
I would remind you that this proposal was
made at a time when we were still discuSsing
the question of the permanent site for the
United Nations. I would remind you that the
Ukrainian delegation, among many others,
favoured the establishment of the permanent
headquarters of the United Nations in the New
York area, while the United States delegation

Le PRESIDENT: Vous vous rappellerez sans
doute que la delegation de l'Ukraine a fait parvenir une lettre au Secretaire general dans
laquelle dIe' proposait que la prochaine AssembUe de notre Organisation se tienne en Europe.
Nous avons decide, une seance precedente, que
cette question serait tranchee lorsque le siege de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies aurait ete
choisi. VOllS avez aujourd'hui, sous les yeux, le
document A/281 qui contient une proposition
resumant la lettre du representant de I'Ukraine
(annexe 100).
Je donne la parole au Dr Medved, representant de la Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine.

a

Dr MEDVED (Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine) (traduit du rum): M. Manuilsky,
chef de la delegation ukrainienne, a soumis au
Bureau et a l'Assemblee generale une proposition
de la Republique sovietique socialiste d'Ukraine,
seIon Iaquelle la deuxieme session ordinaire de
l' Assemblee generale doit etre tenue en Europe.
Qu'iI me soit permis de rappe1er que cette
proposition a ete faite alors que nous discutions
encore de l'emplacement du siege permanent des
Nations Unies. La delegation ukrainienne,
comme beaucoup d'autres, s'est prononcee pour
l'ctablisscment du siege permanent de l'Organisation dans la ville de New-York, tandis que la
delegation americaine prefCrait San-Francisco,

•

I

,.

Sixty-seventh Plenary Meeting

15 December 1946

15 decembr

la. delegation britannique: Philadelphie, et qu'un
grand nombre d'autres delegations etaient en
faveur de la cote de I'Atlantique.

~o ~~eIJl
Vlded excel
the Peace
That is wl
taken to cC
the General

1460

was in favour of San Francisco; the United
Kingdom delegation favoured Philadelphia, and
many delegations favoured the eastern shore
of the Atlantic Ocean.
We declared at that time that we were in
favour of having the permanent headquarters in
New York. This question has now been settled. We are very pleased that the United Nations adopted our proposal to locate the permanent headquarters in New York. We hope,
therefore, that our second proposal in connexion
with this will also be supported and adopted.

Ainsi que nous l'avions declare, nous etioos
done pour l' etablissement du siege permanent a
New-York. Aujourd'hui cette question est resolue. Nous sommes heureux que notre proposition ait ete adoptee, et que l'Organisation des
Nations Unies ait accepre d'etablir son siege
permanent a New-York. Aussi esperons-nous
maintenant que notre deuxieme proposition sera,
egalement approuvee et adoptee.
Permettez-moi de vous exposer nos mobiles.
Permit me to explain the motives for our
proposal. The :first problem is that of the need Premierement, il est necessaire de trouver des
of premises for the session. It is quite obvious locaux pour cette deuxieme session. 11 est evithat, even under the most favourable circum- dent que dans les conditions les plus favorables,
stances and with the maximum expedition of et meme en poussant les travaux autant que faire
work, it is hardly likely that the construction se peut, le projet de construction des nouveaux
programme for the new area where we intend batiments du siege permanent ne pourra guere
to establish ourselves permanently will be ready ctre acheve pour la prochaine session. On peut
in time for the next session. We could hastily sans doute mettre en etat, a la hate, que1quesadapt some other temporary premises, but this uns des autres locaux dont nous pourri.ons dispowould be an unjustified waste of enormous ser, mais cela entrainerait de tres grosses desums of money.. We have had experience of penses, tout a fait injustifiees. A en juger par
this and, if we decide to call the next session l'experience, nous avons tout lieu de cro~e que
here in the United States of America, we shall si nous decidons· de tenir la prochaine session
probably have to work at Flushing and Lake ordinaire ici, aux Etats-Unis, nos reunions deSuccess. I do not think I need enlarge on the vront avoir lieu a Flushing et a Lake Success. Je
fact· that this is inconvenient, and that these crois inutile de vous rappeler les inconvenients
journeys of an hour to and from the city take up qui s'ensuivraient, les heures precieuses que nous
a great deal of our valuable time. The incon- perdrions en nous transportant chaque fois de
venient location of these premises has wasted New-York en banlieue et vice-versa. L'emplacemuch time during this session, has created addi- ment defectueux des locaux nous a fait perdre
tional difficulties for all of us, and has also beaucoup de temps pendant la presente session,
created additional difficulties for the Secretariat. en nous causant a tous, aux delegations aussi bien
qu'au Secretariat, un surcroit d'embarras.
D'autre part, notre proposition tient compte
In making this proposal, we also had in mind
the following considerations. I would remind egalement des considerations suivantes. La preyou that the first conference of the United Na- miere conference des Nations Dnies, celle qui a
tions, where the Charter of the United Nations etabli la Charte, a eu lieu a San-Francisco. La
was established, was held at San Francisco. The premiere partie de la premiere session de l'Asfirst part of this session took place in London, in semblee generale s'est tenue a Londres, dans les
the British Isles. The present session is being held' lIes Britanniques. La presente session Se tient
on the continent of America, in the United sur le continent americain, au siege permanent
States, in the neighbourhood of the pennanent des Nations Unies. Ainsi les pays du continent
headquarters of the United Nations. The result europeen, qui ont plus que les autres souffert de
of this is that countries of the continent of la guerre, et qui ont un interet tout particulier
Europe, which have suffered more than any a suivre les travaux d'une Organisation appelee
others through the war, and are particularly a lutter pour le maintien de la paix et. de la.
interested in the activities of this Organization securite, n'ont pas encore vu fonctionner chez
which is called upon to defend the maintenance eux l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
of peace and security, have not yet seen the
Organization on their own territory.
The work of the Council of Foreign Ministers
Aujourd'hui, les travaux du Conseil des Minis.
has now been completed and the five peace tres des Maires etrangeres sont termines, et les
treaties for Germany's allies· have been success- cinq traites de paix avec les allies de l'Allemagne
fully established. By the time of the next session ont ete conc1us d'une fat;on satisfaisante. D'ici
of the General Assembly, success will doubtless be la prochaine session de l'Assemblee generale, il
achieved in relation to the other treaties. That est probable que nous assisterons egalement a
is why we consider that the time has come une heureuse conclusion des autres traites. C'est
when European countries' can expect the regu- pourquoi nous estimons qu'aujourd'hui les pays
lar session of the United Nations to be convened europeens peuvent demander a bon droit que la
in Europe. We do not insist as yet on this par- prochaine session de l'AssembIee se tienne en
ticular question, but the purpose might be served Europe. Pour le moment, je n'insiste pas sur le
by the splendid, but vacant, buildings of the choix du lieuou se tiendrait la session; ce pourformer League of Nations in Geneva. We must rait ctre Geneve, ou se tr0l;lvent les magnifiques

ize the Seer
in EUrope
convened.
~efore sI
etrUnent SeA:
said: uYOl
the next ses
added: "I
for technic:
before 194:
this statenl<
and On the
potentialitil
TrygveLie:
talentB. Pe
place in y,

1946, I w
Henry Hw
FlUshing, (j
say, Mr. 1
in finding]
and so for
ment that
meal reasol
activities aJ
carried out
to arrange
in Geneva
Success. 1
delegation,
our propol
in Europe
of NewY,
things whi
at devasta
us to solvc:
of the El
Europe, v
United N
of war a
Europe.

I beg)'

ThePl

call upon
IGngdorr
Mr.",

regret th
colleague:
very mu,
last item
be nice
note of
should 1:

reasons
held in
perience
duce re.<

15 decembre 1946

~~ltQs
~tl

e qucstIOn tllt It.

quenotre~.

I'~I""

'
. . dt.l
i .
qalgt
~\I

AC propoitiog:~

tle.

poIr.r la mobila.

~ de tnlIIYtr- del

.. n ta~.

plus faria,
ux aUt1nt que fairt
-tion del ~
It DC poum. gubt
e .
On peul
1&
qlldqutI-

poutrious~
It ua grca'd~

L

en jugtrpar

r

de ~qm

prothaine aim
riunions de-

I

l, IQ

Lake~Je

Ic:a inconv6lknb
prtcieuD que QOllI
t chaque fcis de

2'

:.\

L'.
a fait jlQdrl

1& prtateaioot

tIIR'lbo:'lIS alii lien
d'cm

'boo timt ~
i tts. La pt'
•nita, etBc qti I

.Frucixo.l.l
de fAsLondrcs. dam its
tilt
•
le tknI

tCrc

u
• p.t\
Q

permaDCll

du C(IIIioenI

autrClloufftrt de

1461

also remember that Paris very hospitably provided exceptionally favourable conditions for
the Peace CoIlference which was held there.
That is why we propose that a decision be
taken to convene the second regular session of
the General Assembly in Europe and to authorize the Secretary-General to detennine the place
in Europe where this second session should be
convened.
Before speaking here, I had a talk with our
eminent Secretary-General, Mr. Trygve Lie, who
said : "Your idea is excellent, but we feel that
the next session should be held in America". He
added: "1 am in sympathy with your views, but
for technical reasons I cannot implement them
before 1948". 1 presume that Mr. Lie made
this statement, on the one hand out of modesty,
and on the other because he underestimated the
potentialities of the Secretariat. 1 consider, Mr.
Trygve Lie, that in 1946 you showed exceptional
talents. Personnally, 1 think that this is the fifth
place in which I have attended meetings; in
1946, I was at Hunter College, then at the
Henry Hudson Hotel, at Lake Success and at
Flushing, and before that, in London. I must
say, Mr. Trygve Lie, that you are a magician
in finding premises, turning factories into offices
and so forth. That is why I think your statement that we cannot meet in Europe for technical reasons is not quite in accordance with the
activities and the immense work which you have
carried out this year. I think it would be easier
to arrange a conference in an existing building
in Geneva or Paris than this conference at Lake
Success. Therefore, on behalf of the Ukrainian
delegation, I ask all representatives to support
our proposal. .1 suggest to you all: let us meet
in Europe and have a rest from the skyscrapers
of New York and from some of the remarkable
things which we have seen here, and let us look
at devastated Europe. It will then be easier for
us to solve problems regarding the rehabilitation
of the Europe of the future. The people of
Europe, who know best what war is, want the
United Nations, which was created as a result
of war and on behalf of peace, to meet in
Europe.

~

·_bon awJh
k la . et.de b

If ........

,,\1

r

cbe!

I beg you to support us in this.

Soixante-septieme seance phiniere

batiments inoccupes de l'ancienne Societe des
Nations. 11 y a lieu egalement d'observer que
Paris s'est montre fort hospitalier et a permis a
la Conference de la Paix de se tenir dans les
meilleures conditions. C'est pourquoi nous proposons de decider que la deuxieme session ordi~
naire de l'Assemblee generale' se tienneen
Europe et d'autoriser le Secretaire general a
designer l'endroit precis ou elle se tiendra.
Avant mon intervention, j'ai eu l'occasion de
m'entretenir avec notre eminent Secretaire general, M. Trygve Lie, qui m'a dit: ''Votre idee est
excellente, mais nous insistons pour que la prochaine session se tienne en Amerique." n a
ajoute: "Je partage vas sentiments, mais pour
des raisons techniques, je ne puis realiser votre
projet avant 1948." Je suppose que M. Trygve
Lie a fait cette declaration par modestie, et
aussi parce qu'll sous-estime les capacites du
Secretariat. Testime, M. Trygve Lie, que vous
avez, en 1946, deploye des talents extraordinaires. Si je ne me trompe, j'ai moi-meme participe aux travaux en cinq endroits differents:
depuis Londres, j'ai ete a Hunter College, puis a
I'Hotel Henry Hudson, a Lake Success et a
Flushing. Je dois dire, M. Trygve Lie, qu'en ce
qui concerne la recherche des locaux, vous etes
un magicien, vous transformez les usines en bureaux, et cretera. C'est pourquoi j'estime que
votre declaration, selon laquelle il serait impossible pour des raisons techniques de tenir une
session en Europe, ne correspond pas tout a fait
a \'otre activite et a 1'enonne travail que vous
avez foumi cette annee. A mon avis, il sera plus
facile de tenir une conference dans les ba.timents
tout installes a Geneve ou a Paris, qu'ici a. Lake
Success. C'est pourquoi, au nom de la delegation
ukrainienne, je prie taus Ies representants d'appuyer notre proposition. Je vous propose a taus: .
retrouvons-nous en Europe, reposons-nous un
peu des gratte-ciel new-yorkais et d'un certain
nombre d'autres choses remarquables que nous
avons vues ici, et observons 1'Europe devasteecela nous aidera a resoudre les problemes de la
reconstruction europeenne. Les peuples de
l'Europe, qui savent mieux que les autres ce
qu'est la guerre, demandent que l'Organisation
des Nations Unies, etablie en consequence de la
guerre et au nom de la paix, vienne sieger en
Europe.
Je vous prie done d'appuyer notre proposition.

a

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
call upon Mr. Wells, representative ofthe United
Kingdom.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole
M. Wells, representant du Royaume-Uni.

Mr. WELLS (United Kingdom) : I very much
regret that I cannot join with my Ukrainian
colleague in supporting this proposal. I would
very much like to do so as it happens to be the
last item on this agenda, and I feel that it would
be nice if we could close this Assembly on a
note of unanimity. However, I feel that it
should be pointed out that there are very good
reasons why the next Assembly should not be
held in Europe. We feel that much of the experience gained during this Assembly could produce really good results if followed up here on

M. WELLS (Royaume Uni) (traduit de lJ an glais): Je regrette beaucoup de ne pouvoir me
joindre au representant de I'Ukraine pour appuyer cette proposition. J'aurais aime le faire,
car II se trouve que cette proposition constitue
le dernier point de 1'0rdre du jour et II me
semble qu'll serait bon de voir I'Assemblee finir
sur une note de concorde unanime. Toutefois,
je crois devoir faire observer qu'il y a de tres
bonnes raisons pour que 1'on ne tienne pas la
prochaine Assemblee en Europe. A notre avis,
une grande partie de l'experience que nous avans

Sixty-seventh Plenary Meeting

1462

A.

15 December 1946

;. lis; decent

acquise au cours de cette Assemblee .pourrait
donner des resultats excellents si nous la mettions en pratique ici meme. On devrait, nous
semble-t-il, Iaisser a certains ajustements d'ordre
technique et administratif auxquels il s'est avere
necessaire de proceder et qui ont ete approuves
la possibilite de produire leurs effets.
'
Here at Flushing and· at Lake Success, there
A Flushing comme Lake Success, il est une
is involved the installation and the training of question qu'il convient de prendre en considethe staff as well as the question of experience. ration: c'est celle de l'installation et de la formaIt would not be wise to deprive the staff of the tion du perso~nel du Secretariat, airisi que ceile
opportunity which is now offered or will be de l'expcrience qu'i! lui faut acquerir. 11 serait
offered as a result of the improvements that peu sage de priver ce personnel de l'occasion
have already been approved and that will shortly qu'il a de le faire maintenant ou qui lui sera
be put into operation. And so we ask: why stop, offerte du fait des ameliorations dont le principe
why hamper the training of personnel at this a ete adopte et dont l'execution commencera
very early stage? To me, this appears to be a bientot. Pourquoi done, demandons-nous, arwaste not only of manpower but also of money reter, entraver si tot cette formation du personand of time. Let the staff gain experience nel? Il me semble que ce serait la gaspiller
here, the place of original installation. If you non seulement des activites mais encore de
go overseas for your next year's Assembly, you l'argent et du temps. Laissons le Secretariat
will take large numbers of the staff with you, acquerir de l'experience a l'endroit meme ou
and they will need to be there many months l'Organisation s'est etablie des l'origine. Si v~:)Us
ahead of the conference time.
vous reunissez outre-iner, pour la session de l'an
prochain, il VOllS faudra emmener avec vous un
grand nombre des membres du personnel qui
devront arriver la-bas plusieurs mois avant la
reunion de l' Assemblee.
There is also the question of transport which
La question des transports posera aussi, nous,
we all know presents a great problem. As we le savons tous, un grand probleme. La discussion
heard during the discussion on the question of sur la penurie mondiale en matiere de cereales
the world shortage of cereals, transport consti- nous a appris que cette question des transports
tuted a very serious and formidable bottleneck. constitue un tres grand et tres grave obstacle.
We may be able to do little to alleviate the situa- Si nous ne pouvons pas faire grand-chose pour
tion in regard to the shortage of transport, but ameliorer la situation en la matiere, du moins
at least this great Assembly should do nothing que cette grande Assemblee ne fasse rien pour
to intensify it. It is far too serious a matter to l'aggraver. C'est une question trap grave pour
those people who are trying to eke out an exist- les populations qui essaient de subsister sur une
ence on something around 1,200 or 1,500 ration alimentaire individuelle de 1.200 ou 1.500
calories.
calories.
Then, there is the question of cost. I know
I1 y a aussi la question de la depense. Je
that this is of secondary importance, particularly sais que c'est la un point d'importance seconin an Assembly where we talk glibly and casually daire, surtout dans une Assemblee ou l'on parle
in terms of millions of pounds, but I do feel that avec la plus grande aisance de millions de livres
if we are in a position to save one and a half sterling; mais j'estime que, si nous pouvons
million dollars and that, I understand, is a very epargner un inillion et demi de dollars - et je
conservative estimate of the additional cost of crois comprendre que cette somme represente
holding our next Assembly in Europe, then I feel une evaluation tres prudente, des depenses supplementaires qu'entrainerait la reunion de notre
that is a saving that we should make.
prochaine AssembIee en Europe ~ nous devons
faire cette economie.
Comme je l'ai deja indique, l'objection reelle
AA I have already indicated, the real objection
is the certainty that a splendid chance of running que j'eleve contre la proposition dont nous
our machine smoothly will be thrown away, with sommes saisis est que, si nous l'adoptions, nous
a great loss to future efficiency. It would per- perdrions certainement une magnifique chance
haps be wise for some of the organs of the de voir notre Organisation fonctionner comme
United Nations to meet in Europe such as, for un mecanisme bien rode et compramettrions en
instance, the Economic and Social Council, and grande partie son efficadte future. 11 serait peutperhaps the Trusteeship Council. But to remove etre bon que quelques-uns des organes des
the whole Assembly there would in the view . Nations Unies, le Conseil economique et social,
of my delegation be quite wrong at this stage. par exemple, et peut-etre le Conseil· de tuteIle,
tiennent des sessions en Europe, mais ma delegation estime qlle ce serait une grande erreur que
d'y faire sieger I'Assemblee elle-meme, au point
ou nous en sbmmes.
Attendons d'abord que la periode difficile de
Let us get over our teething troubles fint. Let
croissance
soit passee~ Attendons, avant de quit.
us really find our feet before we run away even

.-~einpora.ri
.' :recentl y (
quarters.
daily tra'\
which is
to which
we can c<
mollS
more till1
buildings.
European
, situation
ence of ~
next year
Kingdom
these reas

the spot. In our opinion, certain technical and
administrative adjustments which have been
found to be necessary, and which have been
approved should be allowed to develop.

a

',."

am

The PR
still have
others rna'
and ixnpo
not sugge:
bly.
I 'WoulC
procedure
headquart
vened else
General A
request of
UnitedN.
The ql
at 11.45 )
because \'
not been
against.
Would
General 1
municate
General
say, by3
our repl)
to be in j
to go te
which ra
tary issu,
more pI
decision

I cal
Australi

Mr. '
argue a
gest the

all dele
this wi:
this Or
ticable
ence it
Secreta
infonn:

s

15 decembre 1946

JlOllttait

Ii

On

~.

devrait,1lO~

iIItCllllCnts d'Oidrt
I
ij a'Qt a'itre
nl~~

Iftts.

II est tIne

:ndrt en consid~
)Q et dt! la rorma.

, . . que ccIIe
lCt1uttir. D&trait
cIt roa:aaion
I
quiluiacra

~ donI It! principe

rommencera

I

'.1Ildons-llOUS, ar.
tion du pcrron.
er '\ U gaspilkr
. encore de
It! Sccrtwiat

mtme c~

'l

I'origine. Si '/9111
I
. de ran
~tr

\'tt \"OUS un

u pmonnd qui
IB m'

1\'IIl1 ~

atmi, lIOOl
n . Ladmoo

re: de drCa1t1

I

.

.

I des lra1lSpOftl

rs

vc obstacle.

-dae pw
Mum. du moim
w: r
ricn poor
~ trop gr&\'C poor
. er !UT une
t 1.200 ou 1.500

~
dtpcme. Je
importance 5CC01l'
I
flU ran park
: millions de /im3
. nous pou't~
doUm -et~

IUfllme ~lt
de! d pcmes su~
I rtunion de ootrt
- DOU' deYQl'J

• robjcctiln rtdIe
'\ ion dont J1iJUS .

r do~nous

l~gniflque chance
men nflU' COJIlIIle
~ronsen

~t""'-; .. ~
JfC. 11 scraJt ~d

do organes . es
oomique et ~~,
eonxil de tutell~
, m . madB~'
.,
ue

~nde erreur qI
e-mCmCt au pow

~ diffi~~~e
vant~qQ1I'

1463

temporarily from New York which we have so
recently decided to make our permanent headquarters. I know that we are all tired of the
daily travelling to and fro and the loss of time
which is involved. However, the improvements
to which I have referred, and I think to which
we can confidently look forward, will save enormoUS arnounts of time and allow us· to spend
more time in our beds and less time in these
buildings. Perhaps a case can be made out for a
European meeting in 1.948 when the transport
situation is eased and the staff have the experience of a Second Assembly behind them. But
next year would, in the opinion of the United
Kingdom delegation be very inopportune. For
these reasons we must oppose this proposal.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
still have two speakers on my list and I fear
others may wish to speak. The question is delicate
and important, and I was wondering if I could
not suggest a compromise solution to the Assembly.
I would remind you that rule 5 of our rules of
procedure reads: "Sessions shall be held at the
headquarters of the United Nations unless convened elsewhere in pursuance of a decision of the
General Assembly at a previous session or at the
request of the majority of the Members of the
United Nations."
The question is complicated by being raised
at 11.45 p.m. on the last day of the session and
because we have no report before us and have
not been able to consider the arguments for and
against.
Would it not be prudent to aRk the SecretaryGeneral to submit a report and for us to communicate our answers later? The SecretaryGeneral might send a report to each Member,
say, by 31 IVfarch 1947. We could let him have
our reply by 15 :May and, if the majority were
to be in favour, that would amount to a decision
to go to Europe. I think that in a question
which raises so many administrative and budgetary issues, such a procedure would be infinitely
more prudent than to come to a last-minute
decision without a repOlt before us.
I call upon Mr. Makin, representative of
Australia.
Mr. MAKIN (Australia): I do not want to
argue about the position, but I just wish to suggest that, if your ideas are put into operation,
all delegations are entitled to know what effect
this will have upon the budgetary position of
this Organization, as well as whether it is practicable to implement the suggestion of a conference in Europe next year. I think that the
Secretariat should provide Members with this
information in the fullest way possible.

Soixante-septieme seance pleniere

ter meme temporairement New-York, ou nous
avons decide si recemment de nous installer de
fa~on permanente, de nous sentir sur un terrain
ferme. Je sais que nous sommes tous fatigues
de nos aIlees et venues quotidiennes et je sais
queUe perte de temps il en resuIte pour nous;
mais les ameliorations que j'ai mentionnees, et
dont nous pouvons attendre avec confiance la
realisation, nous permettront d'epargner beaucoup de temps, d'en passer davantage dans notre
lit et moins dans ces locaux. Peut-etre pourronsnous songer a un voyage en Europe en 1948,
lorsque la question des transports sera amelioree
et qu'une seconde session de I'Assemblee aura
permis au Secretariat d'accrohre son experience;
mais la delegation du Royaume-Uni estime que
ce voyage serait tout a fait inopportun l'annee
prochaine. Pour ces motifs, notre delegation doit
s'opposer a la proposition qui nous est soumise.
Le PRESIDENT: Deux orateurs sont encore
inscrits sur la question et je crains que d'autres
ne surgissent. La question est delicate et importante et je me demande si je ne pourrais pas
offrir a. l'Assemblee une solution transactionnelle.
Je vous rappelIe I'articIe 5, ainsi libelle, de
notre reglement interieur: "L'AssembIee generale se reunit au siege de I'Organisation, a mains
qu'elle ne soit convoquee en un autre lieu en
vertu d'une decision prise au cours d'une· session anterieure ou a la demande de la majorit~
des Membres de l'Organisation."
Ce qui rend certainement la question difficile,
c'est qu'eIle se pose, a minuit moins le quart,
le dernier jour de la session, sans que nous 'ayoIlS
devant les yeux un rapport et sans que nous
ayons eu I'occasion de trouver les arguments
pour et contre.
Ne pensez-vous pas qu'il serail sage que le
Secretaire general nous fasse parvenir un rapport et que nous lui communiquions ensuite
notre reponse? Le Secretaire general pourrait
adresset a chacun des Membres un rapport, par
exemple avant le 31 mars 1947. Nous pourrions lui donner notre reponse avant le 15 mai et
la decision serait prise d'aller en Europe si la
majorite repondait d'une manicre favorable.. Je
crois que dans une question qui souIeve tant
d'aspects administratifs et budgetaires, une telle
procedure serait infiniment plus sage que de
nollS decider au demier moment et sans avoir
de rapport sous les yeux.
J e donne la parole a M. Makin representant
de I'Australie.
M. MAKIN (Australie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Je ne veux pas discuter sur ce point, mais
j'estime que si les choses devaient se passer
comme VollS venez de le suggerer, toutes les
delegations auraient le droit de savoir queUes
consequences cette decision aurait pour la situation budgetaire de rOrganisation et s'il est
effectivement possible de proposer la reunion de
l'Assemblee en Europe, l'annee prochaine. Je
pense que le Secretariat devrait sans aucun
doute communiquer a tous les Membres des
indications aussi completes que possible sur ce
point.

I'

i

..;l' .

"

,.

~.

;

t

Sixty-seventh Plenary Meeting

1464

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Entezam, representative of Iran.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donneJa parole
tezam, representant de l'Iran.

Mr. ENTEZAM (Iran): I am not speaking
as the representative of Iran; the Iranian dele-

gation would indeed be glad if the General
Assembly were to meet in Europe, not only once,
but from time to time. As Rapporteur on the
headquarters question, I feel obliged to draw the
attention of the Assembly to the decision which
it took yesterday, instructing the Secretary-General, in conjunction with an Advisory Committee and with experts, to make recommendations
relating to buildings and plans which the General Assembly would examine at its next regular
session. If the next session is not held at New
York, it will be very difficult for the Assembly
to examine this question.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Gromyko, representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): Although the question raised by the Ukrainian
delegation is not one of the most important questions discussed at the present session of the
General Assembly, in the opinion of the Soviet
Union delegation it nevertheless deserves attention. I wish to submit a few considerations in
support of the proposal made here by the· delegation of the Ukraine. As we know, a number
of international conferences have taken place in
the United States of America of late, especially
during the past two years, including the San
Francisco Conference, the significance of which
is known to everybody, and the present session
of the General Assembly. These conferences took
place in the United States of America. Delegations often composed of a considerable number
of members had to be sent at great expense to
the Governments concerned. It seems to the
Soviet Union delegation that due heed should
be paid to that consideration in deciding the
question of the site of the next session of the
General Assemblv in connexion with the
Ukrainian proposal.
For the sake of European countries in particular, and also for countries situated near
Europe, the next regular session should be convened in Europe. For some countries, for example, the countries of Latin America, it is practically immaterial from the point of view of
distance where the next Assembly takes place,
whether in the United States of America or in
Europe. At any rate it seems to the Soviet
Union delegation that it must be a matter of
indifference to most or many of the countries
of Latin America as far as distance is concerned.
I remember that during the debates regarding
the permanent site of the United Nations which
took place il1' London at the General Assembly
and in the Preparatory Commission, this argument was put forward by the countries in favour
of the proposal that the permanent site of the
United Nations should be in Europe.
There are, of course, countries for which it is
convenient that international conferences, ill-

15 December 1946

a M. En-

M. ENTEZAM (Iran) (traduit de l'anglais):
~e n'est pas comme representant de l'Iran que

Je parle; la delegation de l'Iran, en efIet, serait

tres heureuse de voir non seulement une f(jis,
mais de temps en temps, l'Assemblee generale
en Europe. Mais, comme Rapporteur sur la
question du siege, je dois attirer l'attention de
l' AssembIee sur la decision prise par eUe hier et
par laqueUe eUe a charge le Secretaire general,
de concert avec un Comite consultatif et des experts, de faire des recommandations portant sur.
les blitiments et plans que l'Assemblee generale
aura a examiner lors de sa prochaine session
ordinaire. Si la prochaine session n'est pas tenue
a New-York, il sera tres difficile pour l'Assemblee d'examiner cette .question.
Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a
M. Gromyko, representant de rUnion des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.
.
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Bien que
la question soulevee par la delegation ukrainienne ne soit pas rune des plus importantes
de celles qu'examine la presente session de I'Assemblee generale, nous n'en estimons pas moins
que cette question merite notre attention. Je
voudrais vous exposer quelques-unes des raisons
qui viennent a l'appui de la proposition ukrainienne. Ces derniers temps, et notamment
depuis deux ans, un certain nombre de conferences internationales ont eu lieu aux EtatsUnis, y compris la Conference de San-Francisco,
dont nous connaissons tous la portee, ainsi que
la session actuelle de l'Assemblee generale. Ces
conferences se sont tenues aux Etats-Unis
d'Amerique; il a fallu envoy er des delegations
d'un effectif souvent important, ce qui a entrame de grands frais pour les Gouvernements.
La delegation sovietique estime que l'on devrait
tenir compte de cette consideration en tranchant
la question de l'endroit Oll se tiendra la prochaine session de l'AssembIee generale, question
qu'a soulevee la delegation ukrainienne.
Par egard pour les pays europeens, et aussi
pour les pays voisins, c'est en Europe qu'il convient de tenir la prochaine session ordinaire.
Pour un certain nombre de pays, par exemple
ceux de I'Amerique latine, il importe peu, quant
a la distance, que la prochaine AssembIee se
tienne aux Etats-Unis ou en- Europe. Cela vaut
nous semble-t-il, pour la majorite ou tout au
moins pour un grand nombre des pays de
l'Amerique latine. Je me rappelle qu'au cours
des debats sur le siege permanent de l'Organisation, qui ont eu lieu a Londres, a l'Assemblee
generale et a la Commission preparatoire, cet
argument a ete invoque par les pays qui proposaient d'etablir en Europe le siege permanent
des Nations Unies.

Bien enten,du, i1 y a des- pays pour lesquels
il est commode de tenir aux Etats-Unis les con'..

"t:·"'"

",.~

.

"

'

.eluding
. 'General
States 0
it W0l.l.l{
in the p
if the n<
bly Wer4

The

has raisl
proposa
delegati,
cogent
next ses

I rem
-of the 1
Europe
nothing
In any
sam.e.
In th
it wou1(
session 1
that thi
for estal
United,
asrn.uch
carrying
connexil
Nations
also hol
cannot 1
consider
proved
pensive
session j
The
I ~ill r::
the votf

"1
tiODS

sessic
Nati,
tary-

whel

semI
A re
The
Then
Vot
Soviet
slovak
Ukrai:
States
RepuJ
VOi

iurn,
DeDIT

El Sa

Iran,
Mexi
Pana
Saud
Afric

lecember 1946

15 decembre 1946

_1 M. Rtt.

eluding naturally the next regular session of the
General Assembly, should be held in the United
States of America. We consider, however, that
it would be extremely desirable and convenient
in the present case for the majority of countries,
if the next regular session of the General Assembly were held in Europe.
The representative of the United Kingdom
has raised objections here against the Ukrainian
proposal. In the opinion of the Soviet Union
delegation these objections are not sufficiently
cogent for rejecting the proposal to hold the
.
next session in Europe.

d, rtnlglais) ':
de I'!ran que
en efi'et, Rlait

ntnt une fdi!,
nWtt~

porteur SUr la

I' ttention de
p3J' clie bier et

rttain: g6l&aI,

latif et dts exms portant sur

mbl&: g6l&ale
xhaine aion
n'est pas tenue .
:ilc pour I'A".
1Ol1.

La parole a
nion des R.epu.
lU liques soda·

.ul): Bicn que

dB~tion uk·
Ius importanttJ
. de fA".

nons p3S mains
: attention. Je
tnes des ram

proposition u·
n notammenl
ambre de conlieu awe Etat5-Francisco,

et, aimi que
:gtnb'ale.Ce!
lUX Etatt-Uni

dod~
, c.e qui a err
,.ouveme:ments.

t c I'on demit
:m en uanchan1
tkndrn la pron&nIe, question
Olinicnne.

~ptcns. et aum

IfO"" qu'il con·

."" ordjnaire.

, p3I" e:xetJlple
IUrt c pcu, quanl

c.~

bIee se

rolK', Cda vaut
.ilC OU tout an
c des pays de
·lIr qu'au ~
letcr~

I.r.~

,~par:lloirel eel
, p.1" qui pro.,

.t~gc

._rrTlanenl
.,....._.

1465

I remember that in London the representatives
of the United Kingdom fought for the choice of
Europe as a permanent site. It seems to me that
nothing has changed in the course of one year.
In any event the distances have remained the
same.
In the opinion of the Soviet Union delegation
it would be extremely desirable that th«; next
session be held in Europe, in view of the fact
that this will not complicate the preparations
for establishing the United Nations here in the
United States but will rather facilitate them, inasmuch as no small efforts are required for
carrying out the necessary preparatory work in
connexion with the establishment of the United
Nations in New York. From this point of view
also holding the next regular session in Europe
cannot but be advantageous. As far as financial
considerations are concerned nobody has yet
proved that it would turn out any more expensive to the United Nations to hold the next
session in Europe than in the United States.

Soixante-septieme seance pleniere

ferences internationales, y compris la session
ordinaire de l'Assemblee generale. n nollS semble,
par contre, que pour la plupart des pays, il serait
extremement commode de tenir en Europe la
prochaine session de l'Assemblee generale.
Le representant du Royaume-Uni vient de
presenter ici des objections a la proposition
ukrainienne. De l'avis de la delegation sovietique, les arguments britanniques ne sont pas
assez pertinents pour qu'il faille rejeter la proposition de convoquer la prochaine session en
Europe.
Je me souviens du zele dont les representants
britanniques ont fait preuve a Londres en reclamant que le siege permanent soit etabli en
Europe. Il me semble que rien n'a pu changer
en l'espace d'un an. Les distances, en tout cas,
sont restees les memes.
De l'avis de la delegation sovietique, il serait
extremement souhaitable de tenir la prochaine'
session ordinaire en Europe, puisque ceIa ne
compliquerait pas les preparatifs en vue de
l'installation de l'Organisation aux Etats-Unis,
mais au contraire les faciliterait, car les travaux preparatoires en vue de l'installation de
l'Organisation a New-York exigeront beaucoup
d'efforts. Il nollS semble qu'a ce point de vue
egalement, la reunion de la prochaine Assemblee en Europe ne peut etre que desirable.
Quant a l'aspect financier de la question, personne jusqu'ici n'a pu demontrer qu'une session
tenue en Europe entrainerait plus de frais pour
les Nations Unies qu'une session aux Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I will put the text of the following resolution to
the vote:
"The General Assembly of the United Nations resolves to convene the second regular
session of the General Assembly of the United
Nations in Europe and authorizes the Secretary-General to determine the place in Europe
where the second session of the General Assembly shall be convened."
A roll-call vote was then taken.

Le PRESIDENT: Je mets aux voix le texte de
resolution suivant:

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The result of the voting is as follows:
Votes for: Argentine, Bolivia, Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Chile, China, Czechoslovakia, france, Guatemala, India, Poland,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, United
States of America, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, Yugoslavia.
. Votes against: Afghanistan, Australia, Belgmm, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland,
Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippine Republic,
Saudi Arabia, Syria, Turkey, Union of South
Africa, United Kingdom, Uruguay.

Le PRESIDENT: Voici le resultat du vote:

l'·",.
j"

'~'., ".
~ I

I.

"L'Assemblee generale des Nations Unies
decide que l'Assemblee generale des Nations
Unies tiendra sa deuxieme session ordinaire en
Europe. Elle autorise le Secretaire general a
fixer le lieu ou se tiendra, en Europe, la
deuxiem.e session de l'Assemblee generale".
Il est prodde au vote par appel nominal. '
:)

.. ~I

Votent pour: Argentine, Bolivie, Republique
sodaliste sovietique de Bielorussie, Chili, Chine,
Tchecoslovaquie, France, Guatemala, Inde,
Pologne, Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine, Etats-Unis d'Amerique, Union des RepubIiques socialistes sovietiques, Yougoslavie.
V otent contre: Afghanistan, Australie, Belgique, Canada, Colombie, Costa-Rica, Cuba,
Danemark, Republique Dominicaine, Equateur,
Egypte, Salvador, Grece, HaIti, Honduras,
Islande, Iran, Irak, Liban, Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexique, Pays-Bas, Nouvelle-Zelande,
Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Perou, Republique des Philippines, Arabie saoudite, Syrie,
Turquie, Union Sud-Africaine, Royaume-Uni,
Uruguay.

f

., :
"

•

Sixty-seventh Plenary Meeting

1466

. 15 December 1946

Abstentions: Brazil, Norway, Sweden, Venezuela.

S'abstiennent: Bresil,· Norvege, Suede, Venezuela:

Decision: The draft resolution was rejected
by thirty-five votes to fourteen with four abstentions.

Decision: Le projet de resolution est rejetA
par trente-cinq voix contre quatorze, et quatre
abstentions.

209. Rules governing the admission of new
Members to the United Nations.
Appointment of members to the Committee on procedure

209. Regres pour I'admission de nouveaux
Membres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Nomination des membres de la Commission de procedure

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The President of the Security Council has informed me that that body has appointed a committee composed of the representative of China,
acting as Chairman, and the representatives of
Brazil and Poland, to draw up, in collaboration
with a Committee on procedure to be established by the General Assembly, rules stipulating
the conditions for admitting new Members to
the United Nations Organization 1.
We have to appoint the members of the Committee on procedure of the General Assembly.

Le PRESIDENT: Le President du Conseil de
securite m'a fait savoir que cet organisme avait
nomme une Commission composee du representant de la Chine comme President et des
representants du Bresil et de la Pologne; cette
Commissiotl doit se concerter avec une Corn·
mission de procedure a creer par l'Assemblee
generale en vue de preparer un reglement fixanl
les conditions d'admission des nouveaux Membres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies1 •
N ous devons designer les Membres de la Commission de procedure a creel' par l' AssembIee
generaie.
le propose qu'on s'en tienne aux dispositiom
qui ont ete prevues pour le Comite d'admission
des nouveaux Membres dans I'Organisation des
Nations Unies, et notamment que les representants de I' AssembICe generale soient au nombre
de cinq, c'est-a-dire deux de plus que ceux dtl
Conseil de securite.

1 suggest that we adhere to the provisions laid
down for the Committee on the admission of
new Members to the United Nations, amongst
others that there should be five representatives
of the General Assembly, that is, two more than
in the case of the Security Council.

Tl
I cal
Unit,
Spee

M

I kn4
Unit
ofth
You,
worI,
New
Thet
New
the 1
the!
peac
the 1
of t:
plish

Ei
atm<
peol
the
feare
natic
of t
mere
real
ann

Mr. ENTEZAM (Iran) (translated from
French): I do not quite understand why the
Security Council itself has chosen the Chainnan
of this Committee, and I wonder if it was competent to do so. I think that it is rather the
function of the Committee to elect its own Chairman. I am sure that if the name 6f the repreIic!Jtative of China is proposed, the Committee
wiII approve it with enthusiasm.

M. ENTEZAM (Iran): le n'ai pas bien compris pourquoi le Conseil de securite a choisi luimeme le President de eette Commission, et je me
demande s'il avait competence pour le faire. le
crois plutot que c'est a la Commission a nommer
elle-meme son President. Je suis certain que si
le nom du representant de la Chine est propose,
la Commission l'approuvera avec enthousiasme,

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The reason is that the representative of China
has been chosen as Chairman of the Committee
of the Security Council. I think we should leave
this question to be considered by the Committee,
which will settle it itself. In any case, we cannot
settle it because the Security Council is not here.
I suggest that the Committee should consist
of five members.

If there is no objection, I shall consider that
proposal adopted.
The President's proposal was adopted.

Le PRESIDENT: La raison en est que le representant de la Chine a ete designc comme President de la Commission du Conseil de securite,
Je crois que nous devrions laisser cette question
a l'examen de cette Commission qui la resoudra
eIle-meme. NOils ne pouvons d'ailleurs pas la
regler, puisque le Conseil de securite n'est pas ici,
le propose done que la Commission de procedure de.!'AssembIee se compose de einq
membres.
S'il n'y a pas d'objeetion, je considererai que
cette proposition est adoptee,
La proposition du President est adoptee.

I suggest that this Committee on procedure
should consist of the following countries:
Australia, Cuba, India, Norway and the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
If there is no objection, I shall consider it
agreed to constitute the Committee thus.

Je suggere que cette Commission de procedure soit composee des pays suivants:
Australie, Cuba, Inde, Norvege, Union de.~
Republiques socialistes sovietiques'.
S'il n'y a pas d'objection, je cCinsidererai que
cette composition de la Commission est adoptee.

m

Decision: The membership of the Committee
as proposed by the President was adopted.

Decision: La composition de la Commission
de proeedure proposee par le President est
adoptee.

tJ

nen
vet<
and
hOf

'f."

. -:~ '. ~.

Nat

Ass

1 YQ~rquarante-nep.vieme

• See forty-ninth meeting, 120.

WOl.:

seance, 120.

mel

prc
tici
CO]

to

ha
UJ
st~

in'
ar

pr
th
ki
L"1:

d
tl
A

lecember 1946

15 decembre 1946

1467

Soixante-septieme secmce pleniere

Suede, Veno-

210. Closing speeches

210. Discours de c1ature

:tion est· rejeU

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
[ call upon Mr. Austin, representative of the
United States of America.

Le PREsItiENT: le donne la parole a
M. Austin, representant des Etats-Unis d' Amerique.

Speech by the representative of the United
States of America

Discours du representant des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique

Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America):
I know that I speak for all of the people of the
United States when I say to you, the Members
of this Assembly, that our gratitude is boundless.
You, the representatives of the people of the
world, first of all paid us the honour of choosing
New Yark as the scene of these deliberations.
Then you paid us the higher honour of choosing
New York City, our greatest American city, as
the permanent home of the United Nations, as
the geographical centre of the world's hope for
peace. Most of all, on behalf of the people of
the United States, I wish to thank the Members
of this Assembly for what they have accomplished.

M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'anglais): le sais que j'exprime le sentiment

'Jrze, et quatre

denouveaux
tion des Na,n des meme procedure
du Conseil de
Irganisme avait
:>see du repre:esident et des
Pologne; cette
vec une Comlar l' Assemblt~e
~glement fixant
Juveaux MemlSUnies!'
Jres de la Corn,ar l'Assemblee

dispositiom
Lite d'admission
Irganisation d~
le les representent au nombre
15 que ceux du
lUX

pas bien com-ite a choisi luirlission, et je me
our le faire. le
ssion a nommer
s certain que si
ine est propose,
c enthousiasme.
~t que le repre-

c comme Presiseil de securitc.
r cette question
qui la resoudra
l'ailleurs pas la
rite n'est pas ici.
mission de pronpose de einq
~onsidererai que
~st adoptee.

.ssion de proce-

tnts:

ege, Union d~
=s\.
~onsidererai que
aon est adoptee.
la Commission
President est
20.

. Eight weeks ago this Assembly opened in an
atmosphere of mingled fear and hope. The
people hoped for the best but many doubted that
!the Assembly would accomplish much. They
. feared that on anything important the bigger
nations would disagree and that the influence
of the s~aller nations would be dissipated in
mere talk. They wondered whether anything
real could be accomplished with regard to disarmament; whether the Trusteeship System
would ever be set up; whether the United
Nations would be able to decide on its permanent home; whether the issues of Spain, the
veto, human rights, relief for hungry peoples
and help to refugees could end in anything but
hopeless disagreement. On all these issues this
Assembly has met the test. It has more than
met it.
Starting with the ink and paper Charter, we
progressed from positive disagreement. and scepticism as to the solution of the great· problems
confronting us, to a newly discovered harmony,
to almost unanimous agreement. I think that we
have established the essential reality of the
United Nations. In the definitive resolution,
.stating the principles and priorities for a genuine
international system for the control, regulation
and reduction of armaments, the Assembly has
proved its power to promote unanimous agreement among the great nations on those things
that are most important for the future of mankind. It has proved on this and all-other major
issues the power of the small nations to influence
decisions in the direction of the right. Above all,
this session has proved the power of the General
Assembly as the supreme deliberative body of
the world. .

In my addre&'l during the opening debate of

de tous les hilbitants des Etats-Unis en disant
aux Membres de cette Assemblee que notre gratitude envers eux est infinie. Messieurs les repre.sentants, vous qui representez les peuples du
monde, VOllS nous avez fait tout d'abord le tres
grand honneur de cho\sir l'Etat de New-York
pour le lieu devos deliberations. Puis, vous nous
avez fait l'honneur plus grand encore de choisir
la ville de New-York, la plus grande des cites
d'Amerique, pour etre le siege permanent de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies, le centre geographique vers lequelle monde tournera ses espoirs
depaix. Et surtout au nom du peuple des EtatsUnis, je desire remercier les Membres de cette
Assemblee pour le travail qu'ilsont accompli.
Il y a huit semaines, cette Assemblee s'est
ouverte dans une atmosphere ou la crainte se
melait a 1'espoir. On s'efforc;ait de garder
confi:ance mais beaucoup se demandaient si
I' Assemblee pourrait· faire grand-chose. On- redoutait que sur un point important que1conque
les grandes nations ne puissent se mettre d'accord
et que le role des petites nations ne, depasse pas
le stade des mots. On se demandait si un pas
pourrait veritablement etre fait dans la voie du
desarmement, si le regime de tutelle serait jamais
institue, si 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies
serait capable de fixer son siege permanent, si la
question d'Espagne. sur celles du veto, des droits
de 1'homme, des secours a donner atous ceux
qui ont faim et de l'aide aux refugies, on aboutirait a autre chose qu'a un desaccord' sans issue. Et
.sur toutes ces questions, I'Assemblee est sortie
victorieuse de l'epreuve. Elle a meme fait davantage.
Armes, audepart, du seul texte de la Charte,
nous sommes passes d'un desaccord veritable et
du scepticisme, a la solution des grands 'problemes qui se posaient a nous, a une harmonie
tout recemment decouverte, puis a l'accord
presque unanime. Je crois que nous avons mantre que l'existence des Nations Unies est un fait,
et un fait essentiel. Dans la resolution definitive
qui enonce les principes et les conditions primordiales d'un vrai systeme international de
contr8le, de reglementation et de reduction des
armeinents, l'Assemblee a prouve qu'elle etait
assez forte pour ereer l'accord unanime, parmi
les grandes Puissances, sur les questions qui sont
les plus importantes pour 1'avenir de l'humanite.
Dans ce domaine ainsi que dans toutes les autres
questions fondamentales, l'Assemblee a montre .
le pouvoir dont disposent les petites nations pour
orienter les decisions dans le sens de la justice.
Par-dessus tout, cette session aprouve la puis~
sance de l' Assemblee ,generale en tant que
supreme assemblee deliberante du rnonde.
Lorsque j'ai pris la parole a la seance d'ouver- .

-------------~
Sixty-seventh Plenary Meeting

the Assembly I called your attention to the great
potential power the Charter confers upon the
General Assembly in Articles 10 and 14: the
pOwer to make recommendations on any questions or matters within the scope of the present
Charter-that is found in Article 10; and the
power to recommend measures for the peac~~
adjustment of any situation regardless of ongm
which it deems likely to impair the general welfare-that is found in Article 14. This jurisdiction cannot be exercised by the Security Council.
It is vested in the Assembly exclusively.
In the wide embrace of the Assembly, as in
the shadow of a great rock, all races andnations may be enfolded for peace and happ~ess.
This session of the General Assembly has gIven
the world its first demonstration, the first of
many yet to come, of the tremendous scope of
the power implicit in that word "recommend".
The Members of the United Nations are sovereign
States. Recognition of their sovereign equality is
a basic principle of the Charter. But this Assembly has given life to a new concept. It has
mobilized here the public opinion of the world.
Forceful expression has been given to that opinion. It has influenced our discussions and shaped
the results we have achieved. This is the new,
the higher sovereignty of the peoples' will. This
is the sovereignty of the decisions of the General Assembly. The peoples of the world have
been present through press and radio and film
at all of our deliberations. There have been no
cut and dried performances for the public here
while the realities were fought out behind closed
doors. Here we have spoken from our hearts,
stoutly defended our views, worked, day and
night, towards reconciliation and agreement, all
in the full sight and hearing of the world. There
has been nothing like this before in the history
of nations. The General Assembly gives promise
of endless achievement through continued
scrutiny of any situation which might impair.
the general welfare, and through the public will
aroused by its debates and its recommendations.

Mr. President, I address a personal word to
you and to the distingui~hed Secretary-General
on your right. This Assembly owes to both of
y~u a debt of gratitude that no representative
will ever forget. You, Mr. President, have done
more th~ any other man to forge agreement
out of disagreement and to bring to fruition the
great achievements of this Assembly. And you,.
~r. Secretary-General, and aU the devoted and
tireless members of the Secretariat have more
than lived up to all the great responsibilities
placed upon you by the Charter.
.Fe~ow representatives, our President is the
prmcIpal representative of Belgium. Our Sec:etary-General g<:tve up his post as Foreign MinIster of Norway to serve the United Nations. In

15 December 1946

15 decem

ture de 1'Assemblee, j'ai attire votre attention sur
la grande portee des pouvoirs que la Charte
confere a l'Assemblee generale par ses Articles 10 et 14. 11 s'agit du pouvoir de formuler
des recommandations sur toutes questions ou
affaires entrant dans le cadre de Aa Charte, que
l'Article 10 confere a l'Assemblee. Il s'agit
egalement du pouvoir prevu par l'Article 14,
de recommander les mesures propres a assurer
l'ajustement pacifique de toutesituation, quelle
qu'en soit l'origine, qui semble de nature a nuire
au bien general. Dans ce domaine, la juridiction n'appartient pas au Conseil de securite: cUe
appartient exclusivement a l'Assemblee.
Sous les vastes ailes de l'Assemblee, corrune a
l'ombre d'un rocher geant, toutes les races et les
nations s'abritent pour rechercher la paix et le
bonheur. Cette session de l'Assemblee generale
a montre au mande, pour la premiere fois - ce
que confirmeront les sessions suivantes - tout
1'immense pouvoir inclus dans le mat "recommande"; Les Etats Membres des Nations Unies
sont des Etats souverains, et la reconnaissance
de leur egalite souveraine est un principe fondamental de la Charte; mais eette Assemblee a
donne n~ance a un concept nouveau: eIle a
mobilise ici les forces de l'opinion publique mondiale. Cette opinion s'est exprimee avec vigueur;
elle a influence nos decisions et inspire les resultats que nous avons obtenus. TeIle est la fonnc
nouvelle, la forme superieure de la volonte souveraine des peuples. T eUe est la souverainetc
des decisions de l'AssembIee generale. Les peupIes du monde, par la presse, la radio et le film,
ont ete presents a toutes nos deliberations. Nous
ne nous sommes pas livres ici a des demonstrations pour la galerie, orchestrees d'avance, tandis
que les affaires serieuses se dCbattaient a huis
clos. Dans les diseours que nous avons prononces ici, c'est notre creur qui a parle. Nous
avons energiquement defendu nos opinions, travaille jour et nuit pour la conciliation et l'entente, le tout au vu et au su du monde ender.
C'est un fait sans precedent dans l'histoire des
nations. L'AssembIee generale nous pennet
d'esperer des realisations illimitees puisqu'elle
continuera d'examiner attentivement toute situation qui pourrait compromettre le bien general
et paree que ses debats et ses recommandations
eveilleront l'interet actif du public.
Monsieur le President, je voudrais m'adresser
personnellement a vous et a Monsieur le Secretaire general qui siege a votre droite. Cette
Assemblee a contracte envers vous deux une
dette de gratitude qu'aucun des represelltants
n'oubliera jamais. Monsieur le President, vous
avez fait plus que quiconque pOUf transformer
les desaccords en ententes et mener a bien les
grands travaux de cette Assemblee. Monsieur le
Secretaire general, vous-meme et tout le personnel
devoue et infatigable dont vous disposez, vous ne
vous etes·pas simplement acquitte des devoirs que
vous imposait la Charte, vous avez fait mieu:x;
encore.
Messieurs les·representants, notre President est
le Chef de la delegation de la Belgique. Notre
Secretaire general a abandonne le Ministere des
Affaires etranghes de Norvege pour venir se

these mel
Assembly
ereign eq
nations, ~

1468

FelloW

coast froIl
by the p<
City of :r
the trave
of the In
of the In
done. Y
brotherhc
devoted f
people.
And n
through01
can carry
creasing <
separate
unity-th
the Unit<

The Al
a safe p~
ones.
I

The P
call U]

G~neral.

Sp

Mr. T:
first of a]
of the DJ
words to
Secretari:

May I
for the (
during ei
Secretari:
eight we.
seen any
day and
in your
and to F
I fern,
title Was
impressil
time in :
of the f
New y(
e:catnple
bVes of
tions, Cc;
the Un
which.
thirty y,
TOda
Nations

!rorn aJ
m this
tiCians

15 decembre 1946
~ attention an

qe
Chant
.
ats AniIll' de fonnl!1tt
I qUfStions oU

Chartc,qqe

et. n iagit
LI

I' Article 14I

lpro i!llUtr
it lion, qudle
ture huirt
,illt, la juridk.
ic uril: clle

:mbJh..
l~ aJnmea
I I
races et lts
:r la paix et k
mb~~e
:n.ibe fois - et
1\

mcs - lOut
mot ''rtcom-

I N lions

Units

n:ronnaimnce
principe fonda·
le AIICmbIC:e a
eIle a

lOUYeaU:

,;JUbl" ut mOll~

ioU vigueur;

1469

these men and in what they have done for this
Assembly is a living demonstration of the sovereign equ.ality of all nations. On behalf of the
nations, great and small, I salute you both.
Fellow representatives, your arrival on our
coast from your beloved countries was welcomed
by the people of the United States and of the
City of New York. I believe it is true that if
the traveller wishes to carry home the wealth
of the Indies he must have brought the wealth
of the Indies with him. That is what you have
done, You brought with you the spirit of
brotherhood. You will take home with you the
devoted friendship and respect of the American
people.
And now we part, to return to our homes
throughout the world, with confidence that we
can carry on from here with more faith and increasing effectiveness. Your departure will not
separate us, for you have established the real
unity-the essential concord and brotherhood of
the United Nations.
The American people wish you God speed and
a safe passage to your homes and your loved

ones.

Soixante-septieme seance ph~niere

mettre au service des Nations Unies. Ces hommes
et le travail qu'ils ont accompli 'pour cette Assemblee sont le temoignage vivant de l'egalite
souveraine de toutes les nations. Au nom d'elles
toutes, grandes et petites, je vous salue tous les
deux.
Chers colli~gues, le peuple des Etats-Unis et de
la ville de New-York vous a accueillis avec joie
lorsque, venant de vos chers pays vous avez
aborde sur ce rivage. Je crais vrai le dicton selon
lequel: pour qu'un voyageur remporte avec lui
les tresors des lndes, il faut qu'il ait lui-meme
apporte ces tresors. C'est ce que vous avez fait
Vous avez apporte avec vous l'esprit de fraternite; vous remporterez avec vous l'amitie et
le respect sinceres du peuple americain.
Et maintenant, nous nous separons; chacun
rentre dans son pays, dans son coin du monde,
avec l'assurance que notre travail pourra desormais se poursuivre avec une foi et une efficacite plus grandes. Ce depart n' est pas une
separation car vous avez cree la veritable unite,
la concorde et la fraternite indispensables aux
Nations Unies.
Le peuple americain vous souhaite un bon
voyage, un heureux retour dans vos foyers
aupres de ceux qui vous sont chers.

nspire Its rtsuJ·
~ lie est la. forme
la volonte sou·
la u..'tl'llincl
eruJe. 14 peu.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
T call upon Mr. Try~e Lie, the SecretaryGeneral.

Le PRESIDENT: La parole est aM. Trygve
Lie, Secretaire general.

Speech by the Secretary-General

Discours du Secretaire general

r.&dio et le film,

Mr. Trygve LIE., Secretary-General: May l,
first of all, thank the honourable representative
of the United States of America for his friendly
words to the staff of the United Nations, to the
Secretariat, and to myself?

M. Trygve LIE, Secretaire general (traduit
de l'anglais): Qu'il me soit permis tout d'abord
de remercier l'honorable representant des EtatsUnis d'Amerique pour les aimabIes paroles qu'il
a bien voulu adresser au personnel des Nations
Unies, au Secretariat et a moi-memc.
Puis-je ensuite remercier les Membres de cette
Assemblee des egards et de ·la patience que,
pendant huit longues semaines, ils ant eus pour
le Secretariat et pour moi-meme? Vous avez
travaille pendant deux mois. Je n'ai jamais vu
les membres d'aucune assembIee internationale
travailler comme vous l'avez fait, nuit et jour,
tout en passant quotidiennement plusieurs heures
en voiture entre New-York, Lake Success et
Flushing Meadow.
Je me rappelle avoir vu, il y a quelques
annees, un film intituIe "Le Congres s'amuse";
yen avais retire une certaine idee de la cooperation internationale de ce temps-la; mais lorsque
je pense a la seconde partie de la premiere
session de l'Assemblee generale, a New-York,
j'ose dire que vous avez donne au monde un
bel exemple de la maniere dont les representants
de tous les pays que compte l'Organisation des
Nations Unies peuvent travailler. Quelle difference, entre les Nations Unies d'aujourd'hui et
le Congres qui s'amusait il y a quelque cent
vingt ou cent trente ans!
Aujourd'hui, presque tous les pays, grands ou
petits, font partie des Nations Unies et l' AssemhUe compte des representants de toutes les
groupes sociaux de chaque pays: travailleurs,
intellectuels, hommes politiques de tous les partis,

bb'ations. Nom
des dbnomtra-

m
ua.ient abnU

• VlU1CC,

01.11 avons

pro-

.1 pouIe.

NollS
» opinions, tra·
" . lion eden~ monde cntier·
l'h' oire des

nous pcrmet

~

it&! pui!q11'clle

situale bicn g6bI

rlCDt toutt

:colJlllUUl(lation

Co

dnis m'adressU
11 'curle~
~ droite. Cette
\ IS deux une

reprCscntallts

Prtsidcnt, ;'01lS

our t.ramformer

Ic:ner

bien Ir.s

:c Monsieur le

;o'ut le per.;onnel
lispoSCZ. vOUS ne
•des devoitJ que
~\'a fait roie~

May I then include all Members in my thanks
for the consideration and the patience which,
during eight long weeks, you have shown to the
Secretariat and to myself? You have behind you
eight weeks' work. May I say that I have never
seen any international gathering work like you,
day and night, travelling for hours every day
in your cars from New York to Lake Success
and to Flushing Meadow?
I remember a film I saw some years ago. The
title was "Congress Dances." It gave me some
impressions of international co-operation at that
time in history. But thinking of the second part
of the first session of the General Assembly in
New York, I think you have shown a grand
example to the whole world of how representatives of all countries, united in the United Nations, can work. What is the difference between
the United Nations today and the Congress
which danced some hundred and twenty or
thirty years ago?
Today almost all countries are in the United
Nations, great and small. Today representatives
from all groups of each nation are represented
in this Assembly: labourers, intellectuals, polio:'
ticians from all parties, communists, conserva-

,"

,
,,

; "

Sixty-seventh Plenary Meeting

1470

tives, liberals, and so on. What does this mean
to us all? And what do you think it means to
me after watching you day after day for eight
weeks?
Many have dreamed about the international
parliament of men, and I think that we are at
the very beginning of building up that international parliament which we have hoped for for
such a long time-a parliament built up on the
best principles of national parliaments.
We have followed democratic processes in our
deliberations. There have been different ideas
and different points of view, but you have
agreed on almost all the most important questions. None of us, no one single country, no
single group of people, can every time or in every
situation ask for one hundred percent of what
they themselves think is right. The democratic,
parliamentarian life is in many ways made up
of compromises, and I think you have found the
right way to work out the solutions during the
course of this Assembly.
I may say that the horizon is brighter today
than it was at the time I was elected your Secretary-General in London in February this year.
I think I have to thank you all. And at this
time I think it is my duty to convey my. thanks
to'the Foreign Ministers who have been in New
York and have solved so many difficult proble~ which ,have occupied them all for such a
long time.
I think that peace is 'something ~hich is no
longer merely in the air, but which is more or
less taking shape. We can feel it as something
more certain than we did some time ago.
I think the nations of the world can be proud
of their representatives at this Assembly, and
especially I think I express the opinion of all
the members of the United Nations staff when
I convey to our President, Mr. Spaak, our best
thanks. We express to you, Mr. Spaak, our
deep respect and gratitude. Without you I do
not know how we .could have come throu~h all
the difficulties, and I thank you for your patience
and your understanding in handling me and in
handling all the members of the staff.

There is another group of ,people to whom
I should like to say a few words. They. have
never been present officially in the Assembly, but they have been seated in the press
gallery. I think that I, as your Secretary-General, have the right to thank all the reporters,
the press people, and the radio people because
I do not think any international conference has
had such good service as this Assembly, and they
have all been with us throughout this session,
often almost around the clock. I want to express appreciation not only of the tireless efforts,
but also of the high sense of importance of the'
role of the press and radio, which they have dis~a~d.
.

,.~,

. . • _ ...' •...

15 December 1946

communistes, conservateurs, liberaux, et e<:etera.
Que ce1a signifie-t-il pour nous tous, et que
croyez-vous que cela signifie pour moi, qui vou!'
ai observes chaque jour pendant deux mois?
Nombreux sont ceux qui ont reve d'un parle.
ment international. Je crois que nous sommes a
la veille de constituer ce parlement que nous
attendons depuis si longtemps-un parlement
international qui sera edifie sur les meilleurs
principes des parlements nationaux.
Nos discussions se sont derouh~es seIon l~
methodes democratiques. Nous avons entendu
exprimer des idees et des opinions divergentes,
mais l'accord a ete realise sur presque toutes les
questions les plus importantes. Il n'est personne
parmi nous, il n'est pas un seu! pays, pas un
seul groupe de peuples, qui puisse esperer avoir~
toujours et en toute circonstance, cent pour cent
raison. La vie parlementaire en democratie, est~
a bien des egards, faite de compromis, et je
crois qu'au cours de cette AssembIee vous avez
trouve la vraie manicre d'8aborer des solutions.
Je puis dire que l'horizon est ~ujourd'hui pIU!
clair qu'il ne l'etait a. Londres, au mois de
£evrier de cette annee, au moment OU j'ai ete
elu Secretaire general de cette Organisation.
Je vons dois des remerciements a tous. Je
crois que le moment est venu pour moi de
remercier les Ministres des Affaires etrangcres
qui sont a New-York et qui ont resalu tant de
problemes difficiles, problemes qui les ont tous
occupes pendant si longtemps.
Je crois que la paix n'est plus une chose que
l'on sent simplement dans l'air, mais qu'eHe
prend forme, qu'dle nous parait plus reeHe.
qu'i! y a quelque temps.'
J'estime que les nations du monde peuvent
etre fieres de leurs representants a cette Assemblee et, surtout, je crois exprimer l'opinion
de tous les membres du personnel de l'Organisa.
tion des Nations Unies en adressant aM. Spaak,
notre President, nos meilleurs remerciements.
Monsieur le President, je vous exprime notre
profond respect et notre gratitude. Sans vous,
je ne sais pas comment nous aurious surmonte
toutes les difficultes qui se sont presentees et je
tiens a vons remercier de la patience et de la
comprehension dont vous avez fait preuve a mon
egard et a l'egard des mezpbres du personnel.
Il y a une autre categorie de personnes a
qui je voudrais dire quelques mats. Elles n'ont
jamais assiste officiellement a l'Assemblee mais
eHes avaient leurs places dans le galerie de la
presse. Je crois qu'en ma qualite de Secretaire
general, j'ai le droit de remercier tous les re·
porters, tous les representants de la presse et de
la radio, car ils n'ont peut-etre jamais encore
rendu a aucune conference intemationale des
services aussi precieux qu'a cette AssembIee; ils
ont tous suivi, du commencement a la fin, notre
session, et le' plus souvent, vingt-quatre heures
sur vingt-quatre. Je tiens a leur exprirrier ma
gratitude, non seulement de leurs efforts inlassabIes, mais aussi du sentiment eleve qu'ils
ont montre de l'importance du role de la presse
et de la ~di().
,'t."

15 decen,1:

De~r r,
are now .
your frien:
not stop t
portant ta
and in th
and you r.
to try to J
into living

I wish)
all be herl
Speech by

Mr. P._
French) :
satisfactio:
exhausted
hausted;
whole Sec
atives are
Thus "Ve

of the ess
unanimity
The re,
done a gr
although
judged; t
deny the
scientiousr
throughOl
the repres
The cri
us is that
indeed th
ought to
meet ever
assured (
whom wc
young 01
At times
work I h,
uDo not
Let us
subjects,
a succes:
given pr'
the "","od,
~ers to 01
As I
speech'l
Trygve,
ponder
speaker
myself (
but on
find tha
he has 5

In pr

me ,",as
those oJ
before
being a
had th(
ing of s
I rea

tive. wc

15 decembre 1946
, et Clt.tera.
~ et que

11, qui \'()US

1X Il1Ois?

d'un parle-

ssornmesa
: que notl.!
parlemOlt
!

meiIleurs

s seIon I~
ns entendu
iivergcntes,
:e toutes l~
:st pe1'SGnne
l~

pa8 un

p&-er avoir,
t pour cent

ocratle, est,
~ et ie
:vousavtz
~ solutions.
lId'hui pill!
.u mois de

oll fai W
uUsation.
a tous. Je
'ut moi de

i

ttrange1eS

olu tant de
!.cs ont toUl

~ cho6e que
:lais qu'elle
plus rtdlc

de peuvent

a ettte }J-

et I'opinioD

l'Organisa·

I M. Spaak,

le:rclements.

)nme notrt

Sans vom,
as surmon~
entks et je
ce et de la
euve Amon
:rsonnel.

)tI'S011ntS

a

Mu n'ont
mblee miU
uerie de la
e SecrCtairt
lOllS les re-

presse et de

nais encore
~lionale des
sem bite; iIs

la fin, notrt
atre heurtS
tprimer ~
efforts llI'
Beve qu'j]s
de la pres;e

1471

Dear representatives of all countries, you
are now going home to your families and to
your friends. I wish you all the best. You must
not stop this international work. The most important task will be in the national parliaments
and in the official life of your home countries,
and you must work, if necessary, day and night
to try to make the ideas of the United Nations
into living realities.

Soixante-septieme seance pleniertt

I wish you all bon voyage, and I hope you will
all be here again next year.

Chers representants de tous les pays, vous allez
repartir chez vous et retrouver vos familles et
vos amis. Mes meilleurs vreux vous accompagnent. N'abandonnez pas votre reuvre internationale. La partie la plus importante de votre
tache, vous l'accomplirez dans vos parlements
nationaux et en participant a la vie publique de
chacun de vas pays; vous travaillerez nuit et
jour, s'ille faut, pour que les ideals des Nations
Unies deviennent de vivantes realites.
Je vous souhaite a tous bon voyage et j'espere
vons revoir id l'an prochain.

Speech by the President of the General Assembly

Discours du President de l'Assemblee generale

Mr. P.-H. SPAAK, President (translated from
M. P.-H. SPAAK, President: Je ne puis
French): I cannot suppress a broad smile of dissimuler un large sourire de contentement
satisfaction in informing you that our agenda is en vous annon~ant que notre ordre du jour est
exhausted. The Secretary-General is also ex- ,epuise. Le Secretaire general aussi est epuise;
hausted; Mr. Cordier is also exhausted; the M. Cordier aussi est epuise; tout le Secretariat
whole Secretariat is exhausted; all the represent- est epuise; tous les representants sont epuises, et
atives are exhausted, and I am exhausted too. moi aussi je suis epuise. Ainsi, Messieurs, nous
Thus we have a new proof of the virtue of one trouvons une nouvelle fois la verification de la
of the essential rules of our Organization: the vertu d'une des regles essentieIles de notre Organisation: la regIe de l'unanimite.
unanimity rule.
Si nous sommes epuises, c'est que nous avons
The reason for our exhaustion is that we have
done a great deal of work. I do not yet know, heaucoup travaille. Je ne sais pas encore, quoialthough I can gues.'l, how this session will be que je le devine, que! sera le jugement que ran
judged; but one thing is certain: nobody can portera sur ceUe session, mais certainement nul
deny the industry, the good-will and the con- ne pourra contester l'ardeur au travail, la volonte
scientiousness which have been displayed de bien faire et la conscience qui ant ete deployes
throughout these eight weeks by all and each of pendant huit semaines par tous et par chacun
des representants des Nations Unies.
the representatives of the United Nations.
La critique que l'on pourrait nous adresser
The criticism which might be levelled against
us is that the session has lasted too long. I do c'est que la session a dure trap longtemps. Je
indeed think that this is a danger on which I pense en effet qu'il y a la un danger sur lequel
ought to lay stress. I do not think that we can mon devoir est d'insister. Je ne crois pas que
meet every year for seven or eight weeks and be nous puissions nous reunir tous les ans pendant
assured of the presence of all the statesmen sept ou huit semaines et obtenir le concoul1l de
whom we need to do our work properly. Our tous les hommes d'Etat dont nous avons besoin
young Organization should not be too ambitious. pour mener a bien nos travaux. It ne faut pas
At times when I have been presiding over your que notre jeune Organisation soit trop ambiwork I have thought of the truth of the proverb: tieuse. Quelquefois, en presiclant ces travaux,
je me sills dit..que le proverbe fran~ais etait juste:
uDo not bite off more than you can chew".
"Qui trop embrasse mal etreint."
.
Soyons plus modestes, occupons-nous de mains
Let us be less ambitious, let us deal with fewer
subjects, but let us endeavour to bring them to de choses, mais essayons de les mener a bien.
a successful conclusion. When we have thus Quand nous aurons ainsi prouve nos possibilites
given proof of our ability to achieve something, de realisation, c'est plus volontiers et plus facilethe world will be more ready to entrust new mat- ment que l'on confiera de nouveaux sujets a nos
ters to our debates.
debats.
En entendant le remarquable discours de
As I was listening to Senator Austin's fine
speech and to the remarks of my friend Mr. M. le senateur Austin, et celui de mon ami
Trygve Lie, I realized, and I would ask you to M. Trygve Lie, je me suis rendu compte, et je
ponder this, how difficult it is to be the third vous demande d'y reflechir, de la difficult€
speaker on a specific subject. Mr. Austin and de parler le troisieme sur un sujet precis. Nous
myself did not put our heads together at all, ne nous etions pas concertes, M. Austin et moi,
but on looking at my notes I am horrified to et en consultant mes notes, je m'aper~ois avec
find that I shall have to repeat exactly all that terreur que je vais etre oblige de repcter exactehe has said.
.
ment tout ce qu'il a dit.
Ce qui m'a frappe, en presidant ces debats,
In presiding over these debates, what struck
me was the difference between our meetings and c'est la difference de nos reunions avec ceIles de
those of Geneva. I went to Geneva a few times Geneve. Je suis alle quelquefois a Geneve avant
before the war, and I had the impression of la guerre et j'avais !'impression d'etre clans une
being at a meeting of diplomats. !:Iere I have reunion de diplomates. Ici, j'ai eu tres nettement
~ad the distinct impression of being at a meet- l'impression d'ctre dans une rCunion d'hommes
politiques.
Ing of statesmen.
Nous avons cree, je le pense veritablement, un
I really do think that we have set up a tentative. world parliament, I am not quite sure yet essai de parlement mondial. Je ne suis pas en-

i

r-<

l'

I

"

"

Sixty-seventh Plenary Meeting

1472

that the system is entirely good, but I must
admit that the first attempt which we have
witnessed here inspires me with confidence. For
not only have we heard excellent speeches and
not only have we had proof of talents of which
we were already aware, but during our session
we have witnessed the birth and the development of fresh talents which I joyfully welcome.
We have had more than talent. I have
noticed that, much more so than in London,
successful delegations were modest in their
triumph, and that those which were defeated
accepted their defeat without feelings of bitterness or rancour. That, in my opinion, is a very
important fact.
I have also noticed, I feel bound to say, that
at no time was there in ~ Assembly any bloc,
or any blocs in opposition to each other. If you
have the time, go over the votes which were
cast and you will see that there were co~tant
changes in the majorities and that one or other
great Power in turn obtained a majority, the
small Powers voting in turn like one or other of
the great PQwers.

15 December 1946·

core sur que le systeme soit tout a fait boo,
cependant jedois reconnaitre que le premier
essai auquel nous venons d'assister me donne
confiance. Car, non seulement nollS avons entendu d'admirables discours, non seulement nous
avons eu la confirmation de talents que nollS·
connaissions deja, mais nous avons vu naitre et
se deveIopper, dans notre session, de nouveaux
talents que je salue avec plaisir:
Nous. avons vu mieux que des talents. J'ai
remarque que, bien plus qu'a Londres, les delegations victorieuses triomphaient avec modestie
et que celles qui etaient battues acceptaient leur
defaite sans amertume et sans rancune. Cela est
a mes yeux une constatation fort importante.

J'ai observe egalement, je tiens a le souligner,
qu'a aucun moment il n'y a eu dans cette AssembIee un bloc quelconque ou des blocs s'opposant. Si VOllS en avez le temps, revoyez les.
votes qui ont ete emis et VOllS verrez que les
majorites n'ont pas cesse de changer, et que,
tour a tour, l'une ou l'autre des grandes Puissances a obtenu la majorite, les petites Puissances votant tour a tour comme l'une ou
l'autre des grandes Puissances.
n a ete ditque notre Organisation pouvait
It has been said that our Organization might
perish if opposing and conflicting blocs were perir si des blocs adverses et opposes se formaient.
formed. What we have seen in actual practice Ce que nous avons vu, pratique et realise depuis
for weeks has proved that there were no blocs des semaines a prouve qu'il n'y avait pas de bloc,
but that there was one single internatioJ?al, mais qu'iI n'y avait qu'une seule Organisation
intemationale.
Organization.
We have settled a large number of practical
Nous avons regIe un grand nombre de quesquestions: refugees and agreements with spe- tions pratiques: refugies, accords avec les insticialized agencies. We have come to a final de- tutions specialisees. Nous avons choisi definitivecision on our permanent site; we have settled, ment notre siege permanent; nollS avons
with moderation but firmly, some difficult politi- regIe avec moderation mais avec fermete des
cal questions. We have set up the Trusteeship questions politiques difficiIes; nous avons cree
System, thus rounding off our Organization, and le Regime de tutelle, completant ainsi notre Orlastly, how could I fail to mention what is with- ganisation; et enfin, comment ne pas faire une
out doubt the most important decision we have mention speciale de la decision la plus importante sans doute que nous avons prise, celle du
taken, that on disarmament.
desarmement.
Il faut remercier la delegation de rUnion
We ought to thank the delegation of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics for having sovietique d'avoir eu l'audace de presenter a nos
been bold enough to submit this very difficult deliberations cette question si difficile. Il faut
question to our deliberations. We ought to thank remercier les delegations des grandes Puissances:
the delegations of the great Powers, the United Etats-Unis, Royaume-Uni, France, Chine,
States of America, the United Kingdom, France d'avoir immediatement suivi l'Union sovietique
and China, for having followed the lead of the sur le terrain qu'elle avait choisi et d'avoir
Soviet Union on the ground it had chosen, for contribue avec tant de comprehension et de
bringing so much understanding and conciliation conciliation a la realisation de la motion qui a
towards preparing the motion which was voted. ete votee. I1 faut remercier aussi les represenWe ought also to thank the representatives of so tants de tant de petits Etats qui ont joue clans
many small States who played a most important cette question essentielle un role capital. Nous
part in this essential question. The decision avons fait naitre par la decision que nous avons
which we recently voted has raised great hopes. votee I'autre jour une grande esperance.
Depuis San-Francisco, depuis l'instant OU
Since San Francisco, since the time when we
nous
avons accepte la Charte, nous n'avions
accepted the Charter, we have accomplished.
nothing so important as the motion on disarma- rien realise d'aussi important que la motion sur
ment. If in the months and weeks to come the le desarmement. Si vraiment dans les semaines
competent organs really succeed in making the et dans les mois qui viennent, les organismes
texts we have submitted to them a living reality, competents parviennent a faire une realite viI think that mankind will have entered a new vante. des textes que nous leurs avons soumis, je
era, which you have ushered in-a fact of crois qu'alors l'humanite sera entree dans une
ere nouvelle dont vousaurez ete les promoteurs,
which you may well be proud.
et vous aure£ le droit d'en etre fiers.
\")

15 decem.

There n

expression~

anybody, :
Senator Al
about nte.
the way i]
more than
the co-ope
I cannc
out mentj
President
this Assen
Cordier, ,
throughou
towards h
appreciate
I can say.
After a
staff here
hffid Ine.
.task, of 'V\
their con
their zeal
work.
Finallywant to t]
your kind
ing the ~
even, on (
cedure, I

somethin~

bears :me:
mistaken,
good fait]
You a
hours, or
countries.
the tness<
Governm
confiden(
I have
made, th
our task
temation
eration.
that I h
practise
operatiol
seen bere
Toda)
sage whi
world i:;
And I t
on the"
say that
second I
Idee
of the (
closed.
The fin'
flrsl se~
United

15 decembre 1946

it bon,
)remier
. doune
ons ennt nous
le now~
aitre et
luveaux

There now only remains the part set aside for
Il me reste la partie reservee aux remercieexpressions of thankS. For fear of forgetting ments. De peur d'oublier quelqu'un, je remercie
anybody, I wish to thank everybody. I thank tout le monde. Je remercie M. le senateur
Senator Austin for his kind and indulgent words Austin des paroles fudulgentes et· si aimables
about me. I thank the Secretary-General for qu'il a eues pour moi. Je remercie le Secretaire
the way in which he worked with me; it was general de notre collaboration qui a ete plus
more than cordial, it was unclouded; it was like que cordiale, qui a ete sans nuages: la collaborathe co-operation of two friends.
tion de deux amis.
I cannot end this expression of thanks withJe ne puis passer ces remerciements SaDs reout mentioning my assistant on the left. A mercier mon assistant a ma gauche. Un PresiPresident could not satisfactorily preside over .dent ne pourrait pas bien presider cetie Assemthis Assembly without having at hiS side Mr. blee s'il n'avait pas a ses cotes .M. Cordier qui
Cordier, who never eats or sleeps, and who, ne mange pas, qui ne dort pas, et qui, pendant
throughout the session, has bent his whole mind toute la session ne pense qu'a faciliter le travail,
towards helping the work along; I admire and et dont j'admire et apprecie plus que je ne sauappreciate his keenness and efficiency more than rais le dire l'ardeur et la competence.
I can say.
Apres taus les autres, je veux remercier ce
After all the others, I want to thank the
staff here at my feet, and those who work be- personnel qui est id au pied de cette tribune,
hind me. They have performed a tremendous et celui qui travaille derriere moi. Il a fait un
. task, of which I have been a witness. Without travail formidab~e, dont j'ai ete temoin; sans
their constant devotion, their self-denial and son constant devouement, son abnegation, son
their zeal, we should never have finished our ardeur au travail, jamais nous ne serions parvenus au terme de notre tache.
work.
Enfin, Messieurs-menagez vos applaudisseFinally-be sparing in your applause-I
want to thank all of you, the representatives, for menu-je veux VollS remercier tous, vous les
your kindness, good nature; and discipline dur- representants, pour la gentillesse, l'amabilite et
ing the session. If, as faithful guardian and la discipline que VOllS avez montrees au cours de
even, on occasion, interpreter of the rules of pro- ceUe session. Si, gardien £idele et quelquefois
cedure, I have had to refuse to anyone of you meme interprete des regles de la procedure, j'ai
something to which he felt entitled, I hope he du refuser a run ou a l'autre que1que chose qu'il
bears me no grudge! I may sometimes have been croyait meriter, qu'il ne m'en veuille pas! J'ai
mistaken, but no one could ever doubt my pu me tromper quelquefois, mais jamais ma
good faith.
bonne foi n'a puetre mise en doute.
VOlls allez vous separer et, dans quelques
You are about to separate, and in a few
hours, or days, you will be back in your own .heures, quelques jours, vous serez rentres dans
countries. I am convinced that you all feel that vos pays. Je sliis convaincu que vous avez tous
the message you are able to take back to your le sentiment que le message que vous pouvez
Governments and to your peoples is a message of rapporter a vos Gouvernements et a vos peuples
est un message de confiance.
confidence.
J'ai souvent dit, dans les discours que j'ai:
I have often said, in the speeches I have
. made, that we would not succeed in carrying out prononces, que nous ne reussirions a accomplir
our task unless we practised those two great in- notre t~che que si nous pratiquions ces deux
ternational virtues: understanding and. co-op- grandes vertus internationales: la compreheneration. In closing this session, I wish to say sion et la cooperation. En.cloturant cette sesthat I have seen the representatives as a whole sion, je declare que, plus que je ne l'avais jamais
practise understanding and the virtue of co- vu auparavant, j'ai vu l'ensemble des repreoperation to a greater extent than I have ever sentants pratiquer la comprehension et la vertu
de cooperation.
seen before.
Nous sonunes aujourd'hui dans la bonne voie.
Today, we are on the right road. The mes:'
Le
message que, d'ici, nous envoyons au monde
sage which we are sending out from here to the
est un message de c6nfiance et d'espoir. Et je
world is a message of confidence and hope.
And I trust that one day, when we look back veux croire qu'un jour, pensant au travail que
nous avons accompli, nous pourrons nous dire
on the work we have done, we shall be able
say that we feel proud that we rook part in this que nous avons ete fiers de participer a la seconde partie de la premiere session.
second part of the first session.
Je declare close la seconde partie de la preI declare. the second part of the first session
of the General Assembly of the United Nations miere session de l'Assemblee generale des Nations Unies.
closed.
The final meeting of the second part of the La seance de doture de la seconde partie
flrst session of the General Assembly of the de la premiere session de I'Assemblee generale
United Nations rose at 12.45 a.m.· on Monday, des Nations Unies est levee Cl 0 h. 45, le lundl
16 decembre 1946
16 December 1946
.

J'ai
es dele10destie
ent leur
:Jela est
mte.
lts.

uligner,
ette As'cs s'op:>yez les.
que la
et que,
es Puis~ Puisune ou
pouvait
rmaient.
e depuis.
de bloc,
~nisation

:le quesles insti:finitiveavons
lete des
ms cree
:>tre Orlire une
: imporcelle du

rUnion
er a nos
Il faut
3sances:
Chine,
vietique
d'avoir
1 et de
n qui a
epresenuedans
l. Nous
IS avons

ant ou
tl'avions
tion sur
emaines
anismes
llite villmis, je
lllS une
tloteurs,

1473

Soixante~septieme seance ph~niere

r 1946.

.

:;

::,,::'

..~

to

".1.:

I·

;',;
i'
