Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

1. Commends the Agent General , f the United
Nations Korean Reconstruction Agency for the excellent progress made by the Agency in pursuing its
mission of assisting the Korean people to relieve the
sufferings and to repair the devastation caused by
aggression ;
2. Stresses the desire that implementation of the
programmes of the Agency as approved by the General
Assembly in resolution 725 (VIII) of 7 December
1953 be achieved to the maximum extent possible;
3. Urges all Governments to give the financial support necessary for the continuation of the Agency's
programme, whether by the prompt payment of existing pledges or by the pledging of new contributions
to the programme ;
4. Expresses appreciation for the valuable and continuing assistance given to the Agency by United
Nations specialized agencies and by voluntary nongovernmental organizations ;
5. Requests the Negotiating Committee for Extra
Budgetary Funds, appointed pursuant to General Assembly resolution 861 (IX) of 29 October 1954, to
undertake steps designed to secure new pledges and the
prompt payment of existing pledges to the Agency.
511th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.

15

829 (IX). Full employmeu.t

The Genera/, Assembly,
Noting that the Economic and Social Council is
keeping under review the problem of promoting full
employment,
Endorses resolution 531 B (XVIII) adopted by the
Economic and Social Council on 4 Augm,t 1954, and
particularly the invitation to the International ~bour
Organization to continue its important work m the
field of employment problems.
511th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
830 (IX). Removal of Qhstacles to international
trade and means of developing international
economic relations

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the Economic and Social Council
is giving active consideration to the question of the
expansion of international trade and the development
of international economic relations,
1. Expresses its satisfaction with the Economic and
Social Council's decision to continue to study this
question at its twentieth session ;
2. Endorses resolution 531 C (XVIII) adopted
unanimously by the Council on 4 August 1954.
5.11 th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
