S/2018/778

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 August 2018
Original: English

Letter dated 20 August 2018 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Further to my letter of 22 April 2018 on the reconfiguration of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) mandate and to Security Council
resolution 2416 (2018), I wish to provide you with recommendations for adjusting
UNISFA to the current realities on the ground so as best to serve the border
communities of the Sudan and South Sudan, including in Abyei, and to support both
Governments in their efforts to implement the agreements that t hey have signed.
The independent review of UNISFA, conducted from February to April 2018,
clearly indicated that the context has markedly evolved since the initial deployment
of the interim force. During the most recent consultations of the Security Council,
members again unanimously agreed that, despite the lack of political progress on the
final status of Abyei and on the implementation of the 2012 security arrangements
and border agreements, UNISFA had clearly had a stabilizing role in Abyei and along
the border between the Sudan and South Sudan. However, preoccupied with internal
political tensions and conflicts, the parties have not used the relative calm on their
borders to resolve outstanding issues and/or to implement existing agreements.
In line with my agenda on reforming the peace and security pillar of the United
Nations, I firmly believe that we must restructure operations that no longer meet the
needs on the ground and work towards achieving political resolutions to conflicts, in
conjunction with, as requested by the Security Council, exit strategies for our
missions. The following recommendations are aimed at addressing this requirement
and repositioning the Mission to serve the renewed impetus for a political solution to
the Abyei and other border disputes between the Sudan and South Sudan.
Defining an end state
Two agreements currently form the basis of the UNISFA mandate, the
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of the Sudan and the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement on temporary arrangements for the administration and
security of the Abyei Area of 20 June 2011 and the Agreement on the Border
Monitoring Support Mission between the Government of the Sudan and the
Government of South Sudan of 30 July 2011. Those agreements were intended, on
the one hand, to be temporary, until a referendum was held in a ccordance with the
Protocol on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Abyei Area of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, and, on the other, to prevent any confrontation between the parties
until the demarcation of the border.

18-13830 (E)

280818

*1813830*

S/2018/778

Against that backdrop, UNISFA was deployed to create an environment
conducive to the realization of the two agreements, thereafter integrated into the
cooperation agreements of 27 September 2012. The cooperation agreements were
negotiated under the auspices of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel,
providing a comprehensive framework to settle outstanding issues between the two
countries, following the secession of South Sudan on 9 July 2011.
The end state for UNISFA should therefore remain the implementation of the
relevant chapters of the cooperation agreements, namely, border issues and security
arrangements, as well as the settlement of the final status of Abyei, as one of the
remnants of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement of 2005. Its exit strategy should
reflect the various steps towards this goal and define the role that the Mission should
play in supporting the parties and the African Union in the realization of the
agreements.
Changing realities
Since 2011, the mandate of the Mission has been focused solely on security
aspects, while political support has been provided by the African Union. In the context
of 2011 and 2012, this was a very useful and successful division of labour. In the
years since, however, UNISFA has become exposed to the political shortcomings of
the process and the insufficient political will and interest of the parties, as it had to
deal with the lack of political progress in establishing the administrative arrangements
in Abyei and in addressing border demarcation and security. Although well equipped
and highly performing on security issues and filling the gap in local conflict
resolution, the Mission has lacked the civilian tools to keep the parties engaged in the
advancement of their dialogue politically, while the African Union High -level
Implementation Panel focused on settling the conflict in Darfur and in the Two Areas,
and the African Union Commission lacked the resources to step up its day-to-day
engagement.
Similarly, the Security Council, having established UNISFA on the basis of t he
two interim agreements, has focused on the implementation of the temporary
arrangements rather than considering the end state for UNISFA and the final status of
Abyei and the settlement of the border disputes.
In order to preserve the important gains achieved by UNISFA and to contribute
to the reinvigoration of the political process that was severely hampered by the
conflict in South Sudan, it is now necessary for the Mission to enhance its role in
support of the implementation of the agreements between the Sudan and South Sudan.
This necessitates a reconfiguration of the UNISFA mandate to allow the Mission to
play a more proactive and sustained role in operationalizing the agreements in support
of and in collaboration with the African Union Commission a nd the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel, to achieve the demarcation of the border and the
determination of the final status for Abyei.
Reconfiguring the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
In the light of the above, I would like to propose that UNISFA continues its
current focus on security and stability in the Abyei Area, as well as its monitoring and
verification along the border, which has significantly contributed to the absence of
confrontation and conflict between the Sudan and South Sudan since 2012. Given the
evolution of the situation, however, I would like to suggest a modest expansion in its
role, to foster solutions on a day-to-day basis within the framework of the signed
agreement in support of both parties and the African Union/African Union High-level
Implementation Panel.

2/7

18-13830

S/2018/778

This would allow the Mission to function as a tool that works towards the
resolution of any border issues between the two countries, in close collaboration with
other stakeholders, and to foster community dialogue and reconciliation in Abyei. In
this regard, the Mission would focus on Abyei and two of the 2012 cooperation
agreements on border and security arrangements. This expanded role of the Mission
is differentiated from that of the Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan. The
role of the Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan is to consider the overall
negotiated settlement of outstanding Comprehensive Peace Agreement issues, and
focus on seven other cooperation agreements, including agreements on oil, banking,
trade, economic matters, the status of nationals and post -service benefits, as well as
the Two Areas.
I reiterate my disappointment that the agreements of 20 June and 30 July 2011
remain largely unimplemented. The presence of Sudanese police in Diffra and the role
of South Sudan in the Juba-appointed administration continues, in violation of the
Agreement of 20 June 2011. The Mission cannot continue to be held hostage by this
situation and operate in an administrative vacuum, in particular because both
communities do have an administrative arrangement, albeit separate, in place. We
therefore suggest that, until progress is made towards implementation of the
Agreement of 20 June 2011 and a political dialogue that furthers the resolution of the
final status is in place, UNISFA should be able to engage with the Juba -appointed
administration based in Abyei and the Misseriya administration in Muglad, in addition
to continuing its work with current community-based structures, so as to maintain
stability and foster intercommunal reconciliation.
At the same time, owing to the lack of political progress, the Diffra oil
installation would remain under the temporary control of Khartoum, thereby
maintaining the agreed revenue-sharing structure in the Abyei Protocol until the
temporary arrangements are implemented and/or a final settlement is agreed.
As for the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone, the Agreement on Security
Arrangements between the Republic of the Sudan and the Republic of Sou th Sudan
of 30 July 2011 and subsequent agreements, notably the Agreement on Security
Arrangements between the Republic of the Sudan and the Republic of South Sudan
of 27 September 2012, envisioned that a fully operationalized Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism would provide the parties with a temporary
buffer zone on their common border that would allow the parties to peacefully
negotiate contested areas. However, operations of the Mechanism have picked up
momentum only within the last year owing to a modicum of rapprochement between
the two countries and pressure from the Security Council to utilize the Mechanism or
lose it.
To date, the Mechanism remains at initial operating capability, with only two of
the four sector headquarters in operation, and only one team site established within
the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone, while the presence of both the Sudanese Armed
Forces and the Sudan People’s Liberation Army in the Safe Demilitarized Border
Zone continues to be reported.
As UNISFA continues to proactively push forward the operationalization of the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, progress has been made
towards the full functioning of the mechanism during the first months of this year,
including the establishment of some team sites along the border crossing corridors
within the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone. The completion of the first phase of
marking the centreline and outer limits of the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone in 3 of
the 10 crossing points along the agreed border corridors between the Sudan and South
Sudan has also been achieved by the African Union Border Programme Technical
Team, supported by UNISFA.
18-13830

3/7

S/2018/778

Despite its delays, the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
remains a vital part of the framework that regulates the relationship of the two
countries. Since the inclusion of the Mechanism as part of the UNISFA mandate in
2012, there has not been a single confrontation between their armies. It is therefore
of paramount importance that the Mechanism be deployed fully and that the 2012
security arrangements and border agreements be implemented. The influence that the
Security Council was able to exert was essential in advancing the Mechanism ’s
effectiveness. Continued Council engagement on the matter and relations between the
Sudan and South Sudan in accordance with Council resolution 2046 (2012) will be
very important for the stability of the region while South Sudan is in turmoil.
For the normalization of relations between the two countries, a concerted,
revitalized effort is needed to foster the implementation of the 2012 security
arrangements and border agreements. In the case of UNISFA, as mentioned above,
this should include a focus on the border agreement. The Mission should be mandated
to support the parties in the establishment of a timetable for the border crossing
corridor demarcation, in collaboration with the African Union Border Programme
Technical Team, as well as provide protection for the demarcation teams, their
equipment and facilities. In this regard, the Mission’s operations on the border would
expand, allowing it also to support border demarcation efforts, including
sensitization, in addition to the security and monitoring role it plays within the Safe
Demilitarized Border Zone.
The demarcation of the border crossing points should also be addressed as part
of a wider discussion to alleviate fears that the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone will,
despite all assurances, become the de facto border. Discussions on the border have to
be held in parallel with the move towards full operating capability. Day-to-day
engagement by the Mission with the local communities on both sides of the border
will create an environment in which they have the confidence to restore their
traditional ties and see the benefit thereof, and resume or expand their mutual
commercial activities.
Simultaneously, and in accordance with Council resolution 2416 (2018),
progress needs to be made on the disputed and claimed areas of the common border.
This should commence with the handover of the required documents to the African
Union Panel of Experts, followed by the finalization of the demarcation plan, which
should consider starting demarcation of the non-contested border first, to show results
and create a momentum for the implementation of the entire border agreement. Within
the spirit of the “soft border” concept agreed in 2012, the Mission should be mandated
to support demarcation teams in collaboration with the African Union Border
Programme Technical Team, foster community reconciliation and sensitization and
support integrated border management at the border crossings.
Changing the mission concept
In the light of the above, several changes would have to be made to the mission
concept of UNISFA.
Military component
With regard to the military, a capability study was finalized by the Office of
Military Affairs on 9 July 2018, which recognized the change in threat and which
therefore suggested that adjustments be made to the deployment and equipment of the
force. With diminishing need for a large military component in the Abyei Area, troops
from the Area would be transferred to fully operationalize the monitoring mechanism,
in particular ensuring the establishment of two remaining sector headquarters and
required team sites within the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone and that each sector
4/7

18-13830

S/2018/778

headquarters has a self-sufficient dedicated force protection unit, as well as logistics
support and enabling forces.
While the threat within the Abyei Area is now, thanks to UNISFA, mostly
criminal in nature, there is still no political settlement which would address the
underlying issues that have caused this conflict. In this context, and owing to the
posture of UNISFA, the military capability study identifies cross -border military
action as the most likely threat along its borders. As a result, the military component
of the mission would concentrate its deployments along the borders of the Abyei Area,
to safeguard against and stop any movement of armed rebel groups from both the
Sudan and South Sudan. An incursion of armed entities from either party has the
potential to exacerbate intercommunal tensions and endanger civilians in the Area.
In this regard, the military component of the Mission would maintain a deterrent
posture along the main routes going into the Abyei Area at the northern and southern
borders. With regard to the Misseriya migration, the Mission will continue to manage
security with both the police and military components to facilitate cooperation
between the communities.
Police component
Given the lack of unity of the administrative arrangements of the Abyei Area,
including the Abyei Police Service, and our assessment of the realities set out above,
the police capability study of 9 July 2018 undertaken by the Police Division
underlined the continued tensions among communities due to the lack of a political
settlement. The Amiet common market has become the most visible symbol of the
commitment by the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities to peace and
reconciliation and has provided new impetus in the relations between the communities
and trade in the wider region. However, there remains a potential for friction and
incidents as the two communities intermingle within the market and surrounding
areas. In recent years, UNISFA and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
have worked with the community-led joint peace committee to successfully
de-escalate incidents at the Amiet market by facilitating timely intercommunal
dialogue.
In addition, with the adverse economic situation in South Sudan, the Amiet
market has become a significant economic hub. However, this success has also
increased criminality in the Abyei Area, including murders, cattle rustling, carjacking
and assault, as well as intermittent public disorder and spont aneous shooting
incidents. In the light of this rise in criminal activity, I recommend the deployment of
three formed police units to the three major population centres in the Abyei Area,
namely, the Amiet common market, Abyei town and Agok, as these units are better
designed, trained and equipped to respond to law and order issues than the military.
The latter two would also be positioned for emergency deployment to flashpoints
within the area of operations. This would allow the Mission to enhance its focu s on
maintaining law and order, including justice and corrections and furthering peace
between the communities.
In the absence of progress on the Abyei Police Service, specialized individual
police officers would reinforce their support of the community protection c ommittees,
with deployments to all team sites in the Abyei Area. Further, in addition to its work
with the community protection committees, outreach should be undertaken by the
mission to support the Misseriya in establishing an unarmed migration police fo rce
that would accompany nomads, as well as liaise with the resident Misseriya
community in the Abyei Area to identify support needed on law and order issues.
Specialized individual police officers providing advisory support on integrated
border management issues should be deployed to all 10 team sites along the border
18-13830

5/7

S/2018/778

crossing corridors. Here, the individual police officers would work to strengthen the
capacity of law enforcement agencies of both countries on integrated border
management and control of illicit arms and goods movement, monitoring and
reporting on transnational/cross-border crimes. Total police numbers would therefore
be at 640, with three formed police units at 160 each, 148 individual police officers
and a headquarters staff of 12.
Uniformed personnel ceiling
The reconfiguration accommodates the proposed changes within the current
uniformed personnel ceiling of 4,550. Given that the mission is at initial operating
capability and the aim of the proposal is for full operating capabi lity of the
Mechanism, this represents a net reduction of 607 in the Abyei Area. In addition, the
transfer of some tasks from the military to an augmented police component represents
another reduction of 590 military. Troop figures in the Abyei Area would therefore
reduce by 1,197, or 30.2 per cent, from the currently authorized 3,959 to 2,762.
Civilian component
In order to undertake the additional tasks stated above, the Mission should
review its support capabilities and slightly reinforce and reco nfigure its civilian
capacity. In this regard, UNISFA should create a strong link with the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel to follow up on commitments and help organize and
support meetings essential for political progress. UNISFA would still be led by a
General of the Ethiopian Armed Forces at the Assistant Secretary-General level, who
would function as Head of Mission and Force Commander.
A civilian Deputy Head of Mission at the D-2 level would function as the main
focal point on community liaison in Abyei with both traditional leaders and the
existing administrative structures in Abyei and Muglad, as well as for day-to-day
follow-up on commitments towards the implementation of signed agreements and
support for humanitarian partners and for the African Union in its efforts to bring
about a political settlement. In this regard, the civilian capacity would be reinforced
with one international staff member in Khartoum and one in Juba to follow up in the
capitals and keep Mission leadership abreast of developments that are relevant to its
mandate. Team sites in the Abyei Area would also have community liaison officers,
both international and national, in pursuit of conflict resolution and prevention. Small
teams of international and national civilian officers would be attached to the four
monitoring mechanism sector headquarters in the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone, to
facilitate the work of the African Union and contribute to the sensitization of
communities in the border area.
Peace and development nexus
To alleviate conflict triggers over resources, and to foster the important link
between and mutually reinforcing role of the security and political work of the
peacekeeping mission and the recovery and development of the United Nations
country team, I would like to suggest a dedicated programme for both communities,
Ngok Dinka and Misseriya. In the case of the latter, the Sudan United Nations country
team should engage with the Government and the Misseriya leadership outside the
Abyei Area and ensure that the Misseriya community as a whole benefits from
development efforts.
I call upon donors in the Sudan and South Sudan to finance such projects tailored
to the needs of the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya that focus on reconciliation and
development, taking into account the unique and distinct needs of both communities.
Such country team-run projects would greatly alleviate the burden on UNISFA, which
6/7

18-13830

S/2018/778

has struggled to meet the expectations of the populations, not having the mandate for
any such activities. UNISFA will meanwhile continue to provide operational and
logistical support to the humanitarian community in the Abyei Area and preserve
sufficient capacity to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid and the free
movement of humanitarian personnel.
UNISFA is one of the best performing peacekeeping missions. This is due to the
commitment and dedication of its staff and the support of the Government of Ethiopia.
We should not, however, mistake the success of keeping relative calm in Abyei and
the border for a sign that the issues have been resolved and that UNISFA can therefore
leave or be substantially reduced. Rather, the Mission needs to be adjusted to the
realities on the ground, where the underlying political issues are not resolved. I ap peal
to you to sustain the investment in UNISFA so as to not jeopardize hard -won gains
towards peace over the last seven years. UNISFA can and should remain a vehicle for
building confidence-building between the two countries until they manage to settle
the final status of Abyei and to determine their common border.
(Signed) António Guterres

18-13830

7/7
