46

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

has already appointed a Special Rapporteur for that
purpose,
Reaffirming that racial discrimination and apartheid
are denials of human rights and fundamental freedoms
and of justice and are offences against human dignity,
Recognizing that racial discrimination and apartheid,
wherever they are practised, constitute a serious impediment to economic and social development and are
obstacles to international co-operation and peace,
Deeply concerned that racial discrimination and
apartheid, despite the decisive condemnation of them
by the United Nations, continue to exist in sorne cquntries and territories,
Convinced of the urgent necessity of further measures to attain the goal of the complete elimination of
all forms of racial discrimination and apartheid,
l. Condemns, wherever they exist, all policies and
practices of apartheid, racial discrimination and segregation, including the practices of discrimination inherent
in colonialism;
2. Reiterates that such policies and practices on the
part of any Member State are incompatible with the
obligations assumed by it under the Charter of the
United Nations;
3. Calls again upon all States in which racial discrimination or apartheid is practised to comply speedily
and faithfully with the United Nations Declaration on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and
with the above-mentioned resolutions and all other
pertinent resolutions of the General Assembly, and to
take all necessary steps, including legislative measures,
for this purpose ;
4. Calls upon all eligible States without delay to sign
and ratify or to accede to the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
5. Calls upan Member States which have not already
done so to initiate appropriate programmes of action
to eliminate racial discrimination and apartheid, including in particular the promotion of equal opportunities for educational and vocational training, and guarantees for the enjoyment, without distinction on grounds
of race, colour or ethnic origin, of hasic human rights
such as the rights to vote, to equality in the administration of justice, to equal economic opportunities and
to equal access to social services ;
6. Appeals to Member States that, in combating
discriminatory practices, education and culture should
be directed, and mass media and literary creation should
be encouraged, towards removing the prejudices and
erroneous beliefs, such as the belief in the superiority
of one race over another, which incite such practices;
7. Requests the Member States which have not yet
replied to the Secretary-General's inquiry as to the
measures they have taken to implement the Declaration
to do so without delay ;
8. Proclaims 21 March as Intemational Day for the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-second session a report
on the implementation of the United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,

and on the implementation of the provisions of thc
present resolution;
10. Decides to place this ítem on the provisional
agenda of, its twenty-second session.
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.
2143 (XXI). Manifestations of racial prejudice
and national and religious intolerance

The General Assembly,
Recallin,q its resolutions 1779 (XVII) of 7 December
1962 and 2019 (XX) of 1 November 1965 concerning
manifestations of racial prejudice and national and religious intolerance,
Bearing in mind the continuing efforts of the United
N ations in this field,
Recognizing that the United Nations continues to
receive information relevant to this subject in other
contexts,
Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General2
containing information received from certain Governments concerning action taken in compliance with General Assembly resolutions 1779 (XVII) and 2019
(XX).
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.
2144 (XXI). Question of the violation of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, including policies of racial discrimination and
segregation and of apartheid, in all countries, with particular reference to colonial
and other dependent countries and territories
A

The General Assembly,
N oting Economic and Social Council resolution 1164
(XLI) of 5 August 1966,
Confirming that the United Nations has a fundamental interest in combating policies of apartheid and that,
as a matter of urgency, ways and means must be de ...
vised for their elimination,
Bearing in mind the obligation of all Member States
under Article 56 of the Charter of the United Nations
to take joint and separate action in co-operation with
the Organization for the achievement of the purposes
set forth in Article SS, which include the promotion of
universal respect for, and observance of, human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as
to race, sex, language or religion,
C onvinced that gross violations of the rights and
fundamental freedoms set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights continue to occur in certain
countries, especially in colonies and dependent territories, involving discrimination on grounds of racc,
colour, sex, language and religion, and the suppression
of freedom of expression and opinion, the right to life,
Jiberty and security of person and the right to protection
by independent and impartial judicial organs, and that
these violations are designed to stifle the legitimate
struggle of the people for independence and human dignity,
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the
2 A/6347 and

Add.1-3.

Reaolutions adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee

United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination,
Deeply concerned by the evidence of persistent practices of apartheid in the Republic of South Africa and
South West Africa and the racial discrimination practiced in the colonies of Southern Rhodesia, Angola,
Mozambique, Portuguese Guinea, Cabinda, Sao Tomé
and Príncipe, brought to its attention by the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the
Special Committee on the Policies of Apartheid of the
Government of the Republic of South Africa, such practices constituting, according to General Assembly resolutions 2022 (XX) of 5 November 1965 and 2074
(XX) of 17 December 1%5, crimes against humanity,
Taking note of the conclusions and recommendations
of the Seminar on Apartheid, 8 organized under
the programme of advisory services in the field of
human rights and held at Brasilia in 1966,
l. Reaffirms its strong condemnation of the violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms
wherever they occur, especially in ali colonial and dependent territories, including the policies of apartheid
in the Republic of South Africa and the Territory of
South West Africa and racial discrimination in the
colonies of Southern Rhodesia, Angola, Mozambique,
Portuguese Guinea, Cabinda, Sao Tomé and Príncipe;
2. Regrets the policy pursued by colonial Powers
in order to circumvent the rights of peoples under their
rule through the promotion of the systematic influx
of foreign immigrants, and the dislocation, dispossession, deportation and eviction of the indigenous inhabitants;
3. Further regrets the actions of those States which,
through political, trading, economic and military collaboration with the Governments of South Africa and
Portugal and the illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia,
are encouraging them to persist in their racial policies ;
4. Urges ali States which have not yet done so to
comply with the relevant General Assembly resolutions
recommending the application of economic and diplomatic measures against South Africa and with the relevant Security Council resolutions calling upon ali States
to impose an arms embargo against South Africa;
5. Calls upon ali States to strengthen their efforts to
promote the full observance of human rights and the
right to self-determination in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, and to attain the standards established by the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights;
6. Urges ali States to take effective measures, in accordance with the provisions of the Charter, the General Assembly resolutions pertaining to human rights,
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, for the
suppression of the policies of apartheid and segregation
and for the elimination of racial discrimination, wherever it occurs, especially in colonial and other dependent countries and territories ;
7. Appeal,s to all States, governmental and nongovernmental organizations, and individuals :
(a) To support the United N ations Trust Fund for
South Africa and voluntary organizations engaged in
providing relief and assistance to victims of colonialism
and apartheid ;
a ST/TAO/HR/27, para. 138.

47

( b) To encourage judicial associations and other appropriate organizations, and the public in general, to
provide such relief and assistance ;
8. Urges Member States to take ali necessary measures, in accordance with their domestic laws, against
the operations of propaganda organizations of the Government of South Africa and of prívate organizations
which advocate apartheid and policies of racial discrimination and domination;
9. Invites States to become parties as soon as possible to ali conventions which aim at protecting human
rights and fundamental freedoms, including in particular the International Convention on the Elimination of
Ali Forms of Racial Discrimination;
10. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, the Special Committee on the Policies of
Apartheid of the Government of the Republic of South
Africa and the Commission on Human Rights to take
appropriate measures for the implementation of the
present resolution as it affects the responsibilities of
these organs ;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to assist in the
implementation of the present resolution and to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-second session;
12. Invites the Economic and Social Council and the
Commission on Human Rights to give urgent consideration to ways and means of improving the capacity of
the United Nations to puta stop to violations of human
rights wherever they may occur;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to establish a
unit within the Secretariat of the United Nations to
deal exclusively with policies of apartheid, in consultation with the Special Committee on the Policies of
Apartheid of the Government of the Republic of South
Africa, in order that maximum publicity may be given
to the evils of those policies ;
14. Further decides to place this item on the provisional agenda of its twenty-second session.
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.

B
The General Assembly,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1164 (XLI) of 5 August 1966,
Having adopted resolution A above,
Bearing in mind the various recommendations embodied in the report of the Seminar on Apartheid,ª
organized under the programme of advisory services
in the field of human rights,
N oting that ali the General Assembly recommendations on apartheid have so far been ignored by the
Government of South Africa and the authorities in
Southern Rhodesia,
Convinced more than ever that apartheid in South
Africa constitutes a menace to international peace and
security,
l. Appeals to the Security Council urgently to take
effective measures with a view to eradicating apartheid
in South Africa and other adjacent territories;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Security Council with all the resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly on the question of apartheid, at

General AHembly-Twenty-first SeHion

the present session and at previous sessions, together
with all the reports available on this item.
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.

2197 (XXI). Report of the United Nations High
éommissioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees• and having heard
his statement, 11
Taking note of the progress achieved in all the countries of the world where the Office of the High Commissioner is carrying out its activities, in the field of
the international protection of refugees and in the
search for permanent solutions to their problems
through voluntary repatriation, voluntary integration
in countries of asylum or resettlement in other countries,
Considering the increasing number and scope of refugee problems in Africa and in other regions of the
world, and the additional responsibilities incumbent
upon the High Commissioner as a result of the extension of his activities to new countries, most of which are
in a developing stage,
Recalling its resolution 2040 (XX) of 7 December
1965, in which particular attention is given to the question of the assístance of refugees in Africa,
Noting with concern the serious financia! crisis at
present affecting the assistance programme of the High
Commissioner,
l. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue to provide international protection to refugees who are his concern, within the limits
of his competence, and to promote permanent solutions
to their problems :
(a) By facilitating their voluntary repatriation
through any steps he may consider appropriate and in
conformity with the humanitarian character of his mandate;
(b) By facilitating the voluntary and rapid settlement of these refugees in the countries of asylum and
by making available to these countries, especially developing countries, a maximum of aid, taking into ac<:ount the specific requirements existing in each country
of asylum;
(e) By assuring that in developing countries the
plans for the economic and social integration of refugees, pending their possible inclusion in the economic
and social programmes carried out by the competent
organs and specialized agencies of the United Nations,
are properly co-ordinated with those programmes, and
also with such other programmes as might be carried
out by regional organizations ;
2. Requests the competent organs and specialized
agencies of the United Nations, when considering development plans, to take into account, at the request
of the Governments concerned, the needs of the refugees;
3. Invites States Members of the United Nations
and members of the specialized agencies to give their
full support to the High Commissioner in the accom• Official Records of the Gen.eral Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/6311/Rev.1) and Supplement
No. llA (A/6311/Rev.1/Add.1).
11 Jbid.,
Twenty-first Session, Third Committee, 1447th
meeting, paras. 1-22.

plishment of his humanitarian task and to place at his
disposal the financial means necessary for the completion of his assistance programme.
1495th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

2198 (XXI). Protocol relating to the Status of
Refugees
The General Assembly,
Considering that the Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees, signed at Geneva on 28 July 1951,11
covers only those persons who have become refugees
as a result of events occurring before 1 January 1951,
Considering that new refugee situations have arisen
since the Convention was adopted and that the refugees concerned may therefore not fall within the scope
of the Convention,
Considering that it is desirable that equal status
should be enjoyed by all refugees covered by the definition in the Convention, irrespective of the date-line of
1 January 1951,
Taking note of the recommendation of the Executive
Committee of the Programme of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees 7 that the draft Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees should be submitted to the General Assembly after consideration by
the Economic and Social Council, in order that the
Secretary-General might be authorized to open the
Protocol for accession by Governments within the shortest possible time,
Considering that the Economic and Social Council 1
in its resolution 1186 (XLI) of 18 November 1966
took note with approval of the draft Protocol 8 con~
tained in the addendum to the report of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and concerning measures to extend the personal scope of the
Convention, and transmitted the addendum to the General Assembly,
1. Takes note of the Protocol relating to the Status
of Refugees, the text of which 8 is contained in the addendum to the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
text of the Protocol to the States mentioned
in article V thereof, with a view to enabling them to
accede to the Protocol.
1495th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.
2199 (XXI). Draft Deelaration on the Elimination
of Discrimination against W omen
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1921 (XVIII) of 5 Deccmber 1%3, in which it requested the Economic and Social Council to invite the Commission on the Status of
W ornen to prepare a draft declaration on the dimina,.
tion of discrimination against women,
N oting with interest the text of the draft Declaration
adopted unanimously by the Commission on the Status
of Women on 8 March 1%6 and transmitted to the
General Assembly by the Economic and Social Counct1
in its resolution 1131 (XLI) of 26 July 1966,
6 Unit~ Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189 (1954), No. 2545.
7 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twmty-first

Session, Supplement No. llA
two , para. 38.
s Ibid., part one, para. 2.

(A/6311/Rev.1/Add.1), part
