Reaolutions ndopted on the reporta of the Fourth 'Committee

l. Notes that the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples has taken these petitions into
account in its consideration of the situation in Namibia
within the context of the implementation of the Declaration;
2. Notes further that those petitions which raised
matters of concern to the United Nations Council for
Namibia have been brought to the latter's attention
by the Secretariat and have been taken into consideration by the Council in the performance of the functions as~igned to it by the General Assembly in resolutions 2248 (S-V), 2325 (XXII) and 2403 (XXIII);
3. Draws the attention of the petitioners concerned
to the report on the Territory submitted by the Special
Committee9 and to the resolutions on the question of
Namibia adopted by the General Assembly at its
twenty-fourth session, as well as to the report of the
United Nations Council far Namibia. 10
1819th plenary meeting,
1 December 1969.
2554 (XXIV). Activities of foreign economic and
other interests whirh are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peooles in Southern Rhodesia,
Namibia and Territories under Portuguese
domination and in ali other Territories
under colonial domination and e:fforts to
eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial
discrimination in southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Activities of
foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples in Southern Rhodesia, Namibia and Territories under Portuguese domination and in all other
Territories under colonial domination and efforts to
eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southem Africa",
Having examined the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to this question, 11
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
in particular the eighth preambular paragraph thereof,
and its resolution 2425 (XXIII) of 18 December
1968,
Convinced that any economic or other activity which
impedes the implementation of resolution 1514 (XV)
and which obstructs efforts aimed at the elimination
of colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in
southem Africa and other colonial Territories violates
the political, economic and social rights and interests
of the people in these Territories and is therefore ine Offecial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/7623/Rev.1), chapter VII.
1-0 lbid., Supplement No. 24 (A/7624/Rev.1 ).
11 lbid., Supplement No. 23A (A/7623/Rev.1/ Add.l ).

69

compatible with the purposes and principies of the
Charter of the United N ations,
Recalling that the administering Powers have the
obligation to ensure the political, economic, social and
educational advancement of the inhabitants of the
Territories under their administration and to protect
the population and the natural resources of these Territories against abuses, in accordance with Chapters XI
and XII of the Charter,
1. Approves the report of the Special Comrnittee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to this question;
2. Reafjirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
dependent Territories to self-determination and independence and to the natural resources of their Territories, as well as their right to dispose of these resources in their best interest in the light of the eighth
preambular paragraph of General Assembly resclution
1514 (XV);
3. Af]irms that foreign economic and other interests operating in colonial Territories which are exploiting those Territories constitute a major obstacle
to political independence as well as to the enjoyment
of the natural resources of these Territories by the
indigenous inhabitants;
4. Declares that any adrninistering Power, by depriving the colonial peoples of the exercise of their rights
or by subordinating them to foreign economic and
financia! interests, violates the obligations it has assumed
under Chapters XI and XII of the Chartcr of the
United Nations and impedes the implementation of
resolution 1514 (XV);
5. Condemns the exploitation of the colonial Territories and peoples and the methods practised in the
Territories under colonial domination by those foreign
economic, financia! and other interests which are designed to perpetuate colonial rule;
6. Deplores the attitude of the colonial Powers and
States concemed which have not taken any action to
implement the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolutions;
7. Requests the administering Powers and States
concemed whose companies and nationals are engaged in such activities to take immediate measures
to put an end to all practices which exploit the Territories and peoples under colonial rule, in conforrnity
with General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960, 2288 (XXII) of 7 December 1967
and 2425 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968, in particular by preventing new investments, especially in
southern Africa, which ron counter to the objectives
of the above-mentioned resolutions;
8. Requests all States to take effective measures to
cease forthwith the supply of funds or other forms
of economic and technical assistance to colonial Powers
which use such assistance to repress the national liberation movements;
9. Requests the Special Comrnittee to continue to
study this question and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session;
1O. Requests the Secretary-General to use ali the
facilities at bis disposal to render assistance to the
Special Committee in the pursuit of this study.
1831st plenary meeting,
12 December 1969.
