United Nations

A/RES/63/212

General Assembly

Distr.: General
18 February 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 49 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2008
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/63/414/Add.1)]

63/212. Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes
of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/199 of 20 December 2000, 56/226 of 24 December
2001, 57/253 of 20 December 2002, 57/270 A and B of 20 December 2002 and
23 June 2003, respectively, 61/195 of 20 December 2006 and 62/189 of
19 December 2007, and all other previous resolutions on the implementation of
Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the
outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development,
Recalling also the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 1
Agenda 21, 2 the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21, 3 the
Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development 4 and the Plan of Implementation
of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation”), 5 as well as the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference
on Financing for Development, 6
0F

1F

2F

3F

4F

5F

Reaffirming the commitment to implement Agenda 21, the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation,
including the time-bound goals and targets, and the other internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,

_______________
1
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
2
Ibid., annex II.
3
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
4
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–
4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 1, annex.
5
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
6
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.

08-48351

A/RES/63/212

Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 7
6F

Reaffirming the decisions taken at the eleventh session of the Commission on
Sustainable Development, 8
7F

Reiterating that sustainable development in its economic, social and
environmental aspects is a key element of the overarching framework for United
Nations activities, and reaffirming the continuing need to ensure a balance among
economic development, social development and environmental protection as
interdependent and mutually reinforcing pillars of sustainable development,
Noting that challenges remain in achieving the goals of the three pillars of
sustainable development, particularly in the context of the current global crises,
Taking note of the proposal to convene a world summit on sustainable
development in 2012,
Bearing in mind the need for further consultations on this matter, in the light
of the variety of views expressed by Member States, recognizing that the
preparatory process, content, modalities and timing for such a possible high-level
event on sustainable development would need to be determined taking into account
the work of the Commission, particularly as established in its multi-year programme
of work, 9 with a view to avoiding duplication of work,
8F

Recalling the adoption of the Commission multi-year programme of work
designed to contribute to advancing the implementation of Agenda 21, the
Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan
of Implementation at all levels,
Reaffirming that eradicating poverty, changing unsustainable patterns of
production and consumption and protecting and managing the natural resource base
of economic and social development are overarching objectives of and essential
requirements for sustainable development,
Recognizing that good governance within each country and at the international
level is essential for sustainable development,
Recalling that the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation designated the
Commission to serve as the focal point for discussion on partnerships that promote
sustainable development and contribute to the implementation of intergovernmental
commitments in Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of
Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation,
Recognizing that eradicating poverty is the greatest global challenge facing the
world today and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development, in
particular for developing countries, and that although each country has the primary
responsibility for its own sustainable development and poverty eradication and the
role of national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized,
concerted and concrete measures are required at all levels to enable developing
countries to achieve their sustainable development goals as related to the
internationally agreed poverty-related targets and goals, including those contained

_______________
7

See resolution 60/1.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 9 (E/2003/29), chap. I.
9
Ibid., sect. A, draft resolution I, annex.
8

2

A/RES/63/212

in Agenda 21, the relevant outcomes of other United Nations conferences and the
United Nations Millennium Declaration, 10
9F

Recalling that the Economic and Social Council should increase its role in
overseeing system-wide coordination and the balanced integration of economic,
social and environmental aspects of United Nations policies and programmes aimed
at promoting sustainable development, and reaffirming that the Commission should
continue to be the high-level commission on sustainable development within the
United Nations system and serve as a forum for consideration of issues related to
integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development,
Recalling also that agriculture, rural development, land, drought and
desertification are interlinked and should be addressed in an integrated manner,
taking into account economic, social and environmental dimensions of sustainable
development, related sectoral policies and cross-cutting issues including means of
implementation, as identified at the eleventh session of the Commission,
Recognizing the problems and constraints that African countries are facing in
the areas of agriculture, rural development, land, drought and desertification, and
emphasizing that those problems and constraints should be adequately addressed
during the seventeenth session of the Commission, which will be a policy session,
Recalling the decision of the Commission at its eleventh session, 11 endorsed
by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 2003/61 of 25 July 2003, that
the Commission, at its policy sessions, to be held in April/May of the second year of
the cycle of the Commission’s work programme, would take policy decisions on
practical measures and options to expedite implementation in the selected thematic
cluster of issues, taking account of the discussions of the Intergovernmental
Preparatory Meeting, the reports of the Secretary-General and other relevant inputs,
10F

Recalling also the decision of the Commission at its eleventh session 12 that the
discussions of the Intergovernmental Preparatory Meeting would be based on the
outcome of the review session and reports of the Secretary-General, as well as other
relevant inputs, and that, on the basis of those discussions, the Chair would prepare
a draft negotiating document for consideration at the policy session,
1F

Recognizing the importance of the Intergovernmental Preparatory Meeting in
respect of discussing policy options and possible actions to address the constraints
and obstacles in the process of implementation identified during the review year,
Noting with satisfaction that the Commission at its sixteenth session undertook
an in-depth evaluation of progress in implementing Agenda 21, the Programme for
the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation, focusing on the thematic cluster of issues on agriculture, rural
development, land, drought, desertification and Africa, taking into account the
interlinkages as well as addressing the cross-cutting issues, and identified best
practices, constraints and obstacles in the process of implementation, 13
12F

Noting with satisfaction also the review of the implementation of the
Commission’s decisions on water, held by the Commission at its sixteenth session,
_______________
10

See resolution 55/2.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 9 (E/2003/29), chap. I,
sect. A, draft resolution I, para. 2 (h).
12
Ibid., para. 2 (g).
13
Ibid., 2008, Supplement No. 9 (E/2008/29), chap. II.
11

3

A/RES/63/212

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 14
13F

2.
Reiterates that sustainable development is a key element of the
overarching framework for United Nations activities, in particular for achieving the
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development
Goals, and those contained in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;5
0H

3.
Calls upon Governments, all relevant international and regional
organizations, the Economic and Social Council, the United Nations funds and
programmes, the regional commissions and the specialized agencies, the
international financial institutions, the Global Environment Facility and other
intergovernmental organizations, in accordance with their respective mandates, as
well as major groups, to take action to ensure the effective implementation of and
follow-up to the commitments, programmes and time-bound targets adopted at the
World Summit on Sustainable Development, and encourages them to report on
concrete progress in that regard;
Calls for the effective implementation of the commitments, programmes
4.
and time-bound targets adopted at the World Summit on Sustainable Development
and for the fulfilment of the provisions relating to the means of implementation, as
contained in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;
Invites Member States to express their views on the possibility of
5.
convening a high-level event on sustainable development, and requests the
Secretary-General, in his report on the implementation of Agenda 21, the
Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the
World Summit on Sustainable Development, to include the views expressed, and
decides to consider this matter further at the sixty-fourth session of the General
Assembly;
Reiterates that the Commission on Sustainable Development is the high6.
level body responsible for sustainable development within the United Nations
system and serves as a forum for the consideration of issues related to the
integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development;
Emphasizes the importance of a consensus outcome and action-oriented
7.
policy sessions;
8.
Encourages Governments to participate at the appropriate level with
representatives, including ministers, from the relevant departments and
organizations working in the areas of agriculture, rural development, land, drought,
desertification and Africa, as well as finance, in the seventeenth session of the
Commission and its Intergovernmental Preparatory Meeting;
Recalls the decision of the Commission at its eleventh session that
9.
activities during Commission meetings should provide for the balanced involvement
of participants from all regions, as well as for gender balance; 15
14F

10. Invites donor countries to consider supporting the participation of
representatives from the developing countries in the seventeenth session of the
Commission and its Intergovernmental Preparatory Meeting, inter alia, through
contributions to the Commission’s trust fund;
_______________
14

A/63/304.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 9 (E/2003/29), chap. I,
sect. A, draft resolution I, para. 2 (j).
15

4

A/RES/63/212

11. Reaffirms the objective of strengthening the implementation of
Agenda 21,2 including through the mobilization of financial and technological
resources, as well as capacity-building programmes, in particular for developing
countries;
1H

12. Invites donor Governments and international financial institutions to
support the efforts of developing countries to overcome barriers and constraints
identified during the review year in the thematic cluster of issues of agriculture,
rural development, land, drought, desertification and Africa;
13. Reaffirms the objective of enhancing the participation and effective
involvement of civil society and other relevant stakeholders, as well as promoting
transparency and broad public participation, in the implementation of Agenda 21;
14. Requests the secretariat of the Commission to coordinate the
participation of the relevant major groups in the thematic discussions at the
seventeenth session of the Commission and its Intergovernmental Preparatory
Meeting and the reporting on the fulfilment of corporate accountability and
responsibility with respect to the thematic cluster of issues, in accordance with the
provisions of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;
15. Reaffirms the need to promote corporate responsibility and accountability
as envisaged by the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;
16. Also reaffirms the need to promote the development of microenterprises
and small and medium-sized enterprises, including by means of training, education
and skill enhancement, with a special focus on agro-industry as a provider of
livelihoods for rural communities;
17. Requests the secretariat of the Commission to make arrangements to
facilitate the balanced representation of major groups from developed and
developing countries in the sessions of the Commission, and in this regard invites
donor countries to consider supporting the participation of major groups from
developing countries, inter alia, through contributions to the Commission’s trust
fund;
18. Reiterates the invitation to the relevant specialized agencies, including
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the International
Fund for Agricultural Development, United Nations funds and programmes, the
Global Environment Facility and international and regional financial and trade
institutions, as well as the secretariat of the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa, 16 and other relevant bodies, to actively
participate, within their mandates, in the work of the Commission and its
Intergovernmental Preparatory Meeting at its seventeenth session;
15F

19. Encourages Governments and organizations at all levels, as well as
major groups, to undertake results-oriented initiatives and activities to support the
work of the Commission and to promote and facilitate the implementation of
Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 213 and the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, including through voluntary multistakeholder partnership initiatives;
2H

_______________
16

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.

5

A/RES/63/212

20. Requests the Secretary-General, in reporting to the Commission at its
seventeenth session, on the basis of appropriate inputs from all levels, to submit
thematic reports on each of the six issues contained in the thematic cluster of issues
on agriculture, rural development, land, drought, desertification and Africa, taking
into account their interlinkages, while addressing the cross-cutting issues, including
means of implementation identified by the Commission at its eleventh session, and
also takes into account the relevant provisions of paragraphs 10, 14 and 15 of draft
resolution I of the eleventh session of the Commission;8
21. Underlines the importance of setting aside adequate time for all
envisaged activities in the policy session, including for negotiations on policy
options and possible actions, at the seventeenth session of the Commission, and in
this regard notes the importance of having all required documents, including the
Chair’s draft negotiating document, made available for consideration prior to the
beginning of the session;
22. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session
the sub-item entitled “Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development”, and requests the Secretary-General, at that session, to
submit a report on the implementation of the present resolution.
72nd plenary meeting
19 December 2008

6
