UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

‘YEAR

2228’”

MEETING:

9 JUNE 1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
.Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2228) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda .,.....................................*........

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 29 May 1980 from the Charge d’tiaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Morocco to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13969) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.2228

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Oflcial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2228th

MEETING

Held in New York on Monday, 9 June 1980, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Ole ALGARD (Norway).

the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bouzarbia
(Algeria) and Mr. Kamanda
wa Kamanda
(Zaire)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

agenda (SIAgen&/2228)

1. Adoption of the agenda

3. Mr. MILLS (Jamaica): Mr. President, it gives my
delegation and myself particular pleasure to see you
presiding over the work of the Council. Your country,
Norway, has taken a strong interest in the work of the
United Nations and that has been fully reflected in
the considerable contribution that you yourself have
made here. In the face of the critical issues coming
before the Council at this time, we feel confident that
we shall benefit from your very wise guidance.

2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 29 May 1980 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Morocco to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/13969)
The meeting

was called to order at 3.55 p.m.
Adoption

4. On behalf of my delegation, I wish to express to
Ambassador Oumarou of the Niger, who was our
President for the month of May, our deep appreciation
of the skill, the competence and the dignity with which
he guided our work.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 29 May 1980 from the Chargb d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Morocco to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13969)

At the invitation
of the President. Mr. Leavaila
(Botswana),
Mr. Gpez
Paz (Cuba), Mr. Abdel
Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Ibrahim (Ethiopia),
Mr. Lobo
(Mozambique),
Mr. Clark (Nigeria),
Ms. Gonthier
(Seychelles) and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

5. The events that have been taking place in South
Africa over the past two months tell a familiar story.
Once again the minority regime in that country has
been confronted with protests and resistance against
the racist system of apartheid. Once again the racist
regime has responded with predictable brutality, using
all its well-known techniques of police terror against
the non-white population, which include killings,
arbitrary arrests and bannings. It is significant that the
recent upsurge has been led by the youth of the
country openly and defiantly rejecting racism in the
‘educational system. It is also significant that churchmen have become more prominent in the resistance
movement, demanding fundamental changes in the
prevailing order. These trends ‘are all part of the
growing tide of militancy among the oppressed people
of South Africa and indicate the strengthening of the
liberation forces.

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have received letters
from the representatives of Algeria and Zaire, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with

6. At the same time, the savage and brutal tactics
used by the apartheid regime to suppress all opposition illustrate its determination to maintain white
supremacy in South Africa at ali costs. The minority
tigime has rejected all peaceful options for coming
to terms with the opposition to apartheid and instead

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with previous
decisions [2225th and 2227th meetings], I invite the
representatives of Botswana, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia,
Mozambique, Nigeria, Seychelles and Yugoslavia
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

1

has resorted to the massive use of force and violence
to crush all peaceful protests. These tactics have failed
and will continue to fail because the African majority
will not give up its right to live in dignity, or accept
a servile status in its own country. The South African
racists have still not learned the lesson that repression, intimidation and injustice cannot be a basis for a
stable society. They have persisted along a path of
violent confrontation with the forces seeking liberation
from the oppression of apartheid.

10. While I was in Zimbabwe there were very critical
developments in South Africa, and these have been the
subject of attention and discussion in the Council. It
is impossible to avoid the conclusion that the people
of South Africa continue to suffer and to be deprived
of their elementary rights not only because of the
oppression by a racist minority regime, but because
those who have the means and the power to influence
the South African regime have failed to put maximum
pressure on it.

7. The United Nations has an imnortant role to play
in this particularly dangerous situation, which is a
matter of grave concern for all of us in the intemational community. Apartheid
is a crime against
humanity; it is a problem which transcends the area
of its geographical origin and its eradication demands
a determined and united international effort. Further,
the violent confrontation which threatens in South
Africa, with all its implications for international peace
and security, must be a matter of serious concern for
the Security Council. Action must be taken by the
Council to pressure the South African r&ime and
prevent further bloodshed in southern Africa.

11. All around us we see examples in the world of
situations involving injustices which reach back into
the past. Failure to address these and to remove them
has led the world now into a situation involving a
number of crises which together threaten the peace of
the world. The oppressed are asked to continue to
suffer until such time as it is convenient to grant them
justice. But the entire global community is threatened
by the failure to deal justly and promptly with these
situations.
12. It is time that the people of southern Africa were
liberated. The example of Zimbabwe stands before us
today. The Council must find means of increasing the
pressure to force the South African authorities to
abandon their oppressive regime of apartheid.

8. Jamaica supports the proposals made by the
African Group for strong and effective international
action against the racist regime. Most -important at
this stage is the tightening of the arms embargo to
increase its effectiveness and the inclusion of a
prohibition of all nuclear co-operation with South
Africa. Steps must also be taken towards the implementation of an effective oil embargo, which has
already been declared by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). Action should be
taken to sever all contact and collaboration with the
minority regime, especially such collaboration as
helps to strengthen the economic foundations of
apartheid.
Action along these lines by the Council
could make a decisive contribution to the destruction
of apartheid and white domination in southern Africa.
The criminal regime in Pretoria has continued to
flourish with the support and co-operation of its major
trading partners, among which are some members of
the Council. Their declarations of opposition to upurtheid have been accompanied at best by half-hearted
and inadequate gestures; they continue to provide
the apartheid tigime with the economic and diplomatic
support it needs. They bear a heavy responsibility for
the unfolding tragedy in southern Africa.

13. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) [interpretation from Russian]: The situation in South Africa quite rightly has given rise to
growing indignation and alarm on the part of the whole
world community. The authorities of that country continue, in ever more cruel forms, their massive trampling
underfoot of the basic human rights of the 20 million
indigenous inhabitants exclusively because of the
colour of their skin. It would appear that such actions
are incompatible with the very concept of a civilized
society. However; apartheid is not just a practice on
the part of the Pretoria rulers, but actually an official
policy and the State ideology of the Republic of South
Africa. The racist ideology of apartheid rejects the
natural and inalienable human right to freedom and
equality without distinction as to race, sex, language
or religion.
14. In order to carry out its brutal repression of
those who oppose apartheid, the repressive apparatus
of South Africa uses typically Fascist methods. If
anyone today wishes to have a better understanding
of the fate which was being prepared by the Fascists
for the peoples of the whole world during the Second
World War, he should take a careful look at the policy
and practices of those who govern South Africa.

9. Yesterday I returned to New York after a visit to
Zimbabwe, where I spent the past week. For me it
was a very special experience. I was able to see
something of the tremendous achievement of the
people of Zimbabwe after years of bitter struggle’and
oppression, and of their efforts at social and economic
reconstruction. But I was also able in a way to detect
or to imagine some of the terrible effects of years of
oppression and exploitation of the African population
by a racist minority regime. I therefore felt there both
a sense of pride and a deep anger.

15. In its numerous decisions, the United Nations
has branded apartheid as a phenomenon which is
profoundly inimical to the peoples of the world and
as a crime against humanity. The Security Council has
repeatedly called for a halt to a policy which is
intolerable in our.day: the policy-and the practiceof apartheid. In its resolution 417 (1977), the Council
2

..-.____^_.

-

-I__^--

-

.21; At the same.time, the South,African racists are ” ”
expanding their acts of aggression against neighbouring African countries, in particular against Angola,
and are continuing to carry out major punitive operations in the Territory of Namibia, which they occupy.

deminded that the racist--r&me---of,-South ‘Africa
immediately call a halt to its massive violence and
repression against the indigenous population of the
country and other opponents of apartheid, abolish
the system of bantustanization and all other acts of
apartheid and racial discrimination and ensure that
majority rule based on justice and equality was established in that country.

22. The Soviet Union shares the deep concern of
African and other States at the events in South Africa,
events which testify to the further danger of an exacerbation of the situation in that region. Since the racist
regime of South Africa so stubbornly refuses to put
an end to its inhuman policy of apartheid, as well as
to its aggressive policy against neighbouring African
countries, the Soviet Union whole-heartedly shares
the view of African countries about the situation in
southern Africa-that is, that it represents a threat
to international peace and security. The Soviet
delegation believes that it is high time to consider
this question and therefore welcomed the initiative of
the African countries that requested the convening of
the Council for that purpose.

16. The Pretoria regime, however, has not only
refused to comply with that-and indeed other-resolutions of the Council but has stepped up even more
brutally and cruelly its Draconian measures. Everyone remembers the events which occurred in Soweto
and other parts of the Republic of South Africa when
the Pretoria regime set in train the most extreme
measures in its attempt to stifle the mass protests of
the African population.
17. In recent days, the world has once again witnessed a further wave of massive repression by the
racist regime of South Africa against the indigenous
population of that country. The South African
authorities have ruthlessly crushed the protests of
the opponents of apartheid;
repression has been
visited upon the workers in the textile and food
industries and upon those who protested against the
cruel exploitation of their labour. To the youth who
were protesting and the workers who were striking,
the police responded with bullets, clubs and mass
arrests. On 28 May, in Cape Town, the police opened
fire on a group of students, leaving dead and wounded
in their wake. The number of those arrested in just
the last few days has reached several thousand.

23. Together with the other socialist countries, the
Soviet Union has supported and will continue to sup
port the struggle of the peoples of southern Africa.
In the declaration adopted on 15 May this year at
the meeting of the Political Consultative Committee of
the States parties to the Warsaw Treaty, the following
is stated:
“The participants in the meeting reaffirmed their
solidarity with the just struggle of the people of
Namibia for freedom and independence and with the
people of South Africa, struggling for the liquidation
of the apartheid regime and of racial discrimination.” [S/13948, annex ZZ, part III.]

18. Even the moderate religious groups combined
in the South African Council of Churches came
forward with demands for reform and attempted to
carry out a peaceful demonstration in defence of the
clergyman arrested by the authorities. However,
even that demonstration was cruelly suppressed by
the police.

24. It is not difficult to establish the reason for the
defiant conduct of the rulers in Pretoria, for their
refusal to comply with the numerous decisions on this
subject by the Security Council and other organs
of the United Nations. The reason is that the racists
know that they have powerful support behind them.
The preservation of the hotbed of colonialism and
racism in southern Africa is in keeping with the longterm political, strategic and economic interests of ‘a
number of imperialist countries of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), and in particular the
United States, which views South Africa as a bulwark
and a base for the struggle against independent Africa
and also as its military springboard in that part of the
world.

19. In the struggle for elementary human rights, many
of the best representatives of all races and national
groups in the country have given their lives or have
been placed in South African prisons. Throughout the
world, and here at the United Nations itself, the names
of Nelson Mandela, Walter Sisulu, Govan Mbeki and
others who have fought for freedom are well known,
They are people whom the racists have condemned
to terms of iife imprisonment.
20. Bantustanization, the resettlement of millions of
Africans in barren regions, is an outrageous manifestation of the policy of apartheid. The whole purpose
of that policy is quite clear: to split the indigenous
population of South Africa into separate tribes, deprive
the Africans not only of all their rights but also of
formal citizenship, legitimize the creation of tributary
and dependent territories and erect a barrier against
the growing wave of the national liberation movement.

25. There have been *noteworthy reports in the
Western press to the effect that recently the United
States Administration has even stopped pretending
that it was exerting any pressure on the Pretoria
regime. For example, the American magazine U.S.
News and World Report of 2 June, reported that
“American diplomats in South Africa say that the
United States has quietly switched policy toward the
; ..;, .~.

3’

white-ruled Republic and has stopped hectoring
leaders to force change in racial policy. Behind
the shift: growing realization of the importance of
South Africa to Washington, both as a supplier of
raw materials and as a potential ally if trouble
erupts in the Persian Gulf or Indian Ocean.”

effective measures against the uparrheid regime to be
adopted by international organs. This connivance,
which is covered up by trumped-up arguments about
the need for continuing a “dialogue” with the rulers
of South Africa, is leading only to an intensification
of cruel mass repression and to further increases in the
number of human victims, as well as to an increase in
the most barbarous manifestations of social and racial
inequality.

26. It is precisely thanks to the support of NATO
countries that we have witnessed .an increase in the
economic and military potential of the Republic of
South Africa. It is precisely as a result of support from
and co-operation by NATO countries that South Africa
has attained accessto the technology for manufacturing
nuclear weapons. Everyone understands what consequences the fulfilment of the racists’ nuclear ambitions would have for the peoples of Africa and for
international peace and security. Certain NATO countries, however, have been doing everything they can
to prevent the adoption of effective economic sanctions against the Pretoria racists; they have not
complied with the decision to place an embargo on
arms deliveries to South Africa. Oil is coming to the
racists without any hindrance.

30. The Soviet Unionand theothersocialist countries
have always been and remain faithful friends of the
African States which, having freed themselves from
colonial dependence, continue to wage a fierce struggle
for the elimination of the consequences of foreign overlordship and for the consolidation of their independence and the development of their economies and
their culture. The solidarity of the socialist community
with African States is the guarantee that there will
be more and more victories by the national liberation
movement and further social and economic progress
by the independent countries of Africa.
31. In extending congratulations to the peoples and
States of Africa on the occasion of Africa Liberation
Day on 25 May this year, the General Secretary of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union and Chairman of the Presidium of the
Supreme Soviet of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, Mr. Leonid Brezhnev, stated:

27. Western corporations have an interest in maintaining ties with the Republic of South Africa. I might
recall that almost 2,000 diierent transnational corporations are doing business with the apartheid regime.
Hundreds of American and British companies are
operating in South Africa. They constantly increase
their capital investments in the South African economy, including South Africa’s military industries.
‘Southern Africa remains one of the most important
sources of mineral raw materials and is the main
gold mine of the West. Rare and precious metals,
such as uranium and diamonds, bring these numerous
corporations super-profits, at the expense of the
inhuman exploitation of the slave labour of the
indigenous African population. In 1978 alone, South
Africa delivered to the United States almost $2 billion
worth of metals and minerals. At the end of 1977,
Western investments in South Africa amounted to
$24.5 billion. In the period from 1972to 1978,382 banks
from 22 countries supplied South Africa with loans
exceeding $5 billion.

“This year has been marked by an outstanding
successfor the. national liberation movement of the
peoples of Africa: as a result of long years of selfless struggle by the patriotic forces of Zimbabwe
against colonial, racist oppression, the people of
that country have won their independence. A new
State, the Republic of Zimbabwe, has appeared on
the map of the world. A major step has been taken
towards finally freeing Africa from the shackles of
racism and colonialism.
“The people of the Soviet Union also confidently
await the triumph of the just cause of the liberation
of Namibia, whose people are valiantly fighting for
freedom and independence under the leadership
of SWAPG, their recognized vanguard. The most
shameful phenomenon of our time, apartheid in
the Republic of South Africa, will also inevitably
be done away with. The historic Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, adopted by the United Nations in
1960 on the initiative of the Soviet Union, must be
fully implemented, with no exceptions of any kind.
That is history’s command!“l

28. The refusal to cut off economic ties with the
racist regime is explained by some by the presence in
various Western countries of various kinds of “constitutional” or “legislative” restrictions, which, it
is alleged, do not permit the Governments of those
countries effectively to control those companies or
their branches operating in South Africa. But our
experience of international relations makes it absolutely clear that all such “restrictions” disappear
as soon as the Governments of those countries decide
to set up economic blockades against progressive or
revolutionary regimes.

32. The Soviet Union will support any effective
measures on the part of the Council aimed at the final
elimination of the remaining vestiges of colonialism,
racism and apartheid on the African continent. A
necessary condition for the attainment of this’goal is
strict observance of the sanctions already established

29. Connivance with the South African regime by
monopolistic circles of the countries of the North
Atlantic military bloc has made it impossible for
4

by the Council against the racist regime of Pretoria
and also the adoption by the Council of comprehensive
sanctions as provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter.

39. The inevitable fall-out .of this policy of brutal
repression is a legacy of violence and disruption.
Resistance, long non-violent, has hardened into
implacability, fuelled by years of denial and heartbreaking sacrifice. The memory of Sharpeville and
Soweto is indelibly imprinted in history. They are grim
milestones on the march for human dignity, freedom
and equality.

33. The delegation of the Soviet Union believes that
the proposals-set forth in the- Council by the Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid,
Ambassador Clark of Nigeria [2225th meeting], and a
number of other representatives are the very minimum
which should underlie any decision by the Council if
it really intends to assist in the elimination of the
outrageous policy and practice of apartheid
in
southern Africa and to avert a course of events which
is so threatening to international peace and security.

--

40. The struggle continues; the process is irreversible. It is directed, through the determination and
resolve of the people of Azania, to securing their
freedom despite brutality, repression, spurious
political trials, arbitrary arrests, banning and bantustanization. It draws momentum from the memory of
all those innumerable silent victims of apartheid, all
those who have risked their lives in the cause of
human dignity. It derives strength from the spirits of
martyrs such as Steve Biko, Solomon Mahlangu and
countless other missing heroes, and it is driven by the
will of those who remain incarcerated as political
prisoners or banned: the Nelson Mandelas, the
Soweto 11, the Zeph Mothepeng 18, Walter Mbete
and the 52 clergymen. This is the signal behind the
current wave of strikes and student boycotts across the
face of South Africa. This is the determination that has ,
fuelled the spate of attacks on police stations and oil
plants, the spark that has kindled the resistance of
black and Coloured alike, of workers and students, of
clerics and the common man.

34. Mr. R. RAHMAN (Bangladesh): Mr. President,
it is with genuine pleasure that we welcome your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. Given your wide experience, your diplomatic skills, your broad understanding and your
recognized sense of humour, we are confident that
the affairs of the Council will be conducted with
efficiency and dispatch. I take this opportunity also
to express our gratitude and admiration to Ambassador
lde Gumarou of the Niger, who so capably conducted
our work in the month of May.
35 My delegation has fully endorsed the call by the
African Group that the Council be urgently seized of
the question of South Africa, in the light of the alarming
situation currently obtaining in that country.

41. But beyond the humanitarian content of the
renewed struggle against apartheid is its vital political
dimension. South Africa remains today a powderkeg. The danger to peace and security internally,
regionally and internationally is palpable. Challenged
by resistance from within and from without, South
Africa has been transforming itself into an armoured
bastion with clear-cut objectives. The ultimate
aim is the perpetuation of white supremacy in southern
Africa despite the reverses it has suffered in the neighbouring State of Zimbabwe and as a result of the
collapse of the Portuguese colonial empire. Only
Namibia remains in its illegal grip. A primary objective
is to crush insurrection and deter the struggle for
liberation within South Africa. The immediate target
is the front-line States, and South Africa is determined
to isolatethem and harass and destabilize their Govemments by full-fledged armed incursions across international frontiers. The development of its nuclearweapon potential has become a foremost priority, with
all the incalculable consequences that entails.

36. Despite three decades of systematic exposure
and universal condemnation, the brutal system of
apartheid continues to thrive in South Africa, more
deeply entrenched than ever. No one can doubt that
this remains the core of the current escalation of
tension, violence and repression in. that beleaguered
land..
37. The General Assembly has categorically condemned apartheid not only as *‘a crime against the
conscience and dignity of mankind” but also as *‘a
crime against humanity seriously disturbing and
threatening international peace and security”,
38. The human rights dimension of the problem
needs no elaboration. For three decades the intemational community has exhaustively compiled,, catalogued and condemned the extent of this heinous
policy as implemented by the racist regime in South
Africa. This policy, pursued with unrelenting ferocity,
has meant the usurpation of 87 per cent of the. most
productive agricultural lands for the exclusive use of-a
miniscule white minority, the denial of political representation to more than four fifths of the population,
economic discrimination and exploitation on an
‘unprecedented-scale, the dispossession and transfer of
millions of Africans and. the dismemberment of the
country. There has been an intricate web of legislation
and administrative policies designed to ensure racial
segregation and restrict movement.

42. The search for solutions in the face of these
objective factors is crucial For over 33 years the
United Nations has sought a,wide variety of avenues
for a peaceful resolution of the problem of apartheid,
the essential prerequisite for.which was the encouragement of the right of the people of South Africa
as a .whole to decide the destiny of the nation. Numerous proposals have been made seeking a workable
.framework for a just and lasting solution. The Chairs

.

man of the Special Committee against Apartheid has
already referred [ibid., para. 431 to the recommendations mooted in 1964 calling for the convening of a
national convention composed of genuine representatives of all the South African people. Needless to say,
South Africa has spumed all such attempts-and with
impunity.

President for the previous month, Ambassador
Oumarou of the Niger, for the outstanding way in
which he performed his mission.
47. Under the constant blows dealt by the heroic
struggle of the Namibian and Azanian peoples, and
particularly under the heavy blows dealt by the brilliant
victory of the Zimbabwean people, the South African
racist regime, besieged from all sides, has landed itself
in greater isolation and is finding the going tougher
and tougher. However, the South African racist authorities have not shown the slightest restraint in their
reactionary arrogance. On the one hand, they continue
their militarist policies and refuse to abandon their
colonialist rule over Namibia, while stepping up their
acts of armed aggression against neighbouring African
States. On the other hand, they have intensified their
barbarous repression of the Azanian people.

43. The responsibility of the Council in taking cognizance of the explosive situation is now paramount.
The Council must in the first instance demand the
dismantling of apartheid and its repressive machinery.
This entails the unconditional release of all political
prisoners, the lifting of restrictions on those banned,
the return of exiles, the free functioning of political
parties, organizations and media, and the abrogation
of repressive legislation directed at racial separation
and segregation as well as at the suppression of
resistance.

48. Of late, with the advent of the fourth anniversary
of the tragic incident of Soweto, the heroic- Azanian
people have initiated strikes and school boycotts on
a wider scale to oppose the criminal system of racial
discrimination and apartheid, and there are, growing
demands for the release of the nationalist leaders who
have been illegally detained. In order to maintain their
tottering racist rule, the South African authorities
have once again resorted to the brutal atrocities of
repression, arresting more than a- thousand people
in various walks of life and even killing or wounding
a number of innocent young students. The African
countries and peoples and all justice-upholding countries and peoples express great indignation at these
crimes and strongly condemn them.

44. The demands must be backed by pressure more
tangible than moral appeals. They must call for the
total isolation of the racist regime by all means possible-political,
economic and diplomatic. States
individually and collectively must effectively discourage the racist regime in its attempts to bolster
its military and nuclear might. Through the Committee
established under resolution 421 (1977), the Council
must effectively strengthen efforts to secure full
implementation of the arms embargo. The need to
widen the scope of sanctions has long been mooted.
For immediate purposes, the oil embargo agreed upon
by OPEC countries could constitute a telling vehicle
of pressure. These measures should be fully respected
and supported by all States.

49. The Chinese Government and people firmly
support the just struggle of the Azanian peopie against
colonialism, racism and apartheid. The Chinese delegation emphatically condemns the series of crimes committed by the South African racist regime against
the Azanian people and expresses sympathy to all the
.victims of the atrocities. We firmly support the just
position ufthe African States. In our view, the Council should strongly condemn the- crimes committed
by the South African authorities, demand that they stop
forthwith all their repression and persecution of the
Azanian people and release all political prisoners
immediatiefy. The Council should also appeal to all
peoples and Governments to give support and assistance to the peoples of Azania and Namibia in their
just struggle against racism and colonialism and for
national%beration, as well as to the peoples of other
parts of southern Africa in their just cause offighting
against South Africa’s aggression and defending their
national -independence and territorial integrity.

45. Bangladesh is irrevocably committed to the
eradication ofapartheid. We cannot support or accept
any solution tantamount to a mere modification of
racism or the imposition of unilateral solutions that
deny the people of South Africa as a whole the right
to determine its future. In the final analysis, we believe
that all necessary steps must be taken to ensure the
transfer of all powers to the people of South Africa as
a whole in accordance with their freely- expressed
will and desire and without distinction as to race or
colour. Bangladesh accordingly reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy of the liberation struggle in
South Africa. It is an irreversible process, as the
history of the region has repeatedly confirmed. It is
our hope that the community of interest that now
irrevocably binds us into our global society will see
the demise of apartheid for the benefit of the people
of South Africa, Africa as a whole and humanity at
large.

SO. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Botswana. I invite him to take a place at
the’Counci1 table and to make.his statement.

46. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (inrerpretution
from
Chinese): Mr. President, first of all allow me to
express warm congratulations to you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the current
month. At the same time, I should like to take this
opportunity to extend warm congratulations to the

51. Mr. LEGWAILA (Botswana): Mr. President,
I should like to begin by congratulating you upon your
6

assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
a supreme organ of the United Nations in which the
entire world has reposed its confidence and trust.
Norway is a country with which Botswana enjoys the
most cordial relations, and that says a great deal for
the confidence which my delegation has in you as you
face the arduous task of piloting the deliberations
of the Council to their logically successful conclusion.

beings. South Africa remains a white man’s green
pasture where Africans are not allowed to graze.
This was decreed by the late Verwoerd many years
ago when he introduced Bantu education. It remains
the order of the day in South Africa today. Black
South Africans have since been herded into barren
bantustans where they are expected to live out their
lives in misery, poverty and squalor. They are being
deprived of their heritage, their citizenship of a united
South Africa, their right to enjoy the fruits of their own
labour, to live and die in the country which their
forefathers laboured so hard to develop.

52. The United Nations has been seized of the
question of South Africa for the past 35 years.
Volumes of resolutions have been adopted by the
Security Council with the aim of persuading South
Africa to correct the intolerable situation that has prevailed in that country for so long. This is 1980, and
South Africa remains what it has always been: a
country where apartheid and racism continue to mar
the lives of millions of our black fellow men without
any sign of respite.

55. It is needless for me to state the obvious, that is,
the fact that human patience is not inexhaustible. The
half-a-millenium-old Portuguese empire in Africa is
no more. The Portuguese had never dreamt of the day
when their 500-year-old empire would collapse like a
pack of cards. The Rhodesian rebellion has ended.
When Mr. Ian Smith took over the leadership of the
Rhodesia Front on 14 April 1964, he promised white
Rhodesians that there would be no majority rule in
Rhodesia as long as he lived. He subsequently
extended the period to a thousand years, as recently
as 1975. But five .years later, Rhodesia became the
free nation of Zimbabwe.

53. The history of South Africa is the history of man’s
injustice to man. The atrocities perpetrated there
against black South Africans are well known to all
of us. The tragedy of Sharpeville remains fresh in our
minds, and as recently as four years ago, the children
of Soweto and several other ghettoes of South Africa
decided that they had had enough of apartheid as they
took to the streets-unarmed and completely defenceless, albeit committed and determined-to deliver an
unequivocal message to white South Africa that they
were no longer prepared to suffer in silence. The
response on the part of white South Africa was a brutal
massacre of more than 700 defenceless innocent
children whose only guilt, if guilt it was, to demand
what civilized humanity has grown to value so dearly:
freedom, peace and justice. The date 16 June 1976
marked an historic turning-point in the political history
of South Africa. It marked the beginning of the
unfolding of a tragedy of unspeakable proportions.
The children’s message was loud and clear: “White
South Africa, you will bleed to death if you do not get
rid of apartheid now and begin the process of creating
a society in which every human being will be judged by
the character of his personality rather than by the
colour of his skin.”

56. One would have thought that Pretoria would be
far-sighted enough to draw lessons from such recent.
history. It is quite obvious to all of us-it has been
so since man inhabited this Earth-that no amount of
force, however brutal, can stifle an oppressed people’s
determination to seek and strive for liberation from
the chains of servitude, from the yoke of oppression
and exploitation. South Africa will not be an exception to the dictates of history. South Africa shall be
free. The only question we are compelled to ask is,
therefore, not whether freedom will come to
South Africa, but whether the birth of a new South
Africa, free and truly independent, will occur peacefully or through a painful Caesareanoperation like the
birth of Zimbabwe and the former Portuguese colonies.
57. The choices lie with the Afrikaner regime in
Pretoria. Ominous signs are there to determine the
options for the Botha Government. The first warning
shots have already been tired and they signal the dawn
of a dangerous era in South Africa-an era which will
be marked by a vicious, bloody confrontation, the
worst that Africa has ever seen. They are not going
to be silenced by the consolidation of. the so-called
Bantu homelands and the granting of meaningless
tribal independence to them; not by the abolition
of the South African Senate and the creation of a socalled Presidential Council whose essence is nothing
but the perpetuation of white supremacy in a different
form; not by the opening up of a few restaurants in
the centre of Johannesburg; and surely not by the
maddening noise about the creation of a constellation
of southern African States.

54. And yet it is still being suggested in certain
quarters that apartheid is a me& so&political aberration which is bound to fade away in time without
a push. Indeed, we are made to believe that it is
already fading away because a few civic theatres,
parks, libraries and restaurants in the metropolis of
South Africa are being opened to all races. To the
gullible-to the habitual optimists-the opening up
of these facilities represents the beginning of the end
of the road for aparrheid. But to those of us who-have
lived with apartheid as long-.as we can remember,
white supremacy remains the order of the day in
South Africa. There is no sign that white South
Africans are now willing to accept black South
Africans as equals, as fellow citizens entitled to all
the rights and privileges enjoyed by all free human

58. The Security Council must not allow itself to
fall prey to such transparent machinations designed to
7

.Y

improve the image of a socio-political system which is
inherently evil and repugnant to all honest men and
women of good will. Pressure must be brought to bear
on South Africa to abandon the path of confrontation
and to pursue the path of meaningful change. The
desire for freedom and justice is a consuming fire. The
people of South Africa have been forced to resort to
armed struggle as the only instrument by which they
can seek to effect change in South Africa, and that
spells disaster for all South Africans-both
the
innocent and the guilty.

64. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): Mr. President,
last week I had the opportunity to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month when the Council was considering
another item on its agenda. I should like to take this
opportunity to express to you and to all, the other
members of the Council my gratitude for allowing me
once again to address the Council today on an equally
important issue.
65. South Africa has perversely and consistentiy.continued to flout the United Nations resolutions on the
le&imat,e rights of the African people. Moreover,
South Africa’s blatant and cynical racist policies are
abhorrent and have rarely been matched in the annals
of history.

59. Committed as we all are to peaceful change everywhere, including South Africa, we cannot, however,
fail to appreciate the reasons that have led the African
National Congress (ANC) and the Pan Africanist
Congress (PAC) to resort to armed struggle as an
instrument of change. I believe, nevertheless, that
the Council has the power to forestall the escalation
of armed conflict in South Africa, but only ifit is willing
to summon its collective wisdom to appreciate the
causes of such armed conflict and act accordingly.

66. ‘Egypt was among the first countries to draw the
attention of the world community and the various
international forums to the increasing dangers
resulting from the continuance of this grave and
explosive situation prevailing in the region.
The policy of apartheid has resulted in the deterioration of the situation in southern Africa, especially
since the South African racist regime has been able
to transform South Africa into an arsenal of the most
sophisticated weapons and to acquire all the capacily
to produce nuclear weapons. Unless the world community in general and the Security Council in particular seriously and effectively face this situation,
the Pretoria rf5gime will continue to pursue its policy
of oppression and Suppression against the people of
South Africa, its illegal occupation of Namibia and its
acts of aggression against the neighbouring countries,
thus posing a grave threat to international peace and
security in the region.

67.

60. The least the Council can do is to exert so much
pressure on South Africa as to make that country
realize that the consequences of its resistance to
meaningful change will become more and more
disastrous. South Africa must be forced to open
dialogue with the genuine leaders of the majority who
are at present rotting in prison. Mandela must be
released to resume his place in the leadership of the
black people of South Africa. Repressions and
detentions without trial must stop so that the process
of reconciliation may begin. Its objective’ must of
necessity be the creation of a society in South Africa
in which every South African, regardless of his colour
or creed, may be allowed the opportunity to fulfil
himself in peace and freedom.

The policy of apartheid and the brutal measures
of oppression perpetrated by the racist rkgi~meagainst
the African black majority have fuelled the struggle of
the African peopie.against the white minority regime.
They have strengthened their determination to attain
their legitimate rights for freedom and human dignity.
The recent wave of school strikes by students protesting the inferior system of education provided by the
r&ime for blacks should not be viewed as an isolated
development. In fact, it reflects the widespread discontent among the African black majprity with the
white minority i&ime. Although the demonstrations
of the students were peaceful, the racist- police confronted the demonstrators with firearms, murdering
and injuring scores of defenceless civilians, including
many school children.

68.

61. The Council cannot fail to be moved bv the
plight of the children of South Africa who have decided
to confront tanks and bullets with bare hands. The
Council cannot fail to recognize the legitimacy of
those children’s grievances and their cries for
freedom and justice. Ii cannot fail to be moved by the
plight of thousands of South Africans of all ages who
are rotting in the prisons of South Africa and the
several others who are arrested and incarcerated
every day for no other reason than the fact that
they wish to live as free men and women in their
own land.
We have every confidence in the Council. We
have confidence in its sense of commitment-a commitment to the preservation of peace and security all
over the korld. Let it not be said that the Council
failed to meet the challenge before it today.

62.

69. The world. community has received with grave
concern and indignation the news of those barbaric
actions. In, a statement issued in Caiio on 2 June,
the Government of Egypt strongly condemned that
criminal act. It declared in its statement:

63. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

‘“The Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt
views with deep concern the development. of
8

\

events in South Africa and the resort of its racist
Government to savage and inhuman measures in
suppressing the peaceful demonstrations staged by
the Coloured and nationalist students demanding
their natural right to education, a right sanctioned
by all international covenants, especially the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The brutal
measures with which the racist Pretoria regime has
been dealing. with these peaceful demonstrations
staged by defenceless youth are clearly reminiscent
of the Sharpeville and Soweto massacres. Such
actions demonstrate once more that the racist
authorities continue their repressive practices in
wanton violation of all international principles and
resolutions and in defiance of the international community.”
70. The time has come for the international community to stand firm against the racist r&ime in Pretoria and to adopt concrete measures to eradicate
uparrheid. The verdict of history will be harsh if we do
not unite our efforts and resolutely put an end to the
escalation of violence provoked by the Pretoria regime
against the oppressed people of South Africa. That
racist r6gime must be made to realize that the days of
white minority domination are numbered. No doubt
the recent ruthless wave of violence launched by the
Pretoria rbgime reflects that regime’s awareness of
its own impending demise now that the revolutionary
and nationalist African tide is catching up with it
following the independence of the heroic people of
Zimbabwe.
71. Can the regime of South African learn the lesson
of Zimbabwe and, before it, the lessons of Mozambique and Angola? Can it realize that its- racist policy
against the people of South Africa, the detention and
arrest of freedom fighters, the system of bantustanization, the repeated acts of armed aggression
against neighbouring countries and its continued illegal
occupation of Namibia are doomed?
72. The march of history cannot, however, be
indefinitely hindered and the achievement of majority
rule is inevitable. The racists in Pretoria have to
realize that oppression and suppression cannot but
generate bitterness, violence and bloodshed.
Apartheid should be eradicated, and the people
of South Africa should be enabled to exercise their
right to self-determination without any further delay
in order to avoid further bloodshed and human
suffering.

73.

74. South Africa must immediately and unconditionally release Nelson Mandeta and all political
prisoners. Its repeated acts of aggression against
neighbouring countries and its illegal occupation of
Namibia must come to. an end. In our view, this can
be achieved only through decisive measures to be
taken urgently by the Council under Chapter VII of
the Charter.
. 9

75. Egypt appeals to free peoples all over the world
and to all Member States to stand firmly against the
ruthless wave of violence launched by the racist regime
and to intensify their support of the African people
in their just struggle to achieve their aspirations in
freedom, independence and human dignity.
76. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
77. Mr. KOMATINA (Yugoslavia): First of all,
I wish to thank the members of the Council for having
given me this opportunity to state my country’s position with regard to this extremely complex issue,
which is fraught with danger not only for the region of
southern Africa, but also for the whole African continent and beyond.
78: I should like also to congratulate you warmly,
Mr. President, upon your assumption of the presidency
of this forum. The friendship between our two countries which found expression, in particular, during the
Second World War, as well as our personal friendship, are additional reasons for wishing you much
success in the carrying out of the difficult and responsible tasks of the President of the Council.
79. I should also like to address my thanks to
Ambassador Idi Oumarou of the Niger for the very
effective way in which he conducted the work of the
Council last month.
80. The intensification of the policy of oppression of
the racist tigime in Pretoria directed against the
African people and its aggressive policy against independent African countries have resulted in an aggravation of the situation in the whole region. This has
created an explosive situation, whose consequences
could prove to be catastrophic. One need not be a
prophet to realize that the policies and practices of a
&gime that is condemned to wither away, a regime
that is breathing its last breath and does not shrink
from committing ever new crimes, cannot but have
grave consequences for world peace and security-all
the more as that militarized country, armed to the
teeth, is also now on the threshold of becoming a
nuclear Power.
81. The best proof of this is provided by the fact that
the bayonets and barrels of racist rifles are aimed at
boys and girls who dared to voice aloud their opposition to segregation and to the injustices of a school
system introduced by the racist tigime in implementing
its policy of apartheid. One can rightly say that, asp !
result of these acts, the patience of the international
community which has repeatedly condemned the
inhuman policy of racism and racial discrimination, ’
has been severely tried.
82. Actually, the shedding of the blood of innocent
boys and girls in the towns of South Africa fore-

shadows the end of a system that has been a blot on
the face of mankind for many decades. In order to
achieve that end, it is indispensable that the Council
and all of us take resolute action. It would be difficult
to find another priority issue on which such a broad
consensus could be achieved by the international community. It is obvious that the people of South Africa
are ready to contribute to this. We admire the courage
shown by the South African citizens who have
organized demonstrations and expressed their solidarity with and support of the demands of the demonstrators and strongly opposed the taking of any
repressive measures against them. Workers’ strikes are
a sign of widespread awakening among the African
people, who are no longer prepared to reconcile themselves to the subordinate role of a ruthlessly exploited
population. Attacks by members of the liberation
movement against the strategic installations of the
racist regime indicate the possibility of guerrilla
actions of broader proportions.

tries should take serious steps to prevent this rampage
on the part of the racist regime, which is writing the
most shameful pages of the history of the contemporary
world.
87. Together with the other non-aligned countries
which have resolutely and unreservedly condemned
the policy and practices of the racist regime in Pretoria, Yugoslavia will support every action of the
Council that condemns the policy of apartheid, racism
and racial discrimination; contributes to the elimination of the system; urges unequivocally the cessation
of oppression and exploitation; demands the unconditional and immediate release of all political prisoners;
and, above all, calls for the adoption of measures’
under Chapter VII of the Charter, for mandatory
sanctions in particular, as well as for measures that
will contribute to the total political, diplomatic and
economic isolation of the South African racist regime.
88. The Non-Aligned Movement, which has always
been a staunch supporter of liberation struggles and,
in particular, of the right of peoples to decide for
themselves their fate, is ready in this case also to
assume part of the international responsibility and to
contribute to the liberation of South Africa through
solidarity with its people.

83. That proves that the crimes of the racist authorities cannot remain unpunished any longer and that the
time will come when the crimes perpetrated at Sharpeville in 1960 and at Soweto in 1976 will no longer be
merely lamented but will become active symbols of
the liberation struggle. The racist regime does not feel
safe in its fortress either. The examples of Zimbabwe
and the liberation struggle of the people of Namibia
show that the sowing of death is not sufficient to arrest
the march of freedom and to stifle the right of a people
prepared to use force against force and to get hold
of what belongs to it.

89. We feel that the moment has arrived when mere
verbal condemnation by the Council is no longer sufficient. What is needed now is concrete action. In this
specific case now being considered by the Council,
we are faced with violence and crime in general, and
that against school children in particular. We are faced
also with acts of terrorism. that do not spare even
those who hardly realize what life is like today and
what life should be like tomorrow. The decision of the
Council must be unequivocal and forthright. We firmly
believe that. the Council will adopt such a decision.

84. The list of crimes committed by the Pretoria
regime is too long to be treated lightly and to allow
anyone to escape responsibility. They are the introduction and practice of racism, racial discrimination and
apartheid, which have been branded as a crime against
humanity and a threat to international peace and
security; massacres of populations at Sharpeville and
Soweto; numerous arrests and political trials of
African inhabitants; ruthless exploitation of the human
and natural resources of the populations of South
Africa; defiance of the recommendations and decisions
of the United Nations; continuation of the illegal
occupation of Namibia, regardless of the revocation
of the Mandate by the United Nations; and daily acts
of aggression and terrorism against the neighbouring
independent and non-aligned countries of Angola,
Zambia, Botswana and Mozambique.

90. I think it hardly necessary on this occasion to
mention the full and unreserved solidarity of my
country with the oppressed people of South Africa.
The liberation movements of South Africa-ANC and
PAC4s legitimate representatives of the oppressed
people of South Africa and interpreters of its genuine
aspirations, will always find in Yugoslavia a friend
ready to help and to support, within the limits of its
possibilities, their just struggle for national liberation,
for the affirmation of human dignity and for the
eradication-of racism, racial discrimination, apartheid
and colonialism.

85. What is involved, therefore-although that list is
far from being exhaustive-is an appalling record of
the neo-Fascist regime that cannot be tolerated. At the
same time, it is a warning and a reminder of what
the international community should do, in its own
interest, in order to prevent the worst from,happening.

91. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Zaire. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
92. Mr. KAMANDA wa KAMANDA (Zaire) (irtterfrom French): First of all, I should like to
extend to you, Mr. President, the sincere congratulations of the delegation of Zaire on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council. In these difficult times
prefution

86. At this point, I should like to draw particular
attention to the responsibility of countries which maintain all-round relations with-south Africa. Those coun10

tions of students and schoolchildren, the burning of
the SASOL and NATREF refineries and of other
plants and strategic sites, notably at Springs, the
protests, the hunger strikes and acts of sabotage,
is the legitimate unleashing of frustrations too long
contained, in the face of the obtuse intransigence of a
system nourished on delusion and madness, which
lives and flourishes beyond the realm of reason. It is
the stepping up of resistance to oppression, to humiliation and to the degradation of man in South Africa.

of uncertainty, anguish and anxiety, times of instability
and turbulence, times of confrontation marked by
scorn for men and law when peace and security in
the world are threatened everywhere, it is comforting
to have an eminent representative of Norway presiding
over our deliberations in the Council. Indeed, the
devotion of your country, Norway, to the principles
and ideals of the United Nations, its constant support
for the defence of just causes, and in particular of
the liberation struggle of the oppressed peoples of the
world, and the humanist sentiments of its people and
leaders are, in the opinion of my delegation, a guarantee of the success of the important deliberations
of the Council on the explosive situation at present
prevailing in South Africa.

100. For the United Nations, the international community and all the States in the world with the exception of one, apartheid is a crime against mankind.
But what must be deplored on the international level is
that those very States which have proclaimed upartheid a crime against mankind do not draw all the
practical and logical consequences in their daily
conduct, in their relations with the Pretoria regime.

93. May I also pay a well-deserved tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Idt Oumarou of the Niger,
for the skill and ability with which he conducted
the proceedings of the Council last month.

101. I do not intend today to dwell on the nature of
since I have had several opportunities to
set forth my views on the profoundly odious nature
of that policy and on its true causes. I should like
simply to recall here that all Member States have
made a solemn commitment to contribute to the
eradication of that scourge of mankind and to contribute effectively to the struggle required for the
elimination of apartheid. But in terms of practical,
concrete steps, what have we actually done to bring
about the implementation of our resolutions?

94. Finally, I should like to thank all the members
of the Council for allowing me to address it yet again.

apartheid,

95. Once again, the Council has before it the whole
file on South Africa. The frequency with which the
Council has met to consider the South African case
alone proves that the situation created by uphrrheid
and racial segregation in South Africa is a threat to
international peace and security and is of concern to
the international community.
96. There have been people thrown into prison and
arrested, arbitrary detention has taken place, new
racist laws have been enacted, summary executions
and cowardly killings and kidnappings of so-called
Coloureds, citizens of South Africa, have taken place.
In addition to all that, there have been State terrorism,
unprovoked acts of aggression and attacks against
neighbouring countries of which the Council has
been seized.

102. The South African people, who have endured
too much, hoped too much, and perhaps expected
too much, have now decided to take to the streets,
to take them over and to light the explosives-in a
word, to adapt their battle plan to the nature of the
oppression. Who would be the first to accuse them?
103. Each of us is well aware that those are actions
that are sounding the knell of apartheid and will help
to eliminate it. Although we all feel that and are
cognizant of it, it appears that no one is willing to
articulate or recognize the fact publicly, lest the martyr
people of South Africa, who are fighting with every
means at their disposal, be deprived of the intemational support which is indispensable for attaining
the goal of their sacrifices.

97. Today what we will probably have to do is take
note of a new major fact in South Africa’s history
and draw the appropriate conclusions. That new major
fact is that apartheid is in conflagration. Yes, a match
has been put to apartheid and the citadel of racism is
aflame. But out of that conflagration the inextinguishable flame of freedom, the flame of hope, for the
oppressed people of South Africa mounts up to the
heavens.
98. I have heard and read that there has been an
escalation of violence in South Africa. But I do not
think that this expression is correct; it is ambiguous,
and it barely conceals a certain desire to place on an
equal footing innocent victims and oppressors, and
condemn them equally as responsible for intolerable
violence.

104. It is that support which the peoples seeking
freedom in South Africa expect of the Security Council
in the form of a recognition and reaffirmation of the
legitimacy of their struggle, in the form of an unequivocal condemnation of the oppression and the
bloody repression of the Pretoria regime, and in the
form of a reaffumation of the fact that the solution of
the South African crisis demands the restoration of the
rights of the majority, in a democratic society where
the rights of minorities are ensured.

99. However, ‘what is occurring today in South
Africa, by means of workers’ strikes, the demonstra-

105. Recent history has shown that from French
Algeria to Algerian Algeria, from the Portuguese
11

colonial empire to the independence of the Portuguesespeaking territories of Africa, from the adventure of
Ian Smith to the independence of Zimbabwe, in a
word, from the colonial empires to the independence
of formerly subjugated States, the courageous determination of peoples has always persuaded the rulers
to come to terms, to fall into step with history and
to advance,the cause of peace, itself closely tied to the
cause of freedom and equality. That return to reason
has often even been interpreted as a stroke of genius
that was to the credit of those who were capable of
it, because they too contributed in the end to the
progress of history.
106. The Council should, in our view, help the racist
leaders of South Africa to take in that lesson by
reaffirming here the legitimacy of the liberation struggle
and of the resistance to oppression and by stating
distinctly that neither arrests nor savage repression
will resolve the situation nor extinguish the flames of
aparrheid.
107. It is imperative that everyone should realize
that the explosive situation which currently exists in
South Africa is not to be compared with that in 1910
at the time of the constitution of the Union of South
Africa, with the Sharpeville massacre of 1960, with the
workers’ strikes of 1973-1974 or with the Soweto
uprising of 1976-1977. It must be appreciated that,
while the workers’ strikes of 1973-1974 played an
important role in the awakening of African resistance
and while Soweto and the events of 1976-1977marked
the organized, practical beginning of that awakening
and enlarged its scope, one can say without fear of
being mistaken that the events of 1980 appear very
much like the foretaste of a great and victorious
revolution.
108. ” Even in a democracy, when sanctions designed
to permit the citizens to control the levers of power
can no longer function, and when the people is legally
disarmed in the face of a power in which it no longer
has confidence and against which it cannot act, revolution is legitimate and is recognized in law as having a
sound theoretical and doctrinal basis.
109. If South Africa were a democracy, what is
happening tid is being condemned by the whole world
would amply justify the revolution of the African
peoples. But it is conceded that South Africa is not
a democracy. South Africa is the very antithesis of
democracy, a political system which has institutionalized that antithesis. That is why the United
Nations has recognized the legitimacy of the liberation struggle in South Africa and of the liberation
movements which lead that struggle as the true,
authentic representatives of their people.
110. At a time when there is so much talk in the world
of respect for and defence of human rights, it is
indispensable that the Council should dwell upon the
serious violations of human rights that have taken
place in South Africa and that it should urge all Member States, and particularly those which have always

presented themselves as the defenders of human rights
in the world, immediately to ceaseall collaboration with
and support for the criminal apurrheid regime. Given a
state of affairs such as that which obtains in South
Africa, human rights, to be credible, must be depoliticized if one wishes to give equal consideration
to each man and to all men, wherever they may be in
the world, whatever their race, sex, origin or religious
or philosophical convictions.
111. In conclusion, I should humbly request the
Council to declare that apartheid is the sole cause of
the disturbances and the crisis in South Africa; to
reaffirm the legitimacy of the struggle of the African
peoples of South Africa; to condemn the barbarous’
repression to which they are subjected, a repression which cannot deal with the crisis; to proclaim
that the solution of the crisis lies in the recognition of
the rights of the majority; to invite the Pretoria regime
to show its wisdom and to recognize all those rights;
to decide to strengthen economic sanctions and the
arms embargo; and finally, to invite all Member States
to put an end to all forms of collaboration with the
Pretoria regime so long as it continues to pursue a
policy which the United Nations and the entire world
consider a crime against humanity. And why not say
too that we should also humbly ask the Council to
come to the assistance also of the decent whites and
of the upright consciences of South Africa, who have
perceived the iniquity of their political system, who
are protesting and increasingly opposing their Govemment and who advocate the opening of negotiations,
‘leading to -theimplementation of majority ruIe, with the
legitimate and authentic representatives of the South
African people, namely, the liberation movements. The
Council should come to the assistance of those decent
whites in South Africa and to that of other upright
people in that country and should call on the white
racist South African leaders to free the African political
activists who have been unjustly imprisoned.
112. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of Algeria. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
113. Mr. BOUZARBIA (Algeria) @zrerprerarion
from French): Mr. President, the Algerian delegation
takes pleasure in expressing our particular satisfaction
at seeing you once again presiding over the proceedings
of the Council this month. In conveying our congratulations to you, we should also like to express our
pleasure at being able, in these circumstances, to
assure you once again of our confidence in your
imaginative zeal and the certainty of your judgement.
Your personal qualities, coupled with your broad
experience, will, I am convinced, mark our debate with
the necessary element of tranquillity; they will also
make it possible for our CounciI to appreciate the
true scope and nature of the gravity of the situation
in southern Africa and its repercussions on the stability
of the whole of the African continent and, beyond it,
on international peace and security.
12

114. Similarly, the Algerian delegation wishes to pay
a tribute of gratitude to your predecessor, Ambassador
IdC Oumarou, who discharged his duties with the
insight and vision for which he is known. His straightforwardness, his competence, his commitment to the
cause of right, justice and liberty have won him the
unanimous esteem of those around him and have
aroused sentiments both of admiration and gratitude,
with which the Algerian delegation fully associates
itself.
115. Once again the Council finds itself confronted
with the case of apartheid. This fact reflects, first of
all, the constant refusal of the international community
to countenance a political system which would elevate
racial oppression and the diminution of human dignity
to the level of a State doctrine, and institutionalized
violence to that of an instrument for the running
of society. It also stresses the scope of these admonitions and denunciations, which, from all quarters
and in successive and constant waves, have combined
to confer upon all debates on apartheid the dimension
of an international trial of Soot.h African irredentism.
Finally, it highlights even further the universal concerns at the deterioration of South Africa’s internal
situation, marked as it is by the spread of repression,
emergency legislation and procedures of summary
justice which thus enshrine’ State terrorism as an
institution.
116. A political system, an ideological vision, a
concept of a social order in which the majority,
relegated to the status of the subhuman, maintains
by its sweat, its humiliation and its hunger an overIord minority, is fundamentally unacceptable to men
and nations. With its intractable belligerence, its
arrogant aggressiveness and its repressive logic, such
a system breeds within and of itself the germs of its
own elimination, Thus it- tramples underfoot the rights
and dignity of the African masses; thus it chooses to
rely primarily on the arrogant use of force as an
instrument for the intimidation of the States of the
area; thus it adopts an attitude of scorn and defiance
in the face of universal condemnation. Andinevitably,
it is polishing the weapons of those who will bury it.
117. As the doctrine of another time, the belief of
another age, apartheid is doomed to degeneration and
death: first, because the South African people itself,
-with its yearning for freedom and its determination
to gain independence, constitutes the mortal enemy
of that regime, in spite of oppression-and repression;
also because the South African people has said no, and
that cry, although constantly stifled, is nevertheless
growing louder; and, finally, because that cry has been
continually amplified by its reverberations throughout
the international community, a community which is
becoming every day more concerned.
118. The attempt to adapt the system of apartheid
to the new conditions in South Africa, conditions
born of the spread of the struggle of the South African
people and the victory of nationalism in the region
against colonialism and racism, has culminated in the
13

policy of bantustanization. A natural outgrowth of the
policy of separate development and the expression of
the unavowed intent to turn South Africa into a
pseudo-multinational State, that policy had only
one goal: that of guaranteeing and perpetuating white
supremacy. Because it is contrary to the aspirations
of the South African people to self-determination and
freedom, because it is inspired by a racist philosophy,
because it was conceived in the minds of its initiators
as a “modem” expression of the laws in force in
South Africa, and, finally, because it has been rejected
by the whole international community, that policy is
doomed.
119. In terms of form and content, the repeated
attempts to adapt the apartheid regime have been
consistent. Nevertheless, they have never triumphed
over the intractable determination of the South African
people. As a last manoeuvre to uproot the African
majority and to cast them aside, the policy of bantustanization has added its own effects to those of other
segregation measures and has unleashed as a final
and .inexorable reaction the radicalization of the
national liberation struggle.
120. The radicalization of that struggle today has
been concretely manifested in the widespread people’s
movement which is shaking the very foundations of
the apartheid system. Because of its authenticity, this
struggle will inevitably culminate in the conquest of
the right to selfdetermination and the restoration to
the people of South Africa of their national rights.
121. Incapable of containing the liberation struggle
of a whole people, the Pretoria regime is intensifying
its repression, multiplying its massive and arbitrary
arrests and is undertaking collective trials which are
the merest semblances of justice. In South Africa the
racist colonial order is thus trying out new versions
of methods which have been tested for a Iong time
-elsewhere. It is responding to the logic of national
resistance with an escalation of terror.
122. The least that the international community
can expect of these deliberations of the Council is an
acknowledgement of the exceptional gravity of the
situation in southern Africa in general and in South
Africa in particular. Within this context, the Council
must, as the guarantor of international peace and
security, call for the immediate cessation of the wave
of oppression recently undertaken, the freeing of all
political prisoners, including Nelson Mandela, and,
finally, the immediate cessation of the acts of reprisal
and intimidation which South Africa constantly undertakes against the States of the region. These demands,
if they are to be complied with, must be accompanied
by the enforcement measures provided for by the
Charter itself. It is on this condition, and this condition alone, that the international community will be
doing its duty to the people of South Africa.
The meeting

rose at 5.30 p.m.
NOTE

I A/35/261, annex.

HOW TO ORTAIN UMTED NATIONS PURL!CAnONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and diittiiut&
throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. S&s S&on. New York or Gdieva.
COMMENT

SE PRO-R

LES PURLSCATIONS DES NATIONS -

Les publications des Nations Ueies Jont en vente dans ks librairies et Iesagences d&ositaim du
monde entier. Informer-vous agpr& de votre libraire ou adressez-+ous B : Nations Unies, S&ion
des ventes. New York ou Gen&.
KAK

HOJIYPHTh

H3JIAHHSI

OPrAHH3AI&HH

OIi’bEAHKKHHhlX

HAIfKK

Hs~aHm
OpraWmaufw
06zensitteHmb~x
HaltsiR mo)Kwo XynHTb 6 WiHXttbIX
Ma&
JHXSX R are~wrnax:
ao;Bcex
paRonax
wtpa.
Hasonwre
CilpaB*a
06 H3AaH_liXX
B
*ameM
XH~CHOX
xarasrwe
HJYH nsmmfe
no anpecy:
Oprastmaqnn
WbeXHHeHAblX
Hat@,
Cexttxri
no npo&arrte
H3xaHdk.
Hbxdiopx
mx)Kexeaa.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de ias Naciones Unidas cstan en vent;a+n lib&s
y casas diitn%tidoms en
todas partes del mundo. Con&e aau librem o ditijase a: Naciones Unidas. Secci6n de Vetitas.
Nueva York o Gineba.
-,

Litho in United Nations, New York

003tm

1

83-61462-September 198642,050
