A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/153
26 January 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 146
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/52/647)]
52/153.

United Nations Decade of International Law

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 44/23 of 17 November 1989, by which it declared the period 1990-1999 the
United Nations Decade of International Law,
Recalling also that the main purposes of the Decade, according to resolution 44/23, should be, inter alia:
(a) To promote acceptance of and respect for the principles of international law,
(b) To promote means and methods for the peaceful settlement of disputes between States, including
resort to and full respect for the International Court of Justice,
(c) To encourage the progressive development of international law and its codification,
(d) To encourage the teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law,
Recalling further its resolution 51/157 of 16 December 1996, to which was annexed the programme for
the activities for the final term (1997-1999) of the Decade, and its resolution 51/158 of 16 December 1996,
entitled "Electronic treaty database",
Expressing its appreciation for the note submitted by the Secretary-General,1 and having considered it,
Recalling that the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties between States and International
Organizations or between International Organizations of 21 March 19862 is one of the conventions adopted

1

A/52/363.

2

A/CONF.129/15.

98-77185

/...

A/RES/52/153
Page 2

under the aegis of the United Nations which have codified the law of treaties, and recalling also the impact
of the Convention on the practice of treaties concluded between States and international organizations or
between international organizations,
Recalling also that at the forty-fifth session of the General Assembly the Sixth Committee established
the Working Group on the United Nations Decade of International Law with a view to preparing generally
acceptable recommendations on the programme of activities for the Decade,
Noting that at the fifty-second session of the General Assembly the Sixth Committee reconvened the
Working Group to continue its work in accordance with resolution 51/157 and all previous resolutions on
the question,
Having considered the oral report of the Chairman of the Working Group to the Sixth Committee,3
1. Expresses its appreciation for the work done on the United Nations Decade of International Law
at the fifty-second session of the General Assembly, and requests the Working Group of the Sixth Committee
to continue its work at the fifty-third session in accordance with its mandate and methods of work;
2. Also expresses its appreciation to States and international organizations and institutions that have
undertaken activities, including sponsoring conferences on various subjects of international law, in
implementation of the programme for the activities for the final term (1997-1999) of the Decade;
3. Invites all States and international organizations and institutions referred to in the programme to
provide, update or supplement information on activities they have undertaken in implementation of the
programme, as appropriate, to the Secretary-General for inclusion in the report requested in paragraph 8 of
resolution 51/157;
4. Encourages States to disseminate at the national level, as appropriate, information contained in the
note submitted by the Secretary-General;1
5. Also encourages States to consider ratifying or acceding to the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties between States and International Organizations or between International Organizations,2 international
organizations that have signed the Convention to deposit an act of formal confirmation of the Convention
and other international organizations entitled to do so to accede to it at an early date;
6. Encourages States parties and international organizations or agencies, including depositaries, in
order to facilitate further implementation of the obligation laid down in Article 102 of the Charter of the
United Nations to provide, where available, a copy of the text of any treaty in disk or other electronic format
and to consider providing where available translations in English or French or both as may be needed, for
the purpose of assisting with the timely publication of the United Nations Treaty Series;
7. Invites the Secretary-General to apply the provisions of article 12, paragraph 2, of the regulations
to give effect to Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations4 to multilateral treaties falling within the
terms of article 12, paragraph 2 (a) to (c) of the regulations;
8. Encourages the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat to continue in its efforts to facilitate access
to information concerning United Nations activities in the field of international law and to bring up to date
the publication of the United Nations Juridical Yearbook;

3

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Sixth Committee, 30th meeting
(A/C.6/52/SR.30), and corrigendum.
4

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 859.
/...

A/RES/52/153
Page 3

9. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue developing a policy of providing Internet access to
the United Nations Treaty Series and the Multilateral Treaties Deposited with the Secretary-General, keeping
in mind especially the needs of developing countries in recovering the costs thereof;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to proceed to translate and publish in the form of a report issued
in the official languages of the United Nations a list of the titles of the treaties appearing in the publication
Multilateral Treaties Deposited with the Secretary-General;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that hard copies of the publications mentioned in
paragraph 9 above continue to be distributed to permanent missions free of charge in accordance with their
needs;
12. Appeals to States, international organizations and non-governmental organizations working in the
field of international law and to the private sector to make financial contributions or contributions in kind
for the purpose of facilitating the implementation of the programme;
13. Once again requests the Secretary-General to bring the programme to the attention of States and
international organizations and institutions working in the field of international law;
14. Notes with appreciation the activities undertaken by the International Committee of the Red Cross
in the field of international humanitarian law, including with regard to the protection of the environment in
times of armed conflict;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-third session the item entitled "United
Nations Decade of International Law".
72nd plenary meeting
15 December 1997
