S/2007/118

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 March 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 28 February 2007 from the Secretary-General
to the President of the Security Council
In accordance with the statement by the President of the Security Council of
12 December 2002 (S/PRST/2002/33), I have the honour to convey the attached
letter dated 23 February 2007, which I received from the Secretary-General and
High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European
Union, transmitting the report on the activities of the European Union Police
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina covering the period from 1 July to 31 December
2006 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-25482 (E) 060307

*0725482*

S/2007/118

Annex
Letter dated 23 February 2007 from the Secretary-General
and High Representative for the Common Foreign and
Security Policy of the European Union addressed to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations
In accordance with the statement by the President of the Security Council of
12 December 2002 (S/PRST/2002/33), I attach a report on the activities of the
European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, covering the period
from 1 July to 31 December 2006.
I propose to provide the Security Council with a written update on the progress
of the Mission.
I would be grateful if you transmit this report to the President of the Security
Council.
(Signed) Javier Solana

2

07-25482

S/2007/118

Enclosure
Report of the Secretary-General and High Representative for the
Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union on
the activities of the European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina covering the period from 1 July to 31 December 2006
Introduction
1.
The European Union Police Mission (EUPM) has been the first operation
undertaken under the European Security and Defence Policy. It was launched with a
three-year mandate starting on 1 January 2003 and continued from 1 January 2006
to 31 December 2007 with a refocused mandate. Brigadier General Vincenzo
Coppola from Italy is the current Head of Mission/Police Commissioner.
2.
The Mission operates in line with the general objectives of annex 11 of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and its
objectives are supported by European Community instruments.

Methodology and staffing
Staffing
3.
On 30 June 2006, EUPM numbered 419 staff (175 international police officers,
29 international civilian experts and 215 national staff). On 31 December 2006,
EUPM numbered 414 staff (166 international police officers, 29 international
civilian experts and 219 national staff). All 25 States members of the European
Union (EU) and 8 non-EU contributing States 1 participated in the Mission in the
current reporting period. The Mission takes due account of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security in all its activities, as well
as the EU operational paper on practical measures for taking work forward on
resolution 1325 (2000) in the context of the European Security and Defence Policy.
Methodology
4.
EUPM, under the guidance and coordination of the European Union Special
Representative and as part of the broader rule of law approach in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in the region, aims, through mentoring, monitoring and inspecting,
to establish a sustainable, professional and multi-ethnic police service in Bosnia and
Herzegovina operating in accordance with best European and international
standards.
5.
The Mission continued to follow its co-location methodology which, in the
previous period, had been reviewed and reorganized into a four-region structure, in
line with the four State Investigation and Protection Agency (SIPA) regions, each
under the supervision of a Chief Regional Adviser. The Mission also maintains
multi-level co-locations with SIPA (the lead agency in the fight against organized
crime) and the State Border Service (SBS).
6.
As from 1 October 2006, under the direction of the EU Special Representative,
EUPM has fully assumed the lead in the coordination of policing aspects of the
__________________
1 Bulgaria, Canada, Iceland, Norway, Romania, Switzerland, Turkey and Ukraine.

07-25482

3

S/2007/118

efforts of the European Security and Defence Policy in the fight against organized
crime. It assists local authorities in planning and conducting major and organized
crime investigations. EUPM completed an assessment of organized crime as part of
its regular review process, enabling the Mission to strengthen its contribution in
support of the fight against organized crime, which will remain the key objective for
the Mission for 2007.
7.
At the end of the year, EUPM reviewed its structure and priorities in order to
increase its effectiveness in assisting Bosnia and Herzegovina police in this task.

General situation
8.
The period from 1 July to 31 December 2006 was characterized by a number
of political developments relevant to police in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
EUPM mandate, among them:
• A slow down in the implementation of reforms. In terms of police reform,
Republika Srpska disengaged from active participation in the Directorate for
Police Restructuring Implementation, in contradiction with the Agreement on
Restructuring of Police Structures of October 2005.
• A tense pre-election campaign, but with a limited number of incidents and a
calm and peaceful election day on 1 October.
• The announcement that the Office of the High Representative will begin
preparations to close on 30 June 2007, subject to review and confirmation in
February 2007, followed by a reinforced EU engagement.
In assessing political developments, the Mission sought guidance from the EU
Special Representative as appropriate and continued to benefit from the situational
awareness and analysis capabilities of the European Union Monitoring Mission.
9.
Although EUPM identified limited shortcomings in the ability of the police
services in Bosnia and Herzegovina to effectively maintain public peace and order,
overall, the police demonstrated enhanced professionalism together with an
increased robustness and resolve, as well as improving multi-ethnic command
structures, in dealing with complex public order situations.
10. EUPM continued to advise the appropriate domestic authorities in those areas
that remain a source of concern for public order: policing situations involving longstanding disputes over religious symbols, including buildings, politically motivated
and/or manipulated incidents, potential for cantonal and entity police services to be
perceived as partial. However, despite several serious incidents, EUPM has
continued to observe a decrease in the number of ethnic, inter-religious and
politically motivated incidents.

Achievements during the reporting period
1.

Support of the police restructuring process
11. EUPM has continued to carry out its tasks in support of the police
restructuring process. The Head of Mission continued his role as the only
international member on the Steering Board of the Directorate for Police

4

07-25482

S/2007/118

Restructuring Implementation. The Board’s 12-month mandate was to provide
strategic guidance to the Executive Board of the Directorate on the development of
an implementation plan for police restructuring. Their work was concluded on
22 December with the presentation of the Proposed Plan for the Implementation of
the Reform of Police Structures in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
12. In Steering Board proceedings, the Head of Mission promoted a number of
progressive solutions and suggestions for restructuring, many of which were
adopted by the Board. Nevertheless, the substance of the report is a genuine
domestic product, reflecting extensive deliberation and discussion among the Bosnia
and Herzegovina policing professionals. The plan was forwarded to the Minister of
Security on 27 December and the new Council of Ministers is expected to place this
issue on its agenda for discussion early in 2007. The completion of the plan is a
major achievement considering the technical and political obstacles encountered,
including the fact that the Republika Srpska attended the Steering Board only as an
observer.
13. Considering the fact that political decisions still need to be made on the police
reform and having in mind the considerable implementation period of this reform,
EUPM has continued to address the existing fragmentation in the system by
supporting cantons in the development of cantonal laws on police officials,
representing the country-wide harmonization of legislation regulating police powers
and the employment status of police officials. The Mission facilitated the
development of a model law, which as at 31 December has been enacted in 6 out of
the 10 cantons. As a next step, with the assistance of EUPM and the Office of the
High Representative, 26 complementary by-laws are being developed on internal
disciplinary procedure and external accountability mechanisms, rank allocations and
conditions for promotion, special police powers as well as police officials’ salary
calculation. Such laws already exist at the State and Federation levels. In parallel to
these efforts, EUPM is mentoring the drafting of laws on police officials for the
Republika Srpska and the Brcko District, which also require harmonization.
2.

Support in the fight against organized crime
Assisting in the planning and conduct of investigations
14. The EU Crime Strategy Group and its two subcommittees, the EU-European
Security and Defence Policy Targeting Board (chaired by EUPM since March 2006)
and the Policy Task Force, have been instrumental in the Mission’s taking the lead
role in the coordination of policing aspects of the European Security and Defence
Policy efforts against organized crime and have begun to assist local authorities in
planning and conducting major and organized crime investigations. EUPM activities
in this area are guided by the agreed principles and guidelines among the European
Union Special Representative/Office of the High Representative, EUPM and the
European Force (EUFOR). The end state of all European Security and Defence
Policy efforts is to pass over, with confidence, full ownership and responsibility for
the fight against organized crime to the local police.
15. EUFOR ceased providing planning support at the end of September.
Organized-crime-related planning support since 1 October has been provided only
by EUPM, in line with its mandate. Thus, the Mission has to endorse requests by
local police for operational support from EUFOR. Requests were limited to
technical capabilities, specialized EUFOR deployment for sensitive operational

07-25482

5

S/2007/118

measures, such as high-profile arrests, and the provision of additional criminal
intelligence.
16. In parallel, EUPM has produced a comprehensive organized crime situation
assessment to guide further Mission work in this field. On the basis of police
information the assessment has identified more than 20 significant organized
criminal groups active in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Through this work EUPM came
to realize that local police, including SIPA, are not yet in the position to develop a
comparably comprehensive assessment. EUPM is, therefore, uniquely placed to
assist the local authorities in their fight against organized crime.
17. Supporting the local police, especially SIPA, to develop towards a more
intelligence-led and thereby result-oriented approach, the advisory activity of the
Mission during the latter part of 2006 was refocused on criminal analysis and data
exchange among the fragmented Bosnia and Herzegovina police services. This is
necessary in order to prioritize investigations targeting some of the 20 criminal
groups. The Mission has been taking a number of important steps during this period
to support the police in this respect. EUPM has also actively pursued its role in
assisting in the planning and conduct of a number of individual police organized
crime investigations and operations.
18. EUPM has also raised concerns with the State Border Service on the planning
and conduct of operations, having noted over several months that some operations
being run by SBS units yield no significant results. Various operations lacked
reliable assessed intelligence, which hampered results in spite of large numbers of
resources being deployed. Following EUPM advice and assistance, smaller, more
intelligence-led operations are now being run with some recent notable results in the
joint SBS and Indirect Taxation Authority anti-cigarette-smuggling operations along
the southern border.
19. The EUPM/SIPA oversight of the reviews of nine high-profile murder
investigations from 1998 to 2006 has continued at a rapid pace. EUPM has
additionally assisted with key experts to help facilitate these complex organized
crime-related investigations. Five of the nine murders are now considered to be
cleared; a sixth case shows positive indications that it will shortly be cleared and a
seventh has been reopened recently. As a direct result several successful
prosecutions regarding murders, financial crime and racketeering are expected
shortly. Of equal importance are the links of those murders to influential organized
crime figures, which are being investigated.
Relations between police and prosecutors
20. The Criminal Justice Interface Unit continued to identify and address
deficiencies in the area of police and prosecutorial cooperation. Already some
significant results have been achieved, notably in regard to the reviews of nine highprofile murders (see para. 19).
21. The number of major unsolved crimes, possibly due to corruption,
incompetence and/or obstruction, is an indicator of the underdeveloped relations
between police and prosecutors at all levels. Among the identified weaknesses are
the failure of police and prosecutors to meet; parallel prosecution enquiries without
informing the police; lack of understanding among prosecutors of realistic measures
required in investigations and/or understanding of staffing implications for the

6

07-25482

S/2007/118

police; understaffing, in particular at the Bosnia and Herzegovina State level; and
crucially, a lack of investigative management capacity and culture. In addition,
investigations are held back by delayed prosecutorial approvals, while in some cases
there is unequal or arbitrary application of pre-trial custody provisions, where the
application of this investigative measure by the prosecution and the judiciary
seemingly depends on the suspect’s identity. Further, at entity level, coordination
and common standards are lacking.
22. EUPM encouraged and supported the State Prosecutor’s initiatives, although
limited, to play a coordinating role in dealing with some of the above-mentioned
concerns, by holding “working days” with police, prosecutors and ministerial
representatives. In November, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Chief Prosecutor and the
SIPA Director, supported by EUPM, organized a conference on the theme “Towards
effective criminal investigations within Bosnia and Herzegovina: improving the
cooperation between police and prosecutors” for chief prosecutors and high-ranking
police officials at all levels. Participants analysed circumstances in which criminal
investigations are currently being conducted, identified shortcomings in police and
prosecutor cooperation and proposed specific operational, procedural and legal
solutions. A Common [Bosnia and Herzegovina Prosecutor’s Office/SIPA]
Instruction on Cooperation was introduced that will serve as a model for the entity
and cantonal levels, while a pilot project, where prosecutorial representatives are
allocated to police bodies, was introduced for the State-level law enforcement
agencies. Police-prosecution relations have started to improve, but systematic
coordination processes have not yet been established because of the fragmented
criminal justice system structures. Nevertheless, the Mission has put forward
proposals on common cooperation instructions at entity and cantonal levels in line
with those signed in 2005 at the Bosnia and Herzegovina State level.
23. Working with partner agencies, including the United States International
Criminal Investigation Training Assistance Programme, EUPM has advised on
improvements in the legislative and regulatory framework for major and organized
crime investigations. Deficiencies in the criminal and criminal procedure codes
were highlighted and proposals for improvement were brought to the attention of the
competent bodies. EUPM will also continue this work with regard to legislative
changes required by the National Action Plan to Fight Organized Crime and
Corruption. EUPM also continued monitoring and advising on the development of
subsidiary legal acts to implement provisions of the criminal procedure code. With
regard to special investigative measures, EUPM advised on the introduction of
police administrative regulations regarding informant handling at the Bosnia and
Herzegovina State level to improve the interaction between prosecutors and police.
These State-level regulations may now serve as a model for entity and cantonal
police. EUPM will further promote subsidiary regulations for other special
investigative measures, including advice on the lawful interception of
telecommunications, and advise on the development of by-laws regulating storage
of evidence.
24. In September, EUPM and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Mission to Bosnia and Herzegovina strengthened the coordination
of their monitoring of the pre-trial and post-indictment aspects of the criminal
justice system. Upon provision of arrest information and referral of selected cases,
OSCE monitors pre-trial prosecution hearings and subsequent trial proceedings.
Deficiencies identified by OSCE are referred back to EUPM in order to allow the

07-25482

7

S/2007/118

Mission to mentor local police on the application of the criminal law provisions and
identify other deficiencies in police investigative practices. EUPM has registered
police complaints that there is lack of proper coordination with correctional bodies
in the post-sentencing phase of cases, which compromises effective control over
sentenced prisoners. This further highlights the need for a holistic criminal justice
system approach in supporting the fight against organized crime.
25. In November, as part of continuing efforts to integrate criminal justice system
monitoring, EUPM organized meetings with several police services and OSCE, in
order to assist OSCE in presenting a juvenile justice system monitoring project.
OSCE will be engaging with police, prosecutors, courts, social services and prison
services to assess the system by monitoring juvenile cases from arrest onwards, in
cooperation with EUPM. The police will provide their views, thus becoming
directly involved in this justice reform.
3.

Strengthening internal/external control, inspection and accountability
of the police
26. The question of police accountability is directly linked both to the police
reform and the fight against organized crime. EUPM has applied an inspection
methodology to various aspects of police accountability:
– Appointments of police commissioners and directors of police
– Involvement of police in crimes, including war crimes
– Corruption and fraud (mainly in traffic policing, which undermines confidence
in the police)
– Gender-related issues
– General misconduct.
The accountability mechanisms and the legal framework in Bosnia and Herzegovina
remain insufficient. Because of possible political implications of inspections, the
High Representative/EU Special Representative has been regularly informed and
political guidance is sought as appropriate. EUPM was given full and unimpeded
access to police facilities, personnel, information and files as well as to the police
chain of command at all levels.
27. On the basis of information from various sources, including public reports
passed to EUPM from personnel in field locations and media allegations, the
Mission identified areas for inspections. Suggestions for inspection were reviewed,
and in certain cases it was deemed that the appropriate course of action was referral
to the local police internal control functions, as opposed to direct Mission
involvement, thus encouraging ownership and accountability. Where the Mission
has carried out inspections through its two dedicated inspection teams and EUPM
resources in locations, its aim has been to encourage the police to identify
irregularities and act upon them. EUPM has then continued to oversee the work of
internal control functions, or prosecutors as cases are passed to them, to ensure that
the cases progress through to a final, conclusive and appropriate result.
28. The key inspection of this period continued to be the evaluation of and
investigation into allegations of police corruption and malpractice in the Canton 7
(Mostar) Ministry of the Interior following Operation Granit, which resulted in the

8

07-25482

S/2007/118

local police commissioner being identified as one of the major suspects for
corruption and other offences. It was also found that no disciplinary action had been
taken against him by the responsible bodies. In July, EUPM raised its concerns
publicly and requested that the local police commissioner suspend two other
officials implicated in the investigation and step down from his post. Following the
expiration of his mandate in September 2006, the commissioner left his position, but
the two other officials remained in place. EUPM consulted with the highest level of
the police organization but as the response of the various authorities was not
sufficient, EUPM sent comprehensive information on the case to the High
Representative/EU Special Representative for consideration. In this context, EUPM
has also observed a serious lack of action by the Prosecutor and identified major
procedural mistakes. EUPM is dealing with the case in coordination with the High
Representative/EU Special Representative to accelerate the work of the Prosecutor
in order to conclude the investigation.
29. Operation Granit has been a prime example of the complex interplay of
various factors affecting the proper functioning of the police service, including
dysfunctional police internal and political oversight mechanisms as well as policeprosecution relations. This all results in serious accountability deficits and
undermines the confidence of the public. A proper follow-up (with disciplinary and
judicial consequence, where relevant) of inspected cases remains painstakingly slow
and politicized in high-profile cases such as Mostar. Nevertheless, inspections have
proved an important tool to learn lessons for the police restructuring process, to
identify loopholes which can be utilized by criminal groups and also to help in
restoring public confidence in the police.
30. EUPM has been mentoring the Republika Srpska Ministry of the Interior on a
range of disciplinary and integrity-related legal issues. The Ministry is now clearly
seen to be tackling corruption more robustly. In December, a Chief Disciplinary
Prosecutor was appointed, a position created following the recommendation of
EUPM. The Mission had identified a clear lack of accountability of disciplinary
prosecutors at the lower level, with no one at Ministry level coordinating activity or
providing leadership in this area. This should improve the overall effectiveness of
all disciplinary prosecutions undertaken within this Ministry.
31. In November, following persistent pressure from EUPM, the long-awaited
State-level Police Board appointments were finally approved by the Council of
Ministers. The Board will act as a second-instance disciplinary and administrative
body responsible for reviewing all decisions by State-level law enforcement
agencies pertaining to the status of police officials in accordance with the Law on
Police Officials and its by-laws and will fill a gap in the disciplinary and
administrative framework for the police.
32. Independent selection and review boards, mandated by parliaments, are
responsible for the selection of directors of police and police commissioners in the
entities and cantons and can review their performance. The legally prescribed
mandate of the board members, as well as the mandate of police officials selected by
them, is four years. EUPM is closely monitoring the ongoing process of reselection
and appointment of new board members and police commissioners at all levels
following the expiration of their original mandates late in 2006.
33. The reselection process within the system has been far from satisfactory.
Despite clear legal provisions designed to prevent political interference in the

07-25482

9

S/2007/118

process, political rather than professional considerations played a significant role in
the selection of police commissioners as well as board members. This situation has
been exacerbated by the general elections held in the autumn. Shortcomings in the
present system have necessitated repeated EUPM assistance in interpreting relevant
legal texts governing this area. However, while far from perfect, the independent
selection and review boards system has proved its merits in limiting political
interference. EUPM will thus continue to assist domestic authorities in developing
short-term solutions and advocate for the drafting of a comprehensive legal regime
for the reformed police in Bosnia and Herzegovina that would provide for a more
efficient and professional selection process.
4.

Horizontal tasks
Follow-on finalization and implementation of EUPM projects
34. EUPM continued to follow the implementation and finalization of projects
launched during 2003-2005 in close cooperation with the Bosnia and Herzegovina
police experts co-located within the department. The reliability and sustainability of
these projects required a minimum of further engagement, in the form of inspections
of the programmes or projects to ensure implementation of the obligations and the
recommendations from the earlier project evaluation reports. The inspections started
in the summer and many projects, especially those concerning organized crime,
SIPA and the Republika Srpska, reached completion in the last period.
35. As an outcome of the comprehensive review in the spring, EUPM was
encouraged to play a coordinating role vis-à-vis the donor community in Sarajevo,
given that the development of capacity and confidence of local police in fighting
organized crime requires further technical assistance, as well as provision of
equipment. Accordingly, the Mission has undertaken a continuous mapping of
activities and strategies of the bilateral donors in support of Bosnia and Herzegovina
law enforcement agencies, in close coordination with the European Commission. In
November, EUPM hosted a conference on coordination of donors in the field of
policing, as a follow-on to the donor coordination initiative of April, attended by
embassy representatives and international organizations. This was used as a
practical opportunity to address donors with the needs of SIPA and SBS through the
relevant presentations given by EUPM and the EU Coordination Office. Lastly,
substantial amounts of equipment have been donated to the police over the last
years. EUPM has initiated a quality assessment to inform the main donors, namely,
the European Commission and the International Criminal Investigation Training
Assistance Programme, about the state and the use of this material.
36. In November, a memorandum of understanding relating to the establishment of
a new telecommunication system for Bosnia and Herzegovina law enforcement
agencies was signed by all police services and other judicial and relevant bodies.
The system will improve communication and coordination between the law
enforcement agencies and act as a technical support in the implementation of
operational measures. EUPM gave considerable legal and technical advice in
drawing up the agreement and played a coordinating role in facilitating the
participation of all law enforcement agencies and in securing European Commission
funding.

10

07-25482

S/2007/118

Further support for the development of the State Investigation and Protection
Agency and the State Border Service
37. The second target end-state for EUPM is the full establishment of the Statelevel agencies and preparing SIPA and SBS to be fully operational in order to meet
the domestic and international commitments of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Both
agencies are in the critical stages of development. EUPM has invested considerable
effort in assisting in their institutional and capacity development and continued to
advise on improvements to their internal legal, administrative and budget
frameworks. This has also involved EUPM input to the joint working group of the
two agencies on the Law on Police Officials, which has continued in this period to
amend and refine the State-level Law as it affects these two agencies.
38. Specifically regarding SIPA self-sustainability, EUPM has continued to
monitor the newly established case management system, which SIPA is using
effectively. EUPM has also made tangible progress in the build-up of permanent
headquarters and regional offices. Through the relevant departments of the Office of
the High Representative/EU Special Representative, EUPM lobbied to ensure that
minimum required financial resources are earmarked to start the construction of the
permanent premises within the budgetary year 2007. EUPM has also advised on the
relocation of SIPA regional offices to larger and non-rented premises, to allow for
staff expansion and better sustainability.
39. Following the Mission’s advice, in November, SIPA started training its first
class of cadets, made up of university graduates qualified in specific areas.
Previously, SIPA staff were recruited only from the pool of active police officials
working in other law enforcement agencies. The cadet training will help SIPA to
hire younger, better qualified, professionally selected and trained officers who can
provide expertise in specialized areas such as organized crime and terrorism. This
process is being closely monitored by EUPM. Also following EUPM advice, SIPA
has started to internally review all legal regulations to identify those which limit
effective decision-making by management regarding personnel, promotions,
transfers, ranking and the like, in order to improve the functioning and to help
ensure its stability and self-sustainability. EUPM has also encouraged SIPA to focus
on strategic issues concerning the fight against organized crime and accordingly to
strengthen its capacities and support functions to successfully satisfy these needs.
40. One of the main successes in the development of support functions in this
period is the full establishment of the SIPA Special Support Unit, which celebrated
its first anniversary in September 2006. In only a few months and under the full
monitoring of EUPM, the three teams of the Special Support Unit have carried out a
number of operations and arrests, mostly at the request of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Prosecutor’s Office. It is the Mission’s assessment that the unit is now
fully operational and has the capacity to perform all its required tasks. EUPM has
also assisted the development of other support functions in SIPA in the reporting
period, including the development of the computer forensics system, enhancing the
capacity of the SIPA Operations Centre and the technical and mobile surveillance
capacities.
41. With regard to the State Border Service, EUPM has assisted and monitored the
creation of the 2007 annual workplan and has continued to mentor the agency in
improving its criminal investigation capacity. This included advising on the
development of a new instruction on informant handling and continued support to

07-25482

11

S/2007/118

the already-established case management system. Assistance was also provided to
the implementation of the integrated border management strategy and facilitation of
the establishment of the SBS and Indirect Tax Authority working group, mandated
to make proposals for and guide the implementation of the agreement on
cooperation with the Tax Authority.
42. To contribute to its self-sustainability, SBS made a great effort to produce, in
cooperation with EUPM, a new recruitment policy. This will result in the
incorporation of 100 new officers and 20 inspectors by the end of June 2007. The
distribution of the new staff will be in full accordance with the national balance
principle, with the aim of reaching the figure of 10 per cent female officers.
Accordingly, during November, EUPM intensively monitored and advised on the
activities and preparations of the SBS Central Selection Commission, regarding
3,320 candidates for these new positions. Following the pre-selection, 2,351
candidates were called for examination by the five subcommissions at different
locations. EUPM monitored the process and assessed that the tests were conducted
in a professional manner.
Police certification
43. Police decertification remains an issue of concern for the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities, who have requested a review mechanism. The High
Representative/EU Special Representative wrote to the President of the Security
Council in August asking the United Nations to determine such a mechanism and
continued to explore other options during the last six months. In December, the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers adopted a decision on the
establishment of a national commission for the revision of individual cases of
decertified police officers who had initiated legal proceedings before courts in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Given the implications of such a decision, notably with
regard to relevant Security Council resolutions and annex 11 of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace, the High Representative/EU Special
Representative called upon the Council of Minsters to contact the Security Council
and the United Nations Secretariat as a matter of urgency.

12

07-25482
