UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/37
30 August 1996
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3693rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 30 August 1996 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "Demining in
the context of United Nations peace-keeping", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has reviewed the issue of demining in the
context of United Nations peace-keeping and has given careful consideration
to the views expressed in the open debate under the item ’Demining in the
context of United Nations peace-keeping’ in its 3689th meeting on
15 August 1996.
"The Security Council, bearing in mind its responsibilities with
regard to United Nations peace-keeping, notes that the widespread
indiscriminate use of anti-personnel mines in areas of United Nations
peace-keeping operations poses serious impediments to such operations and
to the safety of United Nations and other international personnel. Against
this background, the Council states the following:
"1. Operational demining should be, wherever appropriate, an
important element and an integral part of peace-keeping mandates. This
will facilitate the implementation of those mandates and better enable the
Secretary-General to allocate appropriate resources towards achieving their
objectives.
"2. The early deployment of mine clearance units will often be
important to the effectiveness of a peace-keeping operation. The Council
encourages the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations to examine
options for achieving such early deployment. It also encourages Member
States to examine whether and in what form they might be able to help in
this respect.
"3. The tasks of, on the one hand, operational mine clearance during
peace-keeping operations, which is the responsibility of the Department of
Peace-keeping Operations, and, on the other hand, longer-term humanitarian
mine-clearance activities, which fall under the responsibility of the
Department of Humanitarian Affairs, are different. The Council is,

96-22511 (E)

300896

/...

S/PRST/1996/37
English
Page 2

however, aware of linkages and complementarities between different elements
of conflict resolution as well as of the need to ensure a smooth transition
from demining as a peace-keeping requirement to demining as part of peacebuilding in a follow-up phase.
"The Security Council, thus, is of the opinion that coordination and a
clear delineation of responsibilities between the two Departments as well
as with regard to other United Nations agencies dealing with demining could
be further improved so as to avoid duplication of effort and to guarantee a
coherent and integrated approach towards the whole range of short and longterm demining needs. With particular reference to paragraph 51 of the
report of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations of 7 May 1996
(A/51/130), the Council requests the Secretary-General to intensify his
efforts aiming in this direction.
"The Security Council emphasizes the importance of coordination by the
United Nations of activities related to mine clearance in the context of
United Nations peace-keeping, including those by regional organizations, in
particular in the areas of information and training.
"4. The primary responsibility for demining in the context of United
Nations peace-keeping lies with parties responsible for the laying of
mines. Parties to a conflict must desist from further mine laying once a
peace-keeping operation is established. They are also obliged to
facilitate humanitarian and military demining efforts by providing detailed
maps and other relevant information on those mines that have already been
laid by them and by contributing financially or otherwise to their removal.
"5. The international community should intensify, multilaterally or
bilaterally, its efforts in assisting those parties to a conflict which
have shown their readiness to cooperate with mine clearance, mine awareness
and training programmes in the context of United Nations peace-keeping
operations. In this connection, the Council welcomes the establishment by
the Secretary-General of a United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Demining
as a necessary and timely mechanism to channel funding to humanitarian
demining operations.
"The Security Council appeals to all States to contribute to this Fund
as well as to other voluntary funds set up by the Secretary-General for
certain peace-keeping operations which contain demining elements.
"6. Demining activities should, as much as possible, make use of the
appropriate modern mine-clearance technologies and specialized equipment
and focus on the creation and strengthening of local demining capabilities;
training programmes should attach particular importance to this aspect.
Where this would be of benefit to the operational effectiveness of a peacekeeping operation, consideration should also be given to including
provision for the training of a local demining capability in mandates of
peace-keeping operations.
"The Security Council encourages the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, given its responsibility for a comprehensive review of
/...

S/PRST/1996/37
English
Page 3

the whole question of peace-keeping operations, to continue and intensify
its considerations of the operational demining aspects of peace-keeping
operations. These considerations might include an analysis of mineclearance experience in previous peace-keeping operations.
"The Security Council is of the view that the elements outlined in
this statement are not exhaustive. The Council will thus keep this issue
under review in the context of the establishment of peace-keeping
operations and the consideration of specific mandates."

-----
