S/PV.7441

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7441st meeting

Tuesday, 12 May 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Jakubonė . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lithuania)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Stehelin
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Adamu
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Ms. Mulvein
Mr. Simonoff
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Libya

15-13846 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1513846*

S/PV.7441

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

Government of Libya and my Office. Together, we
remain committed to bringing fair and impartial justice
to Libya’s victims.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to once again engage with the Security
Council on my Office of the Prosecutor’s ninth report
on Libya.
My Office welcomes the ongoing dialogue with
Council members, and in particular with Rome Statute
States parties that continue, in ways large and small,
to bring justice to the Council’s table as a paramount
issue. It is those efforts that can tangibly demonstrate
that justice and peace are indeed complementary and
can go hand-in-hand. My Office supports those efforts
as an essential tool for facilitating the work of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in the halls of the
United Nations and beyond.
To that end, I extend my sincere gratitude to the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
in particular its Human Rights, Transitional Justice and
Rule of Law Division. The Mission’s support for my
Office in its ongoing assessment of the admissibility
of the Abdullah Al-Senussi case has been essential. In
particular, I would like to acknowledge with thanks
the notable commitment of the United Nations Special
Representative and UNSMIL Head, Mr. Bernardino
León. My Office looks forward to continuing to work
closely with the Mission in the coming weeks and
months.
Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to
the Libyan Prosecutor-General’s Office for its ongoing
professional engagement in implementing the November
2013 memorandum of understanding between the

2/16

12/05/2015

The deteriorating security situation in Libya
continues to be a matter of great concern not only
for my Office, but for the Council and the broader
international community. Innocent civilians continue
to bear the brunt of the deteriorating security situation.
The frequency and brutality of assassinations, terrorist
attacks and threats to media workers and human rights
defenders — and in particular against women — are
especially troubling. Libya continues to be split, with
two Governments vying for legitimacy.
The international community must be more
proactive in exploring solutions in order to tangibly help
Libya restore stability and strengthen accountability
for Rome Statute crimes. To that end, my Office has
encouraged the establishment of an international
contact group on justice issues through which material,
legal and other support could be provided to Libya.
My Office is modestly contributing to those efforts
by fostering cooperative efforts between investigative
authorities in Libya and other countries. One proposal
I submit before the Council is for a willing State with
substantial experience in transitional justice to consider
partnering with Libya to explore more concretely how
such a contact group might be brought to life in the near
future.
It is crucial for such efforts to include local actors
so that their voices and views on achieving justice are
amplified and heard. My Office appreciates the efforts
that the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, as
well as the Permanent Mission of Libya to the United
Nations, have made to that end, and looks forward to
continuing such efforts with those and other partners
as we forge ahead in finding solutions to the crisis in
Libya.
As I suggested in my previous statements, the
Libyan authorities should facilitate a visit to New
York by representatives from the local councils of
Misrata and Tawergha to meet and engage with Council
members. My Office agrees with those who believe
that facilitating a solution for the Tawergha issue will
have symbolic importance and resonance in Libya.
While it has not yet been possible to organize such a
visit, I believe that we can achieve results before our
next briefing, in November, with the help of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, the Libyan Mission
to the United Nations, the Libyan focal point to the ICC
15-13846

12/05/2015

The situation in Libya

and other initiatives engaging with Libyan local leaders
and civil society to promote justice.
I have taken note of the Council’s resolution 2174
(2014), of 27 August 2014, and resolution 2213 (2015),
of 27 March 2015. Both make reference to the referral of
the Libyan situation to the ICC in resolution 1970 (2011)
and stress the importance of the Libyan Government’s
full cooperation with the ICC and with my Office.
Like the Council, we deplore the increasing violence in
Libya, and we are deeply concerned at the impact of the
violence on Libya’s civilian population and institutions.
Accountability for those responsible for violations or
abuses of human rights or violations of international
humanitarian law is essential.
I have also taken note of the Council’s call for
accountability for the use of violence against civilians
and civilian institutions by groups purportedly
claiming allegiance to the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL), or Daesh. My Office believes that
ICC jurisdiction over Libya prima facie extends to
such alleged crimes. I recall, however, the principle
that States, in the first instance, bear the primary
responsibility to investigate and prosecute their nationals
who have joined forces with ISIL and are alleged to be
committing Rome Statute crimes. Similarly, my Office
continues to be concerned about alleged indiscriminate
attacks in heavily populated areas by both Operation
Libyan Dawn and Operation Dignity forces, resulting
in civilian casualties, in particular in Benghazi, Tripoli,
Warshefana and in the Nafusa Mountains. I reiterate my
call to all parties involved in the conflict to refrain from
targeting civilians or civilian objects, or committing
any other crimes that may fall within ICC jurisdiction,
and to be vigilant and actively take all the necessary
measures to prevent the commission of such crimes.
My Office is actively considering the investigation and
prosecution of further cases and will not hesitate to take
such action as may be needed to contribute to ending
impunity in Libya or to contribute to such action by
other relevant prosecutorial authorities.
Although the Libyan Prosecutor-General’s office in
particular has engaged in fruitful cooperation with my
Office, I must reiterate that there are specific areas in
which the Government of Libya is in non-compliance
with the Court’s orders. In particular, I recall that, on
10 December 2014, the Pre-Trial Chamber found that
Libya had failed to comply with the Chamber’s requests
to surrender Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the Court, to
return to his defence the originals of the documents

S/PV.7441

seized in Zintan by the Libyan authorities from the
former defence counsel for Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and to destroy any copies thereof.
The Pre-Trial Chamber decided to refer the matter
of Libya’s non-compliance to the Council in accordance
with regulation 109 (4) of the regulations of the Court.
The Office notes that the Council referred to that
decision in resolution 2213 (2015). The Office continues
to press Libyan authorities to comply and to consult
with the Court in order to resolve any problems that
may impede or prevent the execution of the requests.
The Council is encouraged to do the same.
The Rome Statute provides for such consultation.
In the light of the continuing cooperation that my
Office receives from the Prosecutor-General’s Office,
the importance of constructive consultations to address
problems that may impede or prevent the execution
of those requests is even greater. My Office will do
whatever it can to encourage and facilitate those
consultations, with the goal of ensuring Libya’s full
cooperation with the Court.
In relation to the case of Abdullah Al-Senussi,
the Office stated in its last report to the Council that
no decision had been taken at the time to submit a
request for review under article 19 (10) of the Rome
Statute. As indicated, the Office had requested from
Libya information on the national proceedings against
Mr. Al-Senussi and had taken steps to access data and
analysis from independent trial-monitoring sources.
The Office has since received information from
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya on the
domestic proceedings, as well as from the Libyan
Prosecutor-General’s Office and from independent
civil society members. Based on that information and
on an internal analysis of available video recordings
of selected trial sessions received from United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, the Office has concluded
that it is not in possession of new facts that would
fully satisfy it that the basis on which the case against
Mr. Al-Senussi had previously been found inadmissible
before the ICC has been negated. This position is taken
on the basis of information currently available to the
Office and is subject to change should we receive further
reliable information that would warrant a reassessment
of the finding. The Office will continue to monitor the
situation in Libya and the domestic proceedings against
Mr. Al-Senussi.

15-138463/16

S/PV.7441

The situation in Libya

In conclusion, I will simply reiterate that there
is more that we can and must all do to ensure peace
and justice in Libya. I will do my part in the effort to
end impunity, and I look forward to working with our
partners in Libya and among Libyan civil society and
grass-roots leadership, at the United Nations, among
the Rome Statute States parties and with the Libyan
Mission to the United Nations to bring those plans to
fruition.
The President: I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing
today and for introducing the ninth report submitted to
the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
Jordan stresses its continued support for the
International Criminal Court based on our conviction
in the principles on which it was founded. The Court is
a main pillar for the promotion of criminal justice, for
putting an end to impunity for the perpetrators of the
worst crimes and for the maintenance of international
peace and security and the rule of law.
Jordan welcomes the continuing consultations
between the Libyan Government and the Office
of the Prosecutor of the ICC, as noted in the report.
Jordan stresses that the Court’s success in achieving
its objectives mainly relies on consultations and the
building of bridges of mutual cooperation. In that regard,
we would like to call upon the Libyan Government to
cooperate with the Court and to provide all possible
material and logistical support to enable the Court to
gather evidence, investigate incidents, and coordinate
and exchange information on the arrest and surrender
of individuals.
We would also like to highlight our appreciation
of the huge challenges that face Libya today. It is
important that Libya continues to work to establish
the rule of law and to ensure the investigation of all
criminal incidents for all crimes, without exception, in
accordance with international judicial criteria and with
the goal of establishing justice. That is particularly
necessary since the number of displaced persons and
asylum seekers has continued to increase due to the
barbaric practices of murder, kidnapping, torture and

4/16

12/05/2015

arbitrary arrests, which all fall within the competence
of the Court.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize the
importance of establishing criminal justice as a
main pillar of stability in Libya. We also stress the
need to respect the unity, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Libya, as well
as its commitment to comprehensive dialogue, to the
denunciation of violence and to support for the political
process. We underscore the importance of providing full
support to Libya’s legitimate constitutional institutions
and putting an end to all hostilities on Libyan territory.
We also stress the necessity of the efforts of all Libyans
in enabling the Libyan State to restore control over its
entire territory and continue the democratic transition
and political process.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda for her briefing and for presenting the ninth
report on the implementation of resolution 1970 (2011).
We commend and encourage the work of her team in a
difficult environment, characterized by the continuing
deterioration of the political and security situation in
Libya. The progress achieved in the cooperation between
the Libyan authorities and the International Criminal
Court (ICC) is a positive sign and a prerequisite for the
implementation of the memorandum of understanding,
as well as the ongoing judicial cooperation.
We are deeply concerned by the information
contained in the report of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(A/HRC/28/51) presented at the twenty-eighth session
of the Human Rights Council in March, on the human
rights situation in Libya. The report documents cases
of indiscriminate shelling, violations of international
humanitarian law, summary executions, abductions and
torture and attacks against the justice system, which is
no longer functioning in most parts of the country.
Many of the recent violations and abuses of human
rights fall under the jurisdiction of the ICC, and we
support the investigations carried out by the Court. We
also support the Human Rights Council resolution of
27 March (A/HRC/RES/28/30), on technical assistance
and capacity-building in Libya, which also requests
the High Commissioner to urgently dispatch a mission
to investigate violations and abuses of international
human rights law committed in Libya. It is clear
that only peace and stability in Libya will permit the
proper functioning of judicial institutions and holding

15-13846

12/05/2015

The situation in Libya

accountable criminals and violators of international
human rights law.
We reiterate our support for the efforts of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bernardino
León to achieve a political solution to the crisis through
an inclusive dialogue. We urge all of the Libyan parties
to the crisis to accept an immediate and comprehensive
ceasefire, so as to allow the political process to move
forward constitutively.
In conclusion, we would like to express Angola’s
support for the implementation of resolutions 2213
(2015) and 2214 (2015), in particular the measures
to address threats to peace and security in Libya, as
the country’s ability to face future challenges will
ultimately depend upon a political settlement and
stability.
Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her briefing.
China is deeply concerned about the continuing
deterioration of the situation in Libya. The most
pressing task now is for the concerned parties in Libya
to put national interests and the interests of their people
first, reject violence, take an active part in a United
Nations-led inclusive political dialogue and resolve
their differences through negotiation and consultation.
They must establish a national unity Government and
achieve a political settlement that takes into account
Libyan realities and the concerns of all of the parties,
with the aim of restoring stability and security in the
country. That is the precondition and the basis for
achieving judicial justice in Libya.
China’s position regarding the International
Criminal Court is consistent and remains unchanged.
Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): I thank
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for her briefing and efforts to promote accountability
for atrocity crimes in Libya.
As we have heard, since the Prosecutor last
briefed the Security Council on Libya in November
(see S/PV.7306), the conflict has persisted, despite the
ongoing United Nations-facilitated political dialogue,
and has contributed to a disintegration of the rule of
law, thus paralyzing the current Government’s efforts
to tackle human rights problems.
As the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
recently stated, armed groups across political, tribal,
regional and ideological divides have shown disregard

S/PV.7441

for civilian life. The Prosecutor confirmed that the
absence of stability and the rule of law has significant
consequences for the work of the ICC. Many of the
individuals and institutions with the most critical
roles to play in exposing and preventing violence
against civilians, including journalists, human rights
defenders, judges and prosecutors, female activists
and the country’s human rights commission, have
been singled out for intimidation and brutal violence
for simply attempting to provide key services to the
Libyan people. Other murders, such as the killing of
prominent human rights defender Salwa Bugaighis,
last June on the day of national elections, have a clear
political purpose, even as it has been impossible to
identify those responsible. The ongoing conflict has
ravaged Libya’s domestic justice institutions, which
are essential to protect civilians and which play a key
role in advancing respect for human rights. Escalating
violence between Libyan political rivals make Libya,
its citizens and its resources vulnerable to exploitation
by violent extremists. Sexual violence also remains an
issue of serious concern, as survivors struggle to access
critical services and as those who work to deliver them
face intimidation. All of those abuses highlight the
stakes of the conflict and the urgent need to develop
the strong institutions that Libya needs to protect its
people.
The critical first step towards resolving the current
crisis and restoring the rule of law and the protection
of human rights, is the formation of a national unity
Government through the United Nations-facilitated
political dialogue. There can be no military solution.
All parties should cease hostilities and work to create
an environment conductive to inclusive dialogue.
We fully support the efforts of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Bernardino León, who will
convene the next round of talks shortly. We urge the
parties to seize this opportunity to finalize agreements
on the formation of a national unity Government and
arrangements for a comprehensive ceasefire before the
holy month of Ramadan begins.
We call on all Libyan actors to take steps to ensure
due process for detainees. That includes not only
releasing any individuals held in unlawful detention,
but also planning for the means to transfer detainees to
State custody and rebuilding the judiciary’s capacity to
bring cases to trial.
We welcome the decision by the Human Rights
Council at its March session to request that the Office

15-138465/16

S/PV.7441

The situation in Libya

of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights dispatch a fact-finding mission to investigate
violations and abuses committed in Libya since the
beginning of 2014. We welcome the Prosecutor’s
continuing calls on the parties to refrain from
unlawfully targeting civilians, or, more generally, from
committing atrocity crimes.
With respect to the finding of non-cooperation that
the ICC transmitted to the Council, we welcome the
continuing cooperation between the Libyan authorities
and the Prosecutor’s Office to further implement the
memorandum of understanding concluded between
Libya and the ICC in November 2013, on burdensharing regarding the investigation and prosecution of
former officials of the Al-Qadhafi regime.
At the same time, we reiterate our support of
the Council’s recent call for Libyan authorities to
fulfil their obligation to cooperate with the ICC. We
encourage the Libyan authorities to engage with
the Court and the Council as appropriate to work to
overcome implementation obstacles. We look forward
to continuing to work with the other members of the
Council, the organs of the ICC and all others that have a
contribution to make in bringing this conflict to an end
and restoring the rights of the Libyan people.
Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Prosecutor for her latest report on Libya and
for her briefing today.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the ongoing conflict in Libya. The situation
remains fragile and the fighting has continued. While
we welcome the progress that has been made in the
United Nations-led Libyan political dialogue, the
United Kingdom condemns those on both sides who
continue to use violence to attempt to achieve their
political goals. Both sides in Libya need to demonstrate
control over their armed forces in order to implement
the ceasefire needed.
There can be no military solution to the current
crisis in Libya. We urge those taking part in the United
Nations talks to reach agreement on a national unity
Government and a ceasefire as quickly as possible. We
reiterate our support for resolutions 2213 (2015) and
2214 (2015) and the strong resolution on Libya that was
adopted by consensus at the United Nations Human
Rights Council on 27 March (A/HRC/RES/28/30).
The United Kingdom strongly shares the
Prosecutor’s concerns about grave crimes committed
6/16

12/05/2015

by armed groups and militias in Libya. As highlighted
in the Prosecutor’s briefing, the ongoing violence and
instability have allowed extremists, including those
purportedly claiming allegiance to the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, to emerge. We strongly condemn
their savage and cowardly attacks.
The United Kingdom is particularly concerned
by reports that indiscriminate gunfire, artillery
and air strikes have killed and injured civilians and
damaged civilian infrastructure, including schools and
hospitals. Civilians on both sides of the conflict have
been deliberately intimidated and targeted, including
the forcibly displaced Tawergha tribe. Human rights
defenders, social activists, journalists and the judiciary
have all been intimidated, abducted or murdered. We
support the Prosecutor’s call to all parties in the conflict
to refrain from targeting civilians or civilian objects.
We join the Prosecutor in urging all parties to refrain
from committing atrocities and to take active measures
to prevent the commission of such crimes.
The treatment of detainees in Libya also remains
deeply concerning. In April 2014, the United Nations
Special Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) reported that
10,000 people were being held in detention. UNSMIL
cited ongoing reports of torture and deaths in custody,
with perpetrators including judicial police and militia
groups. Reports indicate that detentions without
trial and arbitrary arrests incresed as the political
and security crisis worsened in 2014. In some areas,
including Derna and Benghazi, and particularly
when dealing with cases concerning conflict-related
detainees, judges, prosecutors and judicial police were
intimidated, detained or assassinated. We call on the
Libyan authorities to ensure due process and fair trial
rights for all detainees.
We welcome the fact that the Prosecutor and her
Office continue to receive cooperation from the Libyan
Prosecutor-General’s Office. The United Kingdom
wishes to underline the importance of continuing
judicial cooperation between the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Libyan authorities in order to tackle
impunity for atrocities. We thank the Prosecutor for her
briefing on the cases against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi. We note that her Office will
continue to monitor the situation in Libya and its impact
upon the domestic proceedings against Mr. Al-Senussi.
With regard to the case against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi, the United Kingdom recalls that in March
the Council adopted resolution 2213 (2015), which
15-13846

12/05/2015

The situation in Libya

reiterates that Libya is obliged to cooperate fully
with, and provide any necessary assistance to, the
ICC and the Prosecutor. We note the decision of the
ICC Pre-Trial Chamber of 10 December 2014, which
found that Libya had failed to comply with requests
for cooperation by the ICC, including the request to
surrender Mr. Al-Qadhafi. The United Kingdom calls
on Libya to surrender Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to
the ICC and to consult with the Court to address any
problems that might impede his transfer to The Hague.
The United Kingdom urges the Libyan Government
to cooperate fully with the ICC as part of efforts
to combat impunity for the crimes that have been
committed and continue to be committed in Libya.
Libya’s future should be built upon a firm foundation
that protects and promotes human rights for all. In order
to build sustainable peace, it is necessary to tackle
impunity for atrocities. Perpetrators of war crimes and
crimes against humanity must be held to account for
their actions. The Libyan people deserve to see justice.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I appreciate the presence of Ms. Bensouda
here today, as well as the introduction of her report.
We must recall that, for the second time in its
history, on 26 February 2011, the Security Council
decided to refer a situation — specifically the situation
in Libya since 15 February 2011 — to the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) (see S/PV.6491).
Referrals by the Council to the ICC constitute an
acknowledgement of the importance attached by the
Council to justice, accountability and the fight against
impunity. We all know that international peace and
security are based on respect for the rule of law. By
referring this case — and let us not forget that we did so
unanimously — the Council rose to the challenge of the
circumstances in the fight against impunity and stood
in favour of justice. Nevertheless, a single referral is
not enough. Libya needs the Council’s support through
consistent and appropriate follow-up.
I have three issues to address; first, the situation
in Libya; secondly, the state of cooperation between
Libya and the Court; and, thirdly, I will make some
remarks and pose a question regarding a proposal made
by Ms. Bensouda.
With regard to the situation in Libya, we cannot
help but express our deep concern at the information we
have on the situation. The ninth report of the Prosecutor,
the report of the Secretary-General dated 26 February

S/PV.7441

(S/2015/144) and the Human Rights Council’s resolution
of 27 March (A/HRC/RES/28/30) all sadly attest to the
deteriorating situation in Libya, where serious violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
continue to take place. Spain unequivocally condemns
attacks perpetrated by all parties to the conflict
against the population and civilian targets, including
arbitrary detentions, torture, extrajudicial executions,
assassinations, abductions, the denial of due process,
and the persecution of immigrants, women activists,
journalists, human rights defenders, attorneys, judges
and prosecutors. We condemn just as forcefully the
barbaric acts committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, or Daesh, and the groups that have sworn
allegiance to them, acts that, as the Prosecutor has
informed us, may constitute crimes under the Court’s
jurisdiction. We should also make clear how worried
we are about the extremely high numbers of displaced
persons, such as the residents of Tawergha.
Spain believes strongly that there can be no military
solution to the crisis in Libya, and only a political
settlement between the parties can ensure the stability
the country needs. We reiterate our call to the parties
to refrain from violence and to participate in a spirit
of reconciliation in dialogue under the auspices of the
United Nations, with a view to forming a Government of
national unity. Once again, we support those efforts and
those of Mr. Bernardino León, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, to agree on a Government of
national unity capable of ensuring respect for the rule
of law, justice, freedom and the rights of all citizens.
Whatever happens, all the parties should understand
that they will be held accountable for their actions.
Concerning the relations between Libya and the
International Criminal Court, we were pleased to hear
about the constructive dialogue being held between the
Prosecutor and the Libyan authorities, including as it
relates to the implementation of the memorandum of
understanding. We welcome the update on the cases
being brought against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi. With regard to Al-Qadhafi,
we note the decision of Pre-Trial Chamber I, which
found Libya non-compliant with the Court’s request
to surrender Al-Qadhafi and return seized documents
to his defence counsel. In our view, Libya must fulfil
its obligations to the ICC and the Council, whose
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 2174 (2014) must be abided
by. Full cooperation with the Court is essential. The
Government of Libya must understand that there can
be no end to the violence if there is no end to impunity.

15-138467/16

S/PV.7441

The situation in Libya

We support the Court’s efforts to begin consultations
immediately concerning the Government of Libya’s
failure to cooperate.
With regard to the second case, that of Abdullah
Al-Senussi, Spain understands that a decision on
the inadmissibility of the case amounts to a vote of
confidence in the Libyan justice system. We view that
positively and hope it translates into the holding of a
fair trial with all the guarantees of due process, and we
await with interest any information from the Prosecutor
in that regard. Libya has frequently reiterated its
commitment to bringing justice to the victims, and for
that the Government should have the support of the
international community. In that regard, we believe
we should consider establishing a contact group on
justice capable of giving practical help to the Libyan
authorities and the judicial system. In other words, we
support Prosecutor Bensouda’s proposal to create such
a contact group, and I would like to know what her
views are on more specific details of its composition
and nature, and above all the kind of assistance it would
provide to the Libyan authorities.
In conclusion, I reiterate our gratitude for
Prosecutor Bensouda’s work and for the tireless efforts
of the International Criminal Court to deal with these
enormously difficult cases, prioritize justice and put an
end to impunity.
Mr. Stehelin (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her ninth report
and for her briefing, and to affirm France’s support
for the Prosecutor, and for the International Criminal
Court (ICC) as a whole.
France reaffirms its commitment to resolution
1970 (2011), which referred the situation in Libya to the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, thereby
saving a considerable, indeed incalculable, number of
human lives. The resolution also constitutes a symbol
of the Council’s support to an institution whose noble
mission is to ensure that, as the preamble to the Rome
Statute states, the most serious crimes of concern to
the international community as a whole do not go
unpunished.
A careful perusal of the Prosecutor’s ninth report
makes it clear that there are three ways in which the
Security Council should continue to work to ensure
that Libya, which is currently going through a period of
instability and uncertainty whose chief victims are the
Libyans themselves, can get back on the road to peace

8/16

12/05/2015

and justice. The first is by encouraging the Libyan
authorities to continue above all to cooperate with the
ICC. That cooperation is crucial to ending a long period
of impunity in Libya and enabling the Court to fulfil the
mandate entrusted to it by the Statute and the Council,
and it will help to build a judicial system in Libya that
respects the rule of law.
Acting in accordance with the Rome Statute and
resolution 1970 (2011), Libya has requested that Mr. Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Mr. Al-Senussi be tried
in Libya, based on the principle of complementarity.
The Court has jurisdiction to try Mr. Al-Qadhafi and
has requested that he be surrendered to it. However,
it found the Abdullah Al-Senussi case inadmissible,
and thus amenable to Libya’s demands. At this point,
the Prosecutor’s report believes that it would not be
useful for the Court to undertake a new investigation
of those decisions. Libya must comply with the judges’
decision on this key issue, as the Pre-Trial Chamber
recalled in its decision of 10 December 2014 and as the
Prosecutor’s report also emphasizes. France therefore
calls on Libya to continue its consultations with the
ICC in order to remove obstacles to implementing the
decision to surrender Mr. Al-Qadhafi to the Court.
France is pleased that in its resolution 2213
(2015), of 27 March, the Council heard the Court and
the Prosecutor’s message loud and clear, noting the
decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber dated 10 December
2014 and emphasizing strongly the importance of the
Libyan Government’s full cooperation with the ICC and
the Prosecutor. The Council also called on the Libyan
Government to cooperate fully with and provide any
necessary assistance to the International Criminal
Court and the Prosecutor as required by resolution 1970
(2011). We are pleased to note that, despite the instability
prevailing in Libya, the Office of the Prosecutor was
able to talk to its Libyan counterpart and implement
the memorandum of understanding signed in November
2013, on sharing tasks between the Court and the Libyan
authorities. France urges Libya to continue those efforts
to share information and cooperate.
The second task is to ensure that the multiple
crimes committed since 15 February 2011 do not
go unpunished. In that context, France would like to
highlight the section in the report that emphasizes that
crimes attributable to members of Daesh fall prima
facie within the jurisdiction of the Court on the basis
of resolution 1970 (2011). France, which recently
organized an open debate in the Security Council on

15-13846

12/05/2015

The situation in Libya

the situation of victims of ethnic and religious violence
in the Middle East (see S/PV.7419) and, along with
other members of the Council, urged for a referral to
the ICC, can only encourage the Prosecutor to continue
investigating such acts, some of which may constitute
war crimes or crimes against humanity.
The third and last step is to provide practical
support to the Libyan authorities, particularly in
the area of justice and rebuilding the rule of law. On
this last point, the Council remains convinced that
the only solution to the Libyan crisis is a political
one. The efforts of Mr. Bernardino León, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya in general,
to achieve a ceasefire and an inter-Libyan agreement
can contribute to peace and stability and to establishing
the rule of law in Libya. For that it is essential that the
Council continue to provide support to United Nations
mediation efforts, and in particular to establishing a
Government of national unity as soon as possible. That
requires that we collectively send a strong messages
to the parties involved and consider using sanctions
against provocateurs.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for presenting the ninth report
on the situation in Libya in accordance with resolution
1970 (2011) and for the work she has undertaken with
a view to achieving justice for this brotherly African
country.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, as a State
party to the International Criminal Court (ICC) since
2002, champions the strengthening of the Court’s
institutional framework and its efficiency. We therefore
encourage those countries that are not States parties
to the Rome Statute to accede to that instrument
in order to strengthen the rule of law at the national
and international levels. Cooperation is an essential
aspect in achieving the objectives of the Court, which
requires the commitment of States to implementing
its decisions and supporting its work. Strengthening
the international criminal justice system, represented
by the ICC, requires that States parties refrain from
signing immunity agreements with countries that are
not parties to the Rome Statute so as to exclude from
the Court’s jurisdiction individuals who are possibly
responsible for committing crimes established under

S/PV.7441

the Statute. This practice undermines the spirit and
purpose of the Statute.
Venezuela is concerned that some trials have been
carried out very quickly owing to political reasons,
as has been the case in Libya. We are also concerned
about the intervention of the Security Council, through
its referral of cases over which the International
Criminal Court has jurisdiction. That highlights the
politicization of decisions on which the international
community should act. It is no secret that there have
been many examples of cases recently that have been
said to fall outside the jurisdiction of the Court, despite
evidence that they fall under the ICC’s jurisdiction,
and on which no action has been taken, such as what
happened in Iraq, Libya and Palestine. In this sense,
one could infer that if the ICC continues to act in this
manner, the its autonomy, independence, objectivity
and impartiality — principles that should prevail in the
ICC’s work — could be affected. There can be no double
standards for legal issues. In that connection, ICC cases
should not be settled outside the framework of the
Court; they should be resolved within the institutional
structure of the Court with the participation of the
members of the Assembly of States parties to the Rome
Statute.
We are concerned about the deterioration of the
political and security situation in Libya, as referred
to in the report, which clearly describes the complex
situation of displaced persons, attacks on civilians,
illegal detentions, torture, disappearances, killings,
persecution and abuse, as well as the obvious legal
delays and violations of basic human rights evidenced
by the fact that there are approximately 8,000 political
detainees. Those are indications that violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights
continue in the country.
That atmosphere of general insecurity has affected
the work of human rights activists, lawyers, judges and
prosecutors, who for security reasons have not been
able to pursue investigations that fall within their remit,
including the prosecutions of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi. Since he was captured in
November 2011, Saif Al-Islam has been in the custody
of the Zintan tribe to ensure his physical safety because
of the danger inherent in his transfer to the capital or
to any party claiming to represent the interests of the
Libyan people. These disturbing events underscore the
absence of the rule of law.

15-138469/16

S/PV.7441

The situation in Libya

The country has not yet regained its institutional
footing and it has not been able to establish new
institutions. Therefore, we cannot speak of the
application of justice in a country where the existing
norms do not guarantee citizens equal treatment under
the law. In this regard, we call on the Libyan authorities
to fully cooperate with the International Criminal
Court and the Office of the Prosecutor by delivering
Saif Al-Islam to the Court so that he may remain in
its custody, thereby guaranteeing his protection and his
right to a fair trial.
We condemn the presence and activities of terrorist
groups, such as Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham and associated groups, which have expanded
their presence in Libya owing to the institutional
collapse in the wake of the military intervention and
war in 2011. As a result, those terrorist groups have
focused on carrying out attacks on ethnic and religious
minorities, as evidenced in the executions of Egyptian,
Ethiopian and Eritrean citizens; indiscriminate attacks
on civilians; and kidnappings and disappearances of
those who think differently from these terrorist groups.
The perpetrators of these heinous crimes must be
prosecuted and we hope that the ICC has all the support
it needs to act quicly. Venezuela supports the efforts of
the Office of the Prosecutor to ensure that justice and
accountability prevail in Libya and that the authorities
promote the establishment of a comprehensive and
effective justice system to put an end to the persistent
impunity in this country.
Finally, we believe that an inclusive political
dialogue and the establishment of a national unity
Government are the basis for establishing the rule of
law with strong judicial institutions that ensure the
promotion and respect of human rights, including
international standards of due process, the right to
defence, the presumption of innocence and fundamental
legal guarantees. In this regard, we support the efforts
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bernardino León to reach a political solution and
urge all parties concerned work to ensure that peace
returns to this brotherly African country. That is an
indispensable requirement for building the institutional
framework in a country that has been ravaged by war
since 2011.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have taken note of the ninth report on
the situation in Libya. We thank Ms. Bensouda for her
participation in this meeting and her briefing.

10/16

12/05/2015

Following the destruction of its State institutions
in 2011, the situation in Libya continues to be a source
of multifaceted threats. It is enough to mention the
vivid spectre of terrorism, arms trafficking and the
unprecedented growth of the criminal business of
smuggling migrants across the Mediterranean Sea. The
breakup of the State has reached the point at which the
Libyan conflict has become a constant, roaring hotspot
on the global map of political instability. Under the
auspices of the United Nations, significant efforts have
been made to establish inter-Libyan dialogue aimed
at finding a peaceful solution to the crisis. That goal
seems almost impossible to achieve, but we hope that
the formula for a solution that would ensure the end of
violence and general stability will be found.
In this vulnerable situation, the use of the
international criminal justice mechanism should be
carefully considered and calibrated, both in terms of
its substance and timing. The idea of establishing
​​
new
formats for dialogue on the topic of Libya with the
participation of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
should be considered not only from the point of view of
its added value, but also in conjuction with efforts to
establish national dialogue in the country.
We feel that the reports on the situation in Libya are
becoming increasingly descriptive, akin to the materials
issued by monitoring missions. Almost nothing is said
in the report about the planned procedural steps. In
the past, the Court initiated proceedings against Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi and
issued warrants for their arrest in a very short period
of time — just four months after the Council’s referral
of the situation to the Court. Since then, however,
no progress has been noted, although the former
Al-Qadhafi supporters are not the only parties to have
committed crimes in Libya that may fall under the Rome
Statute. We think that the experience of using the ICC
to address the situation in Libya in terms of ensuring
justice, encouraging prevention and contributing to
national reconciliation cannot for the time being serve
as an argument in support of proposals to refer other
cases to the Court.
We note a completely new aspect in the report,
namely, its mention of the crimes committed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
affiliated groups. The rising level of terrorist threat
and the strengthening of the capacity of ISIL in Libya
are both a cause for deep concern. An appropriate
response to terrorist crimes in which efforts are made

15-13846

12/05/2015

The situation in Libya

to bring perpetrators to justice could be a significant
contribution to the international community’s fight
against this scourge. In that regard, we hope to
receive more detailed information on the actions the
Prosecutor’s Office plans in this regard.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Lithuanian delegation for convening today’s
meeting. We welcome the presence of the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, as well as her presentation of the ninth
report of the Court pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
As we have stated on previous occasions, Chile is
aware of the multidimensional difficulties that remain
in Libya and which are detailed in the report. In the face
of these difficulties, we echo the call of the Court for all
parties involved in the conflict to refrain from attacking
civilians and committing serious crimes that continue to
be reported. We also call on the Libyan Government to
work with the Council and the international community
to develop effective cooperative strategies to prevent
war crimes from being committed and address the
problems of internally displaced persons.
We insist on the need to strengthen efforts
deployed to find an inclusive political solution aimed
at strengthening the institutions of Libya, the rule of
law and human rights, including the rights of women,
children and persons belonging to vulnerable groups. It
is also essential for the Government to fully cooperate
with the ICC and its Prosecutor. All of this should be
done in accordance with the provisions of resolution
1970 (2011) and the decisions of the Pre-Trial Chamber
dated 10 December 2014 and pursuant to resolution 2213
(2015), which urges the Libyan Government to fulfil the
obligations incumbent upon it under international law.
Once again, we acknowledge the work of the
Prosecutor in investigating the crimes committed since
February 2011 and urge her to continue in this noble
task. On this point, we view the ties of cooperation and
assistance that are being established between the ICC
and the Office of the Libyan Prosecutor-General as a
positive signal.
We think that, along the same lines, cooperation
between the Government and the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya with the International
Criminal Court is essential to putting an end to
impunity. It is in this spirit that — taking up the idea of
establishing an international contact group on judicial
issues mentioned here in the Council — we particularly

S/PV.7441

welcome the idea of including in the group prosecutors
of various nationalities who could provide material and
legal support to Libya. My country, Chile, is ready to
provide support and cooperate actively in this initiative,
bearing in mind the experience we have to share in the
area of transitional justice.
Chile will continue to work to establish a closer
relationship between the Security Council and the ICC,
especially with regard to the two cases that the Council
has referred to the Court and the challenges related
thereto. Clearly, the referrals do not close the matter
by themselves; rather, it is essential that the Council
ensure effective monitoring and support the Court’s
judicial efforts in these cases in compliance with the
mandate it has been given.
The issues raised by the Prosecutor on insecurity
and lack of funding that affect the Court’s work should
be duly addressed by the Council. We stress the
importance of ensuring objective accountability for
all crimes committed by the parties during the events
that occurred in Libya. I would like to reiterate the
support of my delegation for the work of the Court and
of the national judicial bodies. Lastly, I express our full
readiness to work in support of initiatives that advance
the common goals of peace, security and justice.
Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We also thank
Ms. Bensouda. New Zealand appreciates this
opportunity to engage with the Prosecutor on the
situation in Libya.
We share the deep concern expressed about the
continued violence and political crisis in the country,
and the impact of the crisis on Libya’s neighbours, the
States of the Sahel and the wider region. The Prosecutor
has highlighted that atrocities continue unabated. We
also share the Prosecutor’s deep concern about grave
crimes against civilians in Libya committed in the name
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. The Security
Council has spoken as one about its commitment to
work with Libya to combat this terrorist threat and to
hold those responsible for such attacks accountable.
While the urgent political and security challenges
in Libya are uppermost in the Security Council’s mind,
we pursue them with a longer-term vision. A successful
conclusion to the United Nations-led political process
is central to creating the conditions necessary for a
lasting peace in Libya. To ensure sustainable peace,
the international community must partner with Libya
and support it in rebuilding justice institutions and

15-1384611/16

S/PV.7441

The situation in Libya

strengthening the rule of law. As Ambassador Dabbashi
has recognized repeatedly, accountability for past
crimes and effective transitional justice are central to
these efforts.
The present violence and absence of State control
in Libya makes the pursuit of justice particularly
difficult. We recognize the enormous strain this puts
on the Libyan authorities, which is why it is important
for the Council and the United Nations — through the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General León — to
work with the Libyan authorities to support their efforts.
Despite the aforementioned challenges, we are
pleased that the Prosecutor continues to receive
cooperation from the Libyan Prosecutor-General and
that the memorandum of understanding is still being
implemented. This groundwork should help to ensure
that the cases against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi proceed as quickly as possible
and to support Libya in meeting its obligations under
the Rome Statute and resolution 1970 (2011). It is
important — not only for meeting Libya’s obligations,
but for the credibility of the final judgment — that
domestic proceedings against Al-Senussi progress
expeditiously and in line with due process requirements.
As for Saif Al-Qadhafi, we note the Pre-Trial Chamber’s
finding on non-compliance in December and join
the Prosecutor in encouraging Libya to reach out to
the Court to resolve any issues that prevent it from
surrendering Al-Qadhafi.
We appreciate the Prosecutor’s consistent raising of
the plight of internally displaced persons, in particular
the acute situation of the Tawerghans, who have not
yet been able to return to their land. We welcome the
framework agreement struck between the municipalities
of Misrata and Tawergha on the margins of the United
Nations-facilitated talks. A lasting agreement that
assists the return of the Tawerghans to their land after
four years would send an important message to other
groups in Libya that reconciliation, including at a
national level, is achievable.
We recognize that the ability of the Prosecutor
to expand investigations into other alleged crimes is
hampered not only by the security situation but also
by a lack of resources. The Council needs to think
seriously about what it can do to support the mandates
it gives to the Court.

12/16

12/05/2015

The Security Council should not approach these
biannual briefings as simply a compliance exercise.
It is a chance to share constructive, concrete ideas for
ways the Council, the wider United Nations system and
international partners can support Libya’s efforts to
bring justice to victims. In this regard, we appreciate
the Prosecutor’s suggestion that a judicial contact
group be established to better coordinate the provision
of material and legal support to the Libyan authorities.
I wish to end by again recognizing the presence
here today of the Libyan Permanent Representative,
which we view as a testament to Libya’s determination
to maintain a positive dialogue with the Court.
Mr. Adamu (Nigeria): We too thank Prosecutor
Bensouda for her presentation of the ninth report of her
Office to the Security Council pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011).
On matters pertaining to cooperation, we are
pleased to note that the Libyan Prosecutor-General’s
Office has been cooperating with the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in the key areas identified in the
report under consideration. We welcome the successful
outcome of the working meetings held in November
and December 2014. It is our expectation that this
will strengthen judicial cooperation between the ICC
and the Libyan authorities, and we encourage the two
parties to continue to work together with a view to
ending impunity in Libya.
Concerning the case against Saif Al-Islam Gaddafi,
we note that the decision of the Pre-trial Chamber
upheld by the Appeals Chamber as to the admissibility
of his case. Libya as a State party to the Rome Statute
has an obligation to surrender him to the Court. In the
case of Abdullah Al-Senussi, we note the conclusion of
the Court that there are currently no new facts emerging
from his ongoing trial in Libya to support a reversal
of the Court’s decision that the case is inadmissible.
We welcome the decision of the Court to continue to
monitor the case against Mr. Al-Senussi and its concern
about how it may be affected by the situation in Libya.
With regard to ongoing investigations of crimes
committed by militias and armed groups in Libya, we
are concerned that progress has been hampered by the
situation in Libya and lack of resources. We appreciate
the difficulty presented by the challenging situation in
Libya to the work of the Court and call on the people
of Libya to embrace dialogue and work together for
the establishment of a Government of national unity.

15-13846

12/05/2015

The situation in Libya

This, we believe, is a critical first step in stabilizing the
country and ending the impunity of militias and armed
groups.
Nigeria notes with deep concern the crimes
allegedly committed by the different parties in Libya
since February 2011. This can be attributed in part to
the current power and security vacuum in the country,
which has created space for terrorist groups and militias
to operate virtually unrestricted. We condemn in the
strongest terms the brutal killings by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham and other terrorist groups. We
also condemn the indiscriminate attacks on residential
areas, car bombings and suicide attacks targeting
civilians. Those committing grave crimes such as
torture, illegal detention, abductions and executions
must be held accountable. We welcome the commitment
of the Libyan authorities to bring perpetrators to justice
and encourage them to continue to work with the ICC
to that end.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I too should like to thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for presenting her ninth report
on Libya to the Security Council. Since her last briefing
to the Council, in November 2014 (see S/PV.7306), the
political and security situation in Libya has continued
to deteriorate. Malaysia remains deeply concerned at
these developments.
The current, unstable situation in Libya has
proven to be a breeding ground for more crimes to be
committed every day by various militias and armed
groups in the country, in particular groups that have
pledges allegiance to the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham/Da’esh. Over the past few months, we have seen
brutal executions of civilians, unrestrained attacks
on public installations and indiscriminate bombings
of heavily populated areas, all of which have led to
senseless civilian casualties. At the same time, the
Prosecutor’s report also pointed out the ongoing
abductions, unlawful detention, torture and execution
of combatants and civilians alike.
The perpetrators of these grave atrocities must be
held accountable. The culture of impunity, if allowed
to prevail any further, would only mean the loss of
further innocent life. Those who are fortunate enough
to escape the ill fate have fled and will continue to flee
their homes, resulting in mass displacement. Malaysia
is particularly alarmed by the total number of displaced
persons recorded by the end of December 2014, which
was reported to have increased eight-fold compared

S/PV.7441

to before the 2014 crisis. We were equally dismayed
to learn of the increasing number of migrants who
have perished trying to cross the Mediterranean in the
attempt to escape the conflicts in their home countries.
Malaysia is of the view that the efforts of the
Libyan authorities to demonstrate compliance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions would go
a long way towards building trust and confidence in
their commitment to holding to account individuals and
parties responsible for grave violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
Moving forward, we acknowledge that the ability of
the Libyan Government to continue its cooperation, as
well as the level and effectiveness of such cooperation,
will depend largely on the stability of Libya. Towards
that end, Malaysia reaffirms its commitment to
assisting and cooperating with all interested parties
and stakeholders in effecting improvements to the
current situation in Libya through the Security
Council. Malaysia takes this opportunity to reaffirm
its full support for the ongoing efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in promoting
an inclusive political process with all relevant parties
in Libya.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I join previous
speakers in thanking Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court, for presenting her
ninth report on Libya.
We note that, since the last report of the ICC was
submitted to the Security Council (see S/PV.7306),
the political and security situation in Libya has hardly
improved. On the contrary, it has seriously deteriorated,
as has the human rights situation. This situation has not
allowed the Court to effectively carry out its activities
in the country. The Libyan authorities for their part,
while they have not refused to cooperate, do not
facilitate progress in this regard.
With regard to the crimes committed in 2011, the
trials of the principal perpetrators — Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi — have not yet
begun, either at the ICC or in the Libyan courts, since
the issuance on 27 June 2011 of their arrest warrants.
While we recognize the complexity of the situation in
Libya, we encourage the national authorities to respond
favourably to the Court’s request regarding these two
cases, calling for them to uphold the commitments
undertaken in the protocol of understanding signed in
November 2013. We welcome the ongoing cooperation

15-1384613/16

S/PV.7441

The situation in Libya

between the Office of the Prosecutor-General in Libya
and the Court, and we welcome the commitment and
professionalism of national investigators, who continue
to work under very difficult conditions.
Since the last report of the Prosecutor, in November
2014, approximately 8,000 persons, including many
civilians, have remained in detention without trial
under difficult conditions despite the calls made by the
Security Council. Tens of thousands of newly displaced
persons have been recorded, and cases of serious human
rights violations, such as abductions and torture, have
been reported. We condemn the persecution of members
of civil society, human rights defenders, jurists and
journalists, who have courageously denounced the
senseless violence.
The growing terrorist presence in Libya has led
to an increase in and worsening of crimes committed
for religious reasons against foreigners. In that regard,
we strongly condemn the recent savage executions of
Egyptian and Ethiopian nationals by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant. The perpetrators of those crimes
must be identified and brought to account for their
crimes.
Moreover, we express our serious concern with
regard to the grave violations committed against
thousands of migrating African labourers. They are
sometimes taken hostage, often persecuted and robbed
of their belongings, or executed without any form of
trial. Those migrants also fall victim to all kinds of
traffickers who swindle them and unscrupulously pile
them, women and children included, into makeshift
boats, the tragic wrecks of which have become an
almost daily occurrence. In any event, the international
community must mobilize to help the Libyan authorities
put an end to the massive violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law and to impunity.
In conclusion, we reiterate our full support for
the negotiations taking place in Skhirat in Morocco
under the auspices of the United Nations, and hope
that the Libyan parties will quickly be able to reach
a final agreement on the formation of a national unity
Government able to put an end to the hostilities. Without
peace, it will be difficult to deliver justice.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Lithuania.
I thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for preparing the
ninth report to the Security Council and for her briefing
14/16

12/05/2015

on the work of her Office in relation to its ongoing
efforts to ensure accountability for serious international
crimes in Libya.
Lithuania is concerned that since the last time
the Prosecutor briefed the Council (S/PV.7306), the
security situation in Libya has sharply deteriorated.
Indiscriminate attacks in heavily populated areas, the
abduction of civilians, torture, unlawful killings and
arbitrary executions with mass beheadings testify that
violations of international humanitarian law and abuses
of human rights continue to be committed in Libya.
The growing impact of terrorist groups in Libya,
particularly those affiliated with Daesh, is terrifying.
Alleged executions by those groups, including the mass
beheading of 21 Egyptians in February and dozens of
Ethiopian and some Eritrean nationals in April, may
constitute crimes against humanity and war crimes
under the Rome Statute. Such an environment clearly
cannot be conducive to ensuring accountability in the
country.
Especially worrisome are the growing threats
to human rights defenders, media workers and
journalists. Last year, eastern Libya was among the
five most dangerous areas for journalists worldwide;
97 journalists were attacked, 29 kidnapped and four
killed. We encourage the Prosecutor and her Office to
closely monitor that situation, as some of those crimes
could fall within the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court.
Lithuania notes with concern the slow progress that
has been made on the issue of detainees in Libya. The
Government of Libya has to redouble its efforts to put
an end to that situation, release the detainees against
whom there is no evidence, and refer cases where there
is evidence to the national courts, in accordance with
national legislation.
Lithuania thanks the Prosecutor for her update
on the cases against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi. We continue to urge Libya to
uphold its clear legal obligation and surrender Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the custody of the ICC. We
are aware that national proceedings against Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi resumed last fall; however, Libya
should ensure that that trial does not undermine its
responsibility and obligation to cooperate with the
Court.
Despite the fact that Libya still faces numerous
challenges in the area of strengthening rule-of15-13846

12/05/2015

The situation in Libya

law institutions, a constructive dialogue continues
between the Offices of the ICC Prosecutor and the
Libyan Prosecutor General on further implementation
of the memorandum of understanding. International
cooperation is essential to achieving a genuine peace in
Libya, building a strong and effective judicial system
and ensuring respect for its citizens’ human rights.
We support the creation of a contact group on justice,
as suggested by the Prosecutor, and believe that such
a group could provide particular support in fighting
impunity at the national level.
Allow me to conclude by expressing our strong
support for the ICC and the work of the Office of the
Prosecutor, and to reiterate that the United Nations has
to ensure that adequate resources are made available for
the investigation of the situations referred to the Court
by the Security Council. The fight against impunity
is not an obligation exclusive to the States parties
to the Rome Statute; it is the obligation of the entire
international community. Therefore, the commitment
to provide the Court with the necessary recourses has
to be fulfilled.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I am pleased to congratulate you, Madam,
and your delegation on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I wish you every
success.
I also wish to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her important briefing. The Libyan authorities
understand that they are responsible for combating
impunity and achieving justice throughout Libyan
territory. They also realize that the role of ICC is an
auxiliary one within the framework of the principle of
complementarity between the national and international
judiciary systems.
At this time, I would like to express our satisfaction
with the cooperation and meetings held between the
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC and the Prosecutor
General of Libya, and the emphasis the two parties
have placed on implementing the memorandum of
understanding on burden-sharing signed between them.
I welcome the proposal of the Prosecutor concerning
the establishment of an international contact point on
justice to support the judiciary authorities in Libya.

S/PV.7441

We will consult with interested States on that matter.
By the same token, I emphasize the readiness of the
Libyan mission to the United Nations to facilitate the
travel of officials from Misrata and Tawergha to New
York should the Security Council find it useful for the
resolution of the issue of internally displaced persons.
Libyan judiciary authorities are determined to fulfil
their commitments despite the difficult circumstances
faced by our judiciary, particularly the Office of the
Prosecutor General and judges, given the state of
insecurity. That insecurity arises from the control
by outlawed militias of the capital since August 2014
and their shared authority over civilian areas in the
absence of any political authority able to issue orders
or force them to respect the law and human rights. This
situation led, inter alia, to delaying the trials of officials
of the Al-Qadhafi regime, including Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi.
Despite the difficult circumstances, the Libyan
authorities have proven their effective and practical
ability to guarantee the conduct of fair trials for those
accused of the most serious crimes perpetrated in Libya
since February 2011. They have made progress in the
investigation proceedings undertaken by the Prosector
General’s Office and the staging of public trials, at
which all the guarantees for the accused enshrined in
national legislation and international instruments have
been taken into consideration. Militia control of prisons
where the accused officials from the previous regime are
incarcerated, involving one case in particular in Tripoli
and Misrata, and the impossibility of bringing that case
before the Criminal Chamber, have necessitated a delay
in the resumption of the trial sessions until the rights
of the accused can be protected in accordance with
international law. We hope that legitimate authority can
be restored over the capital so that these trials may be
resumed in a normal environment.
In that connection, the Parliament and the interim
Government reiterate their commitment to restoring the
institutions of the State to the capital, Tripoli, extending
the authority of the State to the detention centres and
jails currently under militia control, and adopting the
measures necessary for the resumption of fair trials
for the accused, in accordance with international
instruments, as soon as possible. They emphasize their
resolve to achieve criminal justice and to prosecute
perpetrators of crimes, including those responsible
for destroying private and public property and
installations and for breaching human rights in Libya

15-1384615/16

S/PV.7441

The situation in Libya

since 15 February 2011, regardless of the identity of the
victim or the perpetrator. They are also determined to
ensure reparations for the victims for the harm done to
them, to achieve national reconciliation and to return
refugees and evacuees to their homes.
While the Libyan authorities commend the interest
shown by the ICC in consolidating the principle of
accountability, achieving criminal justice and pursuing
the perpetrators of crimes of humanity and other
serious crimes, they emphasize the need to uphold the
exercise of their legal jurisdiction and judicial mandate
in trying the accused, in accordance with the provisions
of national laws and international instruments,
including the Rome Statute through which the ICC was
established.
We reiterate that Libya’s exercise of its national
judicial jurisdiction does not mean it will not respect
the decisions of the judges of the ICC or cooperate
with the Court. It means that we will continue to apply
our national judicial proceedings as we establish the
necessary procedures with the ICC to convince it to
amend those decisions that we disagree with. Since
2011, the Libyan authorities have been eager to promote
cooperation with the Court as a complementary organ
supporting the Libyan judiciary. Numerous meetings
have been held between the Prosecutor of the Court
and the General Prosecutor of Libya. Important
proceedings have been adopted to enshrine cooperation
and complementarity between the national judiciary
and the judges of the ICC.
Undoubtedly, the end goal of these trials is to
combat impunity and achieve justice. Conducting
proceedings and trials in Libya would consolidate
that goal at the national level, since these crimes
were committed there. It is easy to bring the case,
evidence and witnesses there, in addition to the fact
that the case of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi includes a
number of officials of the previous regime. However,
partitioning the case may spoil the evidence and
mislead the investigations. Conducting trials in Libya
generates a sense of justice, and public opinion will
be the cornerstone of national reconciliation, security
and stability in the country. The Libyan authorities
reiterate their hope that the ICC will acknowledge the
Libyan judiciary’s jurisdiction in trying Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi, just as it acknowledged its jurisdiction in
trying Abdullah Al-Senussi.

16/16

12/05/2015

In conclusion, the Libyan authorities look forward
to further support of the Security Council for the
creation of conditions conducive to implementing and
fostering the rule of law in Libya as soon as possible.
We hope for further positive cooperation with the
ICC to achieve criminal justice in the framework of
Libyan sovereignty. We hope that the Libyan dialogue
currently under way in Skhirat in fraternal Morocco
will succeed in achieving broad agreement among
the participants to form a national unity Government,
even if some interlocutors decide to withdraw for any
reason. Restoring State institutions and extending State
authority to all its territory is the only way to end the
criminality and human rights violations and to achieve
justice for all.
The President: I now give the floor to Prosecutor
Bensouda to respond to comments and questions raised.
Ms. Bensouda: On the issue of the contact group
which the representative of Spain raised, I welcome
the interest of Spain and of others in what, I believe,
could be a very important transformative process. I
can already say that we have helped to facilitate initial
discussions between Libya and several Rome Statute
State parties. We are happy to be able to help bring
other interested parties into that discussion, but, as we
always say, Libya must take ownership of this process
if it is to succeed.
I envisage that such a contact group would ensure
a systematic and sustained focus on the issues of
justice and accountability in Libya and also serve as a
forum for brainstorming on how institutional capacity
in Libya can be strengthened. The group could also
systematically look at the challenges and needs of
the Government of Libya to meet its obligations with
respect to cooperation with the International Criminal
Court and to advance the course of justice in Libya. I
also think such a contact group could facilitate and pool
resources and receive assistance from willing States
for capacity-building in Libya, taking into account the
issue of complementarity. Those are some of the ideas
we have had that suggest such a contact group could be
very useful.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

15-13846
