United Nations

S/PV.3454 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Forty-ninth Year

3454th Meeting
Wednesday, 9 November 1994, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Albright . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Peláez
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Patriota
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Li Zhaoxing
Czech Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Sporys
Djibouti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dorani
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mérimée
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Keating
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Gambari
Oman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Al-Sameen
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Marker
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fedotov
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Bakuramutsa
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Yañez-Barnuevo
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . Mr. Gomersall

Agenda
The situation in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 3 November 1994 from the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/1994/1248)

94-87001 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Section,
room C-178.

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
The meeting resumed at 10.55 a.m. on Wednesday,
9 November 1994.
Mr. Peláez (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish):
On this occasion, as the Security Council once again
considers the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
light of General Assembly resolution 49/10, I should like to
restate some of the components of my country’s position on
this matter.
Argentina supports — in general — all the initiatives
being taken by the Organization with a view to reaffirming
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a cause to which we
are committed.
The current diplomatic situation, which is affected by
the Bosnian Serbs’ regrettable refusal to accept the peace
plan of the Contact Group, has made it necessary to
confirm the international community’s resolve to promote
a peaceful solution to the conflict.
Today, we are faced with a situation in which one
party, the Bosnian Serbs, is continuing to pursue an ethnic
and fratricidal war rather than acceding to a settlement with
international guarantees that our Organization could
provide. For that reason, we once again urge that party to
reconsider and to act in accordance with the views of the
international community as a whole and put an end to the
aggression.
The extremely serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law in Bosnia and Herzegovina
have disturbed and continue to disturb international public
opinion. For that reason the International Tribunal will
shortly become active as a basic instrument for restoring
justice.
In the present conditions of fragile security we once
again appeal for respect for the cease-fire and the safe
areas.
There are, however, some signs that are not negative.
I have in mind, in particular, the measures adopted recently
in regard to the partial closure of the border between the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). If that
border remains closed, then those measures, we believe,
will contribute, gradually, to the achievement of regional
peace.

36

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
In this context, we believe that the partial lifting of
the arms embargo imposed in resolution 713 (1991) on
the whole of former Yugoslavia will not contribute to
maintaining peace and security in the region.Further, we
believe that such a step would to some degree imply the
assessment that diplomatic efforts had proved futile.
In addition, the risks that an escalation of the
conflict would entail would cast a shadow not only on the
future of the long-suffering people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina but also on the functioning of the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in fulfilment of
its mandate.
I would emphasize that in this case, as in the case of
all peace-keeping operations, the principle of neutrality is
one of the fundamental principles for troop contributors.
On this understanding, the States contributing troops
to UNPROFOR have done and continue to do so with the
clear intention of contributing to the maintenance of peace
and security in the region, and with no intention of
participating in the conflict in any way.
Furthermore, UNPROFOR’s mandate and
composition are the result of a very delicate balance, one
that it seems desirable, in light of the circumstances, to
maintain. Therefore, the positive effects of the peacekeeping effort must be recognized and properly evaluated;
they must not be underestimated.
We agree, in general, with the judgement of the
Secretary-General, who in the report in document
S/1994/1067 issued in the context of the last renewal of
UNPROFOR’s mandate, stated that the lifting of the arms
embargo would significantly change the nature of the
United Nations presence in the area and create totally
unacceptable risks for the Force.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, on whom I
now call.
Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): It is, I
think, truly an honour for all of us, Madam President, to
have you chairing the Security Council for this month and
we certainly welcome the opportunity to have the benefit
of your leadership.
Let me also say again that it was a benefit for the
Council to have the Permanent Representative of the

Security Council
Forty-ninth year

3454th meeting
9 November 1994

United Kingdom, Sir David Hannay, in this leadership role
last month.

were not present in person to hear the statements of the
general membership.

My statement to you today will be augmented by
several comments based on instructions I received from
President Izetbegovic this morning, and by some new
information. Therefore, I beg your indulgence in following
this presentation.

The situation in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina has for too long been discussed in the
abstract.

Over the last 30 months, on more than one occasion
this Council has heard the convincing logic of why the
application of the arms embargo is counter-productive for
the peace process, why it has actually contributed to the
further victimization of the civilian population and why it
is inconsistent with the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I am afraid, though, that this logic is not considered
important to at least some of the members of the Security
Council. Their predisposition not to hear our pleas or to
comprehend our reasoning is not something that we will
once again attempt to confront with more pleas and more
clear arguments. We will now seek to speak in terms and
language that they can no longer avoid or ignore.
In the meanwhile, we will leave it up to the overall
membership of the United Nations to ponder and to
challenge why the right of self-defence, the targeting of
civilians and the affirmation of sovereignty and territorial
integrity have succumbed to a secondary priority.
I believe this is an especially appropriate question for
the non-permanent members of the Security Council who
have joined the Council from the rank and file of the
General Assembly membership, and who, in reality, after a
brief two-year term will descend from their position once
again into the ranks of the general membership.
Yesterday evening, I listened intently to the debate
and, in particular, to the commentary of the non-permanent
members.
Maybe too idealistically, I believe these nations of the
Security Council to be most inclined to represent the
opinions of the general membership in view of their
temporary status in the Council.
I was struck, at times, by the lofty language and
surrealistic nature of the debate. I was also struck by the
fact that some members of the Council, after having stayed
through the statements of their fellow colleagues in the
Council, with whom they exchange views on a daily basis,

One or two members of the Council retorted
yesterday, “More guns do not mean more peace.”
This may be an appropriate basis or theory from
which to work in the search for global disarmament, but
it is not an appropriate remark to make with regard to a
country that has already had the unfortunate fate of being
overrun and brutalized by a more than amply armed
aggressor which frankly, is not concerned with lofty
principles.
But more to the point, would you have raised such
a question with your own people or your own soldiers
when your nation was the subject of aggression and
occupation? Would you even raise this question today
when weapons — defensive weapons at least — are
viewed as part of the balance of power and deterrence of
aggression? No.
I think you must ask only one simple question: Has
the current policy of applying the arms embargo to both
the victim and the aggressor, to both the unarmed
defender and the initially well armed attacker, produced
the desired result, which is peace? The answer is clearly
“No”.
In fact, I believe most of you acknowledged in the
debate yesterday that the situation seems only to be
deteriorating further, that more civilians are endangered
and that we are further from peace than before.
If you wish to continue to prescribe a medicine,
then, at least examine its initial effect upon the patient
and re-evaluate its curative benefits and see whether the
effect, the relief, is only symptomatic or perhaps even
counter-productive.
Continuing to prescribe the arms embargo to the
Government of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
is like continuing to prescribe thalidomide to pregnant
mothers after having witnessed its most tragic and
unfortunate side-effects on the innocent ones, the newborn
babies. The original idea behind the medicine, which was
to provide symptomatic relief to the nauseated mother,
may have seemed like a good idea at the time, but

37

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
unfortunately the resulting side-effects are much worse than
any benefits that could be derived.

3454th meeting
9 November 1994

We actually give serious consideration to the potential
consequences for UNPROFOR and for humanitarian efforts
in the Republic if the arms embargo is lifted.

We, the Government of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, have welcomed UNPROFOR because it is
an important source of humanitarian assistance for many
of our desperate citizens. It is a source that can moderate
the war; it could also have been an effective peacemaking
vehicle.

The contributions of the brave and committed
individuals associated with UNPROFOR and humanitarian
relief have been intended to mitigate the consequences of
aggression and suffering. We are truly grateful to these
individuals, to the families of those that have lost their lives
trying to help our citizens, and to the countries that have
provided, and continue to provide, the necessary resources
in support of UNPROFOR and humanitarian assistance.
Unfortunately, this cannot be a substitute for the real cure.

On the other hand, the Serbians tolerate
UNPROFOR as a factor that provides them with
international legitimacy; that in fact can be plundered or
pruned to augment fuel and other supplies to the Serb
military and profiteers. It is tolerated because it is a
vehicle for preserving the status quo in the absence of
peacemaking action, and in fact it is tolerated because,
through UNPROFOR, the international community can be
effectively intimidated and held hostage.

Humanitarian assistance would be most effective as a
supplement to peacemaking but it can be politically
convenient, and abused, if applied as a substitute instead of
a supplement.

Today I was informed that the Serbians will in fact
be given more fuel by UNPROFOR, in order ostensibly
to clear the roads of snow. This is but one example of
how UNPROFOR’s resources are pruned to serve the
interests of a war machine.

Ambassador Keating — a man for whom I have the
highest respect and who, I noticed, stayed here for the
entire debate yesterday evening — was one of several
representatives who spoke of the negative implications of
lifting the arms embargo upon the "peacemaking " efforts
of UNPROFOR. Therein, I am afraid lies the problem.
At least the current command of UNPROFOR, not to
mention a few key members of the Security Council, have
effectively neutered UNPROFOR to the point that it is, by
no stretch of the imagination, a peacemaking force.
What is it then? The UNPROFOR Command refers to
itself as a peace-keeping force and emphasizes its
neutrality. I am afraid there is no peace to keep and the
situation is only getting worse.
As for neutrality, UNPROFOR cannot maintain its
neutrality by supporting a status quo that not only is
disadvantageous but in fact means the gradual and certain
demise of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its
Government.
You see, there is a harsh reality in the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina beyond the idealism of peacekeeping and humanitarian work. UNPROFOR is tolerated
by both sides in the conflict because it serves the different
interests of both.

38

From the perspective of both the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and those genuinely concerned for our
country and people, the benefits of UNPROFOR are
quickly becoming outweighed by the longer-term
disadvantages and taxing costs that it places upon citizens
desperate to get back to normality, not just to receive
humanitarian assistance.
So what are we to do? What efforts are to be made
in the pursuit of peacemaking?
Some members of the Contact Group, particularly
certain European Union members, have advocated a
position that we heard yesterday, which includes further
attempts at political inducement of the Serbians, both
Belgrade and the Pale Serbs.
Some could refer to this ongoing process as
appeasement. I will not use that term today — I think we
can all judge for ourselves.
However, that effort seems to have been stillborn
and is not much more than an attempt to buy time in
order yet again to offer an excuse as to why more
resolute action is not necessary, including the use of the
famous words "Why we have not reached the point of last
resort".

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
I am afraid we have reached the point of last resort;
the last resort is the status quo.
Unfortunately, last night, while spouting untruths and
appeals to religious prejudice, Ambassador Djokić also
killed any hopes that the European Union’s plan could bear
quick fruit, bitter or otherwise. He rejected the call for
mutual recognition between the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro).
So what other avenues are open for peacemaking?
Unwilling to confront ever-increasing Serbian
challenges by using all the mechanisms available to them,
some elements within UNPROFOR have now established
a negotiating process parallel to that of the Contact Group
and the mandate given to them by the Security Council.
Instead of insisting upon full compliance by the Bosnian
Serbs with relevant Security Council resolutions, and
instead of pressuring them to accept the Contact Group
peace plan, these elements within UNPROFOR are now
second-guessing and effectively eroding the mandate given
to them by the Council; they are now actually formulating
alternatives to the Contact Group peace plan.
We find this parallel track to be inconsistent with
UNPROFOR’s mandate and the Contact Group peace plan.
We of course must ask: Is it in fact the tail wagging
the dog?
On several occasions we have discussed new options
to try to gradually bring peace to the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. One of the ideas born out of the
European Union initiative was the concept of demilitarizing
Sarajevo and ultimately placing it under the temporary
control of the United Nations. It is an idea that was
advanced on several occasions in discussions in the Council
and in a draft resolution submitted to the Council.
I have before me an analysis by certain political
elements within UNPROFOR that are actually giving their
judgement as to why this potential effort by the Security
Council should not be supported. I will read from that
analysis as follows:

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
plan that had been signed by the [Bosnia and
Herzegovina] and Croat governments but refused by
the Bosnian Serb government. [Security Council
resolutions] 824 and 836 define the Safe Area
concept and reaffirm SARAJEVO as a safe area.
The NATO ultimatum supported the lifting of the
siege of SARAJEVO as a step toward placing
SARAJEVO under UN administration in conformity
with the plan and commended the current efforts of
the UN negotiators toward securing the
demilitarization of SARAJEVO. The plan referred to
was the European Union Action Plan of 22 Nov 93.
(Vance Owen Plan).”
Apart from the fact that this constitutes a judgement
of a Security Council initiative, it is incorrect. The
European Union
Action Plan is not the Vance-Owen Plan.
And here is the commentary:
“The Vance Owen plan does not exist now. To
restore old initiatives now may be counter
productive as other initiatives for an overall peace
plan are ongoing in GENEVA. It appears to me that
this draft is an admission of failure of the GENEVA
initiatives or an attempt by the BH government to
further secure SARAJEVO in order to carry out the
war successfully on other fronts. It is apparent that
no overall peace settlement will be agreed by the
BH government at this time.”
Once again, demilitarizing Sarajevo and placing it
under United Nations control is part of the current
Contact Group peace plan.
The analysis continues:
“It is unlikely that the Bosnia Serbs would
agree to complete demilitarization of SARAJEVO
including all ten opstinas. The 20 km exclusion
zone includes most of SARAJEVO but not all.”
It seems to me that this is the real crux because what
the Bosnian Serbs do not want, UNPROFOR does not do.
I continue to read from the analysis:

“The logic can be traced through [Security
Council resolutions] 824, 836 and 900 and the NATO
ultimatum of 9 Feb 94. It should be noted that
[Security Council resolutions] 824 and 836 were
designed to support the then on going Vance Owen

“The idea to eliminate any internal
confrontational lines and to dismantle all check
points is noble but would in fact hand over territory
to the BH government as the Draft implies.”

39

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
Again, we are not claiming Sarajevo for “BH
government”; we are claiming Sarajevo for its citizens —
an open city demilitarized.
Now I quote again:
“The DRAFT does not include Serb authorities
in a city where UNPROFOR will be responsible for
maintaining the security of the city' and where all
the police and the internal security of the city would
be placed under the joint authority of UNPROFOR
and the Government of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina with participation of other local
authorities.'”
This seems to be the basis for UNPROFOR’s having
rejected, certainly reacted negatively to, at least one
potential effort to bring peace to Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the gradual application of the concept of
demilitarization and peacemaking.
Another resolution was proposed, which was to allow
UNPROFOR forces to enter Banja Luka in order to deter
further human rights abuses. We may recall that back in
June the Secretary-General’s Special Representative was in
fact asked by the Security Council, and was given
permission by the Bosnian Serbs at that time, to go into
Banja Luka.
On several occasions the Security Council has in fact
demanded once again that the Special Representative,
Mr. Akashi, be granted access to Banja Luka.
Allow me to read the comments of UNPROFOR
regarding the proposed resolution to deploy UNPROFOR
forces in Banja Luka. Under the heading of general
comment, we read:
“This draft is emotional and complete with
rhetoric. Yet there is some truth in it. According to
the UNHCR the ethnic cleansing and the movement of
refugees from the BANJA LUKA and surrounding
area has been extensive since 1991. This is on going
with an estimated 1,696 refugees moving from
Northern BH (Banja Luka area) to Croatia in May
94.”
This is just one month. This is May 1994, and
refugees are moving only into Croatia, not into the rest of
Bosnia. I would consider this cause for alarm.

40

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
The second general comment is that in resolution
780 (1992) the Security Council expresses
“...grave alarm at continuing reports...of mass
killings and the continuance of the practice of
ethnic cleansing'” (fourth preambular paragraph).
In the comments from which I have been quoting,
the statement is made that “This appears to be the basis
for the draft”. I think that is an accurate statement.
There are comments on particular paragraphs of the
Security Council draft resolution. I will not go through all
of them but will read out only a few.
The first comment concerns the paragraph from the
Security Council draft resolution that reaffirms that all
parties are bound to comply with the Geneva
Conventions. The comment reads:
“This is motherhood and in no way accomplishes
anything.”
I would call that cynical.
The second comment relates to the following phrase
from the draft resolution: “Strongly condemns ethnic
cleansing' by de facto Serbian authorities in Banja
Luka...”. In fact, UNPROFOR’s comment is: “No
comment”.
The third comment is on the phrase in the draft
which reads: “Demands that the de facto Serbian
authorities end despicable acts, which constitute a form of
genocide”. UNPROFOR’s comment on this element of
the Security Council draft resolution is:
“emotional and non-objective; unlikely to be
accepted by Security Council. The leap of logic
from expulsion to mass murder is not acceptable”.
I think we all know that mass murder has occurred in the
Banja Luka area. There is a war crimes Tribunal in The
Hague right now, which yesterday indicted the first
criminals associated with mass murder in Banja Luka.

Security Council
Forty-ninth year

3454th meeting
9 November 1994

I turn now to the next point, which concerns the
following phrase from the draft resolution:

Croatia, have attacked the Bihac pocket in violation of the
no-fly zone.

“Calls for the immediate deployment of UNPROFOR
into this region to deter further attacks and human
rights abuses against the non-Serb population”.

I am informed that reconnaissance aircraft flew over
Bihac yesterday and were not confronted. Not having
been confronted yesterday, they decided today to carry
things one step further.

The UNPROFOR comment is:
“If all Muslims and Croats have been expelled, then
there is no requirement for UNPROFOR. This appears
an attempt to gain more territory for BH
Government”.
There are almost 50,000 non-Serbs — Muslims, Croats,
gypsies — who still live in the Banja Luka area. Yes, they
may all be expelled very soon. Some of them may even be
murdered. But they still do live there.
The final, overall UNPROFOR comment is:
“This is a draft that condemns the Serbs and argues
that the UNPROFOR should enter the Banja Luka
area under the auspices of Chapter VII, i.e., peace
enforcement. This would mean that impartiality would
be lost. There would not appear any reason for
UNPROFOR to enter into Banja Luka as there does
not appear to be atrocities occurring warranting
intervention. This draft appears to be another attempt
to gain more territory”.
While The New York Times and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
report continuing atrocities, we hear this comment from
UNPROFOR — and I repeat it:
“This would mean that impartiality would be lost.
There would not appear any reason for UNPROFOR
to enter into Banja Luka as there does not appear to
be atrocities occurring warranting intervention.”
Why is UNPROFOR in Sarajevo? Why is
UNPROFOR in Mostar? It is because they are welcomed
by our Government. But they are not welcomed by the
criminals who occupy Banja Luka.
In the meantime, these elements within UNPROFOR
have gradually allowed their real mandate to erode to the
point of irrelevance. Today, as I mentioned, I have been
informed by my President that Serbian aeroplanes, coming,
we suspect, from the United Nations Protected Areas in

Yesterday, as was mentioned in this Council, four
children and a women were murdered in front of a
schoolyard in Sarajevo as a result of the now-intensified
shelling of the city of Sarajevo and its civilian population.
Back in July of this year, after we agreed to the
Contact Group peace plan, we believed that the
international community, and particularly the members of
the Contact Group, would be prepared to undertake evermore-forceful measures to compel the acceptance and
implementation of peace. Unfortunately, exactly the
opposite has happened. We now find ourselves in a
situation where once again Sarajevo is being shelled; our
young children are being murdered on our streets; and
Serbian aircraft are once again flying through our skies
like birds of prey.
Let me remind the Council of how this re-intensified
Serbian war has come about. In July, the Government of
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina accepted the
Contact Group peace plan. Soon after our acceptance, the
Serbian forces threatened that they would respond by
creating ever-increasing tension and brutalization. Then
the Blue Route was closed. Then certain areas of our
Republic continued to be subjected to “ethnic cleansing”.
Then, after this met with no resistance, shelling of the
Blue Route and areas around the Blue Route started.
When this did not meet with a response from the United
Nations forces, the shelling of Sarajevo and the sniping at
street-cars and the murder of civilians in Sarajevo once
again resumed.
I am truly grateful to those forces that, between
February and late summer of this year, managed to bring
a sense of normalcy to Sarajevo through the imposition of
the exclusion zone. Unfortunately, I must inform the
Council that the people of Sarajevo believe they are
worse off today than they were in February. Why?
Because in February they had hope that what the Council
was delivering to them would be something real,
something that would bring about real peace. Now, once
again, their hopes have been dashed and they understand
that they are living under an illusion.

41

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
I wish to make one final point. I cannot confirm this
information, but I bring it to the attention of the members
of the Security Council as a cause for alarm. I have been
informed by President Izetbegovic that the Bosnian Serbs
intend to take action today, this evening, to demand the
withdrawal of UNPROFOR from Srebrenica, Zepa and
Gorazde. We hope that this is not so, because, of course, it
would put all of us in a very difficult situation, and
particularly the people of Srebrenica, Zepa and Gorazde.
But by bringing this potential truth to the attention of the
Council, I hope to ensure that it does not become a real
truth.
What options does the Council believe are left to us?
If we are told that we must choose between UNPROFOR
and the lifting of the arms embargo — and we are actually
being given that choice — then we must once again say
that we will choose the lifting of the arms embargo. That
seems to be the only true way to a real and lasting peace.
But I must not simply leave the issue at that point.
Some believe that the choice must be to have one or the
other: either UNPROFOR or the lifting of the arms
embargo. But, as has been pointed out by many members
of the General Assembly, including the representatives of
other troop-contributing countries, the choice may not in
fact be between one and the other. It may be that both
options can be chosen.
We would welcome the redeployment or withdrawal
of those who do in fact believe that it is a choice between
one and the other, if that is truly what they believe. But in
the meantime, we believe that UNPROFOR’s efforts can be
supplemented by measures that effectively allow the
Bosnians to defend themselves: by the lifting of the arms
embargo or, on the other hand, through an overall
peacemaking process — in conjunction, indeed, with the
Contact Group peace plan — to achieve a settlement.
We must recall for everyone that the lifting of the
arms embargo is mentioned in the Contact Group peace
plan as part of the overall plan. It should not be something
that is considered outside of the plan, for it would then be
viewed as being outside a political framework designed to
achieve peace. We believe that, in order to achieve the
political framework established by the Contact Group, it
may be necessary to undertake greater peacemaking efforts.
We would in fact welcome the international community’s
undertaking those greater peacemaking efforts. But if the
Contact Group and the international community are not in
fact prepared to undertake such efforts, then all we can do
is ask the Council to redouble its efforts to secure them.

42

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
We are prepared to continue to live by the Contact Group
peace plan.
Some speak of the threat that once the arms embargo
is lifted Serbia and Montenegro will continue to send
weapons into Bosnia and Herzegovina, and will in fact
intervene. I think this is a real admission of the original
causes of this war: that is, aggression from a
neighbouring country. If in fact Serbia and Montenegro
chose to react to the lifting of the arms embargo by
allowing weapons and men to flow into the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, that again would be an
admission of continuing aggression and would need to be
responded to accordingly.
Is an attempt now being made to tell the Bosnians
that they cannot defend themselves, that they cannot
receive weapons, because if they do they will be the
target of aggression? That is not the logic of the Security
Council; that is not the logic of international peace and
security; that is not the logic that we should be bound by.
Ambassador Djokic yesterday spoke of the “spillover” of what he calls the civil war in the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. In fact, there already has been
a spill-over. The spill-over is from Serbia and
Montenegro into the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and we must find a way to stem that spill-over. We
certainly welcome the placement of border monitors on
the border between Serbia and Montenegro and the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. But if these border
monitors are to be subject to Serbian whims, then they
are not in fact serving their intended purpose.
Let me now address the issue of the potential threat
to regional peace and security if the arms embargo is
lifted. There already is instability; we are already on the
brink of war in the entire region. In fact, if there is a
failure to stem aggression, if there is a failure to address
the consequences of that aggression and to allow the
victim to defend itself, then I am afraid that the threat to
regional peace and security will increase. There can be no
greater threat to regional peace and security — to
international peace and security — than the legitimization
of the aggression through the sanctioning, through the
creation, through the legitimization of a “Greater Serbia”.
How can we talk of regional peace and security if
efforts here amount to the promotion, the legitimization
of ultra-nationalism and the concept of ethnically
homogeneous territories and countries? These in fact are
the greatest threats to peace, not giving weapons to a

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
victim that wants to defend itself and preserve a
multicultural society.
Let me turn to the following point. Our President
came to the General Assembly in late September and made
an offer in the interests of peace and in the interests of
cooperation with the Contact Group and with the Security
Council as a whole in bringing about a settlement for the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have already
made many concessions in the past, and we thought we
were making one more compromise, that is asking the
Security Council today to lift the arms embargo and to
defer the application of that decision for six months, to give
the international community and the Contact Group a last
opportunity to compel the Bosnian Serbs to accept the
peace plan — in fact to give them additional leverage to
pressure the Bosnian Serbs, knowing that the Bosnian Serbs
would no longer enjoy an advantage in weapons.
It seems to us that this offer has either been
misunderstood or, in some cases, perhaps even deliberately
misinterpreted. None the less, the offer stands, and we look
to the Security Council to act in a manner that welcomes
the offer and that builds upon it. We certainly remain open
to cooperation with you, Madam President, with the
remainder of the Security Council and with the members of
the Contact Group in this effort.
We believe that flexibility is a virtue. Unfortunately
for the Bosnians, we have been asked to be too flexible for
too long. I think it is now time for flexibility on the part of
those whose actions and ideas in Bosnia have not proven to
be successful.
As a last point, I believe that over 40 nations are
participating in this debate. I would like to thank all of
them, whether they speak in support of our cause or not,
whether they share our views or not, for participating and
for once again taking the time and making the effort to
prepare and present their views.
The President: I thank the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Norway. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Biørn Lian (Norway): Allow me first of all,
Madam, to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of November, and
to say that I look forward to further manifestations of your

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
skilful leadership. Allow me also to thank Sir David
Hannay, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, for his truly effective performance during
October.
I have the honour to make this statement on behalf
of the five Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Sweden and Norway. I should say at the outset that the
Nordic countries share the views expressed in the
statement made yesterday by the representative of
Germany, on behalf of the European Union. I want to say
also that I listened closely and with great attention and
respect to the statement made a moment ago by the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, whose views
will be fully considered by our authorities.
This debate takes place against the background of
intensified fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Once
again, we receive images of death, human suffering and
material destruction. The Nordic countries launch an
urgent appeal to the parties to cease all hostilities
immediately.
The Nordic countries firmly support the process of
negotiations with a view to finding a comprehensive
political settlement of the crisis in former Yugoslavia.
The relentless efforts and the concrete proposals worked
out by the international community, including the Contact
Group and the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia, have our full support. We again urge the
Bosnian Serbs to accept unconditionally the Contact
Group plan.
The Nordic countries strongly believe that lifting the
arms embargo would have serious consequences. It would
increase the risk of a further escalation of the war and a
widening of the conflict. It would jeopardize the security
of the personnel of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) and put at risk the humanitarian aid
operations it has been mandated to protect. It would
further victimize the recipients of this vital humanitarian
aid — namely, the civilian population, including the
Muslims. A decision on lifting the arms embargo must
therefore remain a last resort.
We are convinced that a political settlement should
be pursued until all avenues are exhausted. In this
context, the five Nordic countries support the wider
approach outlined by the European Union, introducing
additional elements into the peace process.

43

Security Council
Forty-ninth year

3454th meeting
9 November 1994

The Nordic countries are among the largest
contributors to the peace process, participating in
humanitarian operations, where the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) plays
a leading role, and in the United Nations Protection Force,
as well as in other efforts.

Ambassador, Permanent Observer of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to the United
Nations, to address the Council under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure in the course of the
Council’s consideration of the item The situation
in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina .”

The presence of UNPROFOR will continue to be vital
for the maintenance of supply routes of humanitarian aid
into Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the “safe areas” and as an
overall element of stability in a volatile situation.
UNPROFOR must act decisively and not fall victim to
intimidation, in order to maintain respect for its mandate
and its troops. The agreed close coordination of
UNPROFOR and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) is an important element in this regard.

The letter will be published as a document of the Security
Council under the symbol S/1994/1269.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to His
Excellency Mr. Ansay.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The next speaker is the representative of Jordan.

Allow me one final remark on UNPROFOR, which is
working under very difficult conditions. We want it put on
record as our considered opinion that, despite limitations in
manpower and other resources, and despite the constant
infringements on its freedom of movement and allegations
of ineffectiveness, UNPROFOR is doing a first-rate job.
The President: I thank the representative of Norway
for the kind words he addressed to me.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Thailand in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Phanit
(Thailand) took the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council Chamber.
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 9 November 1994 from
the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the United
Nations which reads as follows:
“On behalf of the members of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference, I have the honour to
request that the Security Council extend an invitation
to His Excellency Mr. Ahmet Engin Ansay,

44

I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
Mr. Abu Odeh (Jordan) (interpretation from
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to convey to you,
Madam President, my delegation’s congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I am confident that your rich experience
and great skill will be reflected in the able manner in
which you will conduct the work of the Council. I should
also like to take this opportunity to express my
appreciation to your predecessor, Sir David Hannay, the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, for the
able manner in which he conducted the business of the
Council during the month of October.
My delegation has not failed to participate in one
single Security Council or the General Assembly meeting
on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Nor has it
failed to co-sponsor any of the various resolutions
adopted in the context of the continuing international
endeavours to mitigate the tragic suffering of the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to put an end to the
Serbian aggression against their Republic. We have
continued to do that because my Government, like many
other Governments in the world, accords a very high
priority to the human, legal and political tragedy of the
Government and the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It is most regrettable and, indeed, puzzling that this
clearly just cause has been met with clear failure on the
part of the countries that have the strongest influence in
international affairs to champion the cause of that State
whose sovereignty and whose people’s human rights

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
continue to be violated, regardless of the fact that since the
beginning of the aggression against it, that country has
continued to appeal to the United Nations for protection.
All these appeals have availed nothing, with the exception
of the fragile protection afforded to some “safe areas”.
In addition, this failure to protect the Government and
the people of that State has been accompanied by the
adamant insistence, without any legal or moral justification,
to deprive that State of its right to self-defence. This has
resulted, as far as all sectors of the Jordanian population are
concerned, in a feeling of strong sympathy for, and stronger
solidarity with, the Bosnian people as a result of the
unjustifiable, flagrant disregard of and silence over the
violation of the sovereignty of that small Muslim Member
State and the flagrant violations of the human rights of a
people that lives in a civilized European milieu that greatly
prides itself on its championing of the causes of freedom
and human rights, and its commitment to the system of
collective security, all of which are supposed to be
fundamental features of our era and the universal goals that
the whole world, represented by the United Nations, aspires
to achieve and entrench.
The application of Security Council resolution 713
(1991) to the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
weaker party and the victim of aggression, without any
commitment to protect that party, has prevented that State
from acquiring the means whereby it could exercise its
right to self-defence. This contravenes Article 51 of the
Charter. The insistence on applying this resolution to the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, after the acceptance
by its Government of the peace plan proposed by the
Western Contact Group and the rejection of that plan by the
aggressor Serbian party, amounts to alliance with the
aggressor instead of standing up to aggression because, in
actual fact, this insistence has created a major military
imbalance between the already weak Muslim Bosnian party
and the strong Serbian party. This imbalance has
undoubtedly been one of the major factors in encouraging
the Serbian party to persist in its aggression and to continue
to reject the proposed peace plan. Here we must refer to the
testimony of the Special Rapporteur on human rights in the
former Yugoslavia, who stated in late 1992 that that
military imbalance was the main factor that enabled the
Serbs to carry out their policy of “ethnic cleansing”.
We proceed, in participating in this debate, from our
desire to reach consensus on the need either to persuade or
to force all the parties involved in the ongoing conflict in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to renounce the military option and
to resort to a negotiated political settlement in accordance

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
with the principles of the Charter and the rules of
international law.
Regrettably, this endeavour, at the level of the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia has
not been successful so far, and we do not believe that it
will succeed in the future unless the root cause of such
failure is dealt with — the root cause being the military
imbalance between the aggressor and the victim of
aggression.
Logic dictates that so long as the Bosnian Serb side
feels it enjoys military superiority and that it can achieve
its unjustifiable nationalist ambitions by military force, no
serious progress will be achieved in the political
negotiations on Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Bosnian
Serb side will not respond to any international peace plan,
even if it gets the lion’s share out of that plan.
Consequently, if we really want a peaceful settlement, we
must act in the light of this realization and in a manner
that would serve such an aim.
In order for us to do that, now that the Council has
failed to discharge the responsibility mandated to it under
the Charter, and had not ended the aggression against the
territory and people of a State Member of the United
Nations, the imbalance created by the Security Council in
the equation must be redressed by lifting the arms
embargo so that the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
may be able to acquire the means whereby it could
exercise the right of self-defence.
It is inconceivable that the existing situation should
be allowed to continue, after three years of suffering, with
70 per cent of that State’s territory under occupation, its
capital and other cities under siege, and its people
savaged by the criminality of the aggressor while that
aggressor continues to reject the proposed peace plan and
persists in its aggression, to the extent of hindering the
efforts to provide humanitarian relief to Bosnian citizens
besieged in the so-called safe areas.
We are convinced that the lifting of the arms
embargo that is now imposed against the people and
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina will promote the
peace process in more than one way. It will contribute
effectively to making it difficult for the Serbs to realize
their illegal ambitions and thereby force them to opt for
dialogue, negotiation and peace.

45

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
Lifting the arms embargo will also work in favour of
the humanitarian relief efforts and help to mitigate the
suffering of the civilian population, as it will enable the
army of Bosnia’s Government to shoulder its
responsibilities with regard to the delivery of assistance to
the civilian population. It would also strengthen the role
and capability of the United Nations Protection Force by
protecting it from harassment by Serbian militias and from
the acts of robbery and blackmail perpetuated by those
militias. The consequences of the vast military imbalance
between the Bosnian army and the Serbian forces for the
civilian population are tragic, and its political implications
destructive.
Contrary to the suppositions of some, the action that
we advocate would not widen the conflict. Rather, it will
contribute to the performance of the legitimate and very
desirable moral task of enabling the army of Bosnia, for the
first time, to discharge the duty of protecting the civilian
population and deterring the heinous policy of aggression
pursued by the Serbian side. Deterrent military force is
without a doubt a legitimate political means of achieving
and consolidating peace.
It is in this light that we can understand the threat by
the Serbian leadership to attack the international peacekeeping force if the arms embargo against Bosnia and
Herzegovina is lifted. The Serbian leaders fully realize the
consequences of any improvement in the Bosnian army’s
capability in the area of armament and, consequently, in its
ability to deter aggression. They know full well that, should
this happen, they will be forced to accept the proposed
peace plan, which runs counter to their ambitions.
The threat by some troop-contributing countries to
withdraw their contingents is nothing but surrender to the
blackmail of the Serbian leaders. Such a course would
amount to falling into the Serbian trap, and it would be an
implicit admission that the troop-contributing countries’
forces are no more than hostages in the hands of the Serbs.
The Serbian threat to the peace-keeping forces validates the
call for the lifting of the arms embargo against Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order for its army to be able to deter
aggression and thereby to compel the aggressors to
renounce their intransigence and move towards dialogue
and serious negotiation.
Under the terms of Article 24 of the Charter, and in
the light of paragraph 2 of that Article, the failure or
inability of the Security Council, which acts on behalf of
the international community, to face up to the grave
security, military, political and humanitarian situation that

46

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
has obtained in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
for more than three years makes it imperative for the
Council to allow the victim, without delay, to acquire the
means of self-defence. This is a humanitarian, legal and
moral duty that the Council must discharge forthwith
without any hesitation.
Otherwise, we shall remain in a vicious circle, and
whole Chapters of the United Nations Charter will be
thrown dangerously into question. I refer to the Chapters
that determine the Security Council’s conduct in
discharging its duties in accordance with the principles
and purposes of the Organization. Failing the lifting of the
embargo, the international community will have a duty to
act, collectively or individually, to provide the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina with the means
of self-defence, in accordance with Article 51 of the
Charter.
General Assembly resolution 49/10, which was
adopted on
3 November 1994, contains 44 preambular and operative
paragraphs which state the position of the overwhelming
majority of the international community with regard to the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and its various
developments. The resolution, of which my country was
one of the sponsors, expresses the international
community’s moderate will to deal with this tragic
situation. My delegation appeals to the Security Council
to respect that will, to act in accordance with it and, in
particular, to respond to paragraph 22, of the General
Assembly’s resolution which pertains to the question of
exempting the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina
from the arms embargo that was imposed by Security
Council resolution 713 (1991), on the basis of the
Bosnian Government’s offer to accept the de jure lifting
of the arms embargo with effective application deferred
by the Security Council in the light of acceptance and
implementation of the peace plan by the Bosnian Serbs.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Morocco. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Snoussi (Morocco) (interpretation from
French): First of all, Madam President, I should like to
congratulate you very warmly on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. We are sure that
under your presidency the work of the Council will be
successful.

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
I should like to pay a special tribute to your
predecessor, Sir David Hannay, for the competent and
distinguished manner in which he guided the work of the
Council last month.
Last week the General Assembly adopted, without any
negative vote, a resolution in which it asked the Security
Council
“to give all due consideration [to exempting] the
Governments of the Republic and the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina from the embargo on
deliveries of weapons and military equipment
originally imposed by the Security Council in
resolution 713 (1991) of 25 September 1991”.
(General Assembly resolution 49/10, para.22)
The de jure lifting of the arms embargo would be
effectively implemented only in six months’ time, in
accordance with the proposal made last September by the
Bosnian President, if by then the Bosnian Serbs were
continuing to reject the peace plan presented by the Contact
Group.
This overwhelming support for an initiative that does
honour to your country, among others, Madam President,
reflects the true feelings of the international community,
which has for more than two years tried to discourage
attempts to infringe the sovereignty and integrity of a
country that is a member of our community.
During the debate in the General Assembly on the
question of lifting the arms embargo against the Bosnian
Government, it became evident that the efforts of the
international community had not succeeded in fully
ensuring the protection of civilian populations, let alone in
putting an end to the conflict that has been ravaging this
brotherly country for more than two years, despite all the
concessions - often very painful ones - agreed to by the
Government and the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
themselves, though our intentions were assuredly good.
But how can one speak of good intentions to a people
that day after day is subjected to humiliation and sorrow?
We had thought that by permitting this country to defend
itself, we were going to encourage, as was often said, an
escalation - but what an escalation!
After more than two years of this tragedy, we can
now say that, unfortunately, we encouraged the
established military superiority and dreams of hegemony.
Is it not time for us to realize that we are in the process
of putting this country at the mercy of extremists? Some
Muslim States, such as mine, should today feel guilty for
not having done more.
Those States had hoped that at any moment a
reaction by the international community would correct
these inequalities. It was not a question of helping the
Bosnian people to fight a war, a war they did not want,
but of allowing them to defend themselves and their
dignity.
Indeed, while the United Nations Protection Force
and humanitarian organizations - to which we pay
particular tribute here - have given the civilian
populations considerable humanitarian assistance and
contributed to easing their suffering, this assistance, which
is still insufficient, cannot and must not replace the
search for a lasting and equitable solution, one that would
put an end finally to the aggression and occupation and
would restore the sovereignty of the Bosnian Government
over its territory.
Given the ineffectiveness of the efforts of the
international community and, admittedly, faced with the
persistence of the Serbs in perpetuating their aggression
and in refusing all peace proposals, it has become
inevitable that we should, finally, allow the Government
of Bosnia to acquire the means necessary to exercise its
right to legitimate self-defence, as defined by Article 51
of the Charter of the United Nations.

After more than two years, we find ourselves back
where we started. We have succeeded only in very
minimally protecting a Member State from invasion and
from attempts against its sovereignty. Bosnia and
Herzegovina, it must be repeated, had to fight, but it had to
fight with too few weapons against an enemy that had help
and heavily armed forces.

We would like in this respect to reaffirm our
position regarding the non-applicability of Security
Council resolution 713 (1991) to the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the need to apply, effectively,
various measures aimed at preventing the flow of military
equipment to the Bosnian Serbs.

We have shared the sufferings and the frustrations of
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but on several
occasions we did in fact prevent them from defending

Maintaining the arms embargo unjustly imposed on
the Government of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina while reinforcing the military superiority of

47

Security Council
Forty-ninth year

3454th meeting
9 November 1994

the Serbs has, in fact, encouraged the latter to continue the
conflict, to extend their areas of occupation and to pursue
their horrible policy of "ethnic cleansing", especially in the
areas that are still occupied.

preserve the credibility of the United Nations, ensure
respect for the rule of law and dissuade the aggressors
from their intransigence and their continued rejection of
all peace proposals made thus far to end the conflict.

This Serb military superiority is certainly not such as
to ensure a credible outcome of the peace process, one that
would allow, inter alia, for the mutual recognition of all the
States in the region within their international borders, the
effective protection of refugees within the safe areas and
the strict application of sanctions against Serbia and
Montenegro.

The President: I thank the representative of
Morocco for the kind words he addressed to me.

Faced with this huge obstacle to the peace process, the
offer of the President of Bosnia and Herzegovina, made
before the General Assembly in September 1994 - to decide
to lift the embargo but not to apply this decision until six
months afterwards, in order to give the Bosnian Serbs time
to reconsider their position regarding the peace plan reflects once again the spirit of compromise and the sincere
will of the Government of Bosnia to seek a peaceful, just
and lasting solution to this conflict, which has gone on for
far too long.
The Kingdom of Morocco, of course, supports this
proposal because it is convinced that this measure, which
would supplement the other measures adopted by the
Security Council, would merely do justice to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, a full-fledged Member of our Organization
and a victim of aggression deprived of its legitimate right
to self-defence.
This de jure lifting of the embargo, by putting an end
to the military superiority of the Bosnian Serbs, could turn
out to be a very effective means of dissuasion that would
lead the Bosnian Serbs to accept the Contact Group’s peace
plan.
We are also convinced that the international
community should no longer allow the Serbs to continue
with impunity to trample the fundamental principles of
humanitarian law and the provisions of the Security Council
resolutions.
After these years of unpardonable atrocities, the
Council’s responsibility is still just as great, as is ours.
Today we learned, as we did yesterday, from the
representative of the former Yugoslavia that the provisions
we wish to implement will surely be flouted.
In any case, we must show greater firmness and
determination against the Bosnian Serbs if we wish to

48

The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me first of all, Madam President, to convey to you
once again our warm congratulations on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. There is no
doubt that your wisdom and your well-known leadership
skills will yield positive and tangible results.
The delegation of Egypt will not go into further
detail to illustrate the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We all have heard the clear and
comprehensive statement of the Ambassador of Bosnia
and Herzegovina which eloquently described a situation,
that is quite clear to all. The justice of the cause
concerned is undeniable and uncontestable.
The Egyptian delegation, therefore, will confine
itself to making certain points and to recalling that, on a
number of occasions, it has already drawn the Security
Council’s attention in the course of the general debate on
Bosnia and Herzegovina to the fact that unless the
Council acts promptly and takes firm and immediate
measures to address the root causes of the problem, the
policy of half-measures and contradictions will undermine
the Council’s credibility and raise major questions
concerning the international order in its entirety.
At the same time, it should be noted that the
Security Council adopts numerous resolutions under
Chapter VII which are mandatory and must be
implemented even by force.
So when one of the parties — and I refer here to the
Serbs — flouts those resolutions and the Council chooses
to let that pass in silence as if nothing has happened,
would that be correct? Would the Council accept to stand
by and watch the flouting of other resolutions it has
adopted under that same Chapter VII of the Charter in
other regions of the world as is the case with its
resolutions on Bosnia and Herzegovina? Does the Council
really apply double standards as some accuse it?

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
The Security Council itself set up the regime of safe
areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is therefore incumbent
upon it, as a historic responsibility which it cannot abdicate,
to provide for genuine protection of those areas. The
Council must now enable the Government of the Republic
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to exercise its natural and
inherent right to self-defence.
It should be recalled here that Article 51 of the
Charter expressly stipulates that:
“Nothing in the [present] Charter shall impair the
inherent right of individual or collective self-defence
if an armed attack occurs against a Member of the
United Nations.”
The stipulation in this text fully confirms beyond
doubt that the Charter takes the view that the right to selfdefence is sacred, and inalienable. Similarly it is known
that all States Members of the United Nations are
constitutionally bound under Article 103 of the Charter to
give precedence to the provisions of the Charter over any
other international obligations. Whether such obligations
arise from bilateral agreements or from Security Council
resolutions, it is the States Members’ obligations under the
Charter that shall prevail.
The General Assembly adopted resolution 49/10 a few
days ago. One of its provisions encourages the Security
Council to exempt the Government of the Republic and
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina from the embargo
imposed by the Security Council in resolution 713 (1991).
Exempting the Republic and the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina from the arms embargo would serve the cause
of a negotiated settlement because if Bosnia and
Herzegovina is enabled properly to defend itself, the
aggressor will have to return to the negotiating table.
Lifting the embargo will contribute to acceptance by the
aggressor of the international peaceful settlement Plan,
whereas the continuance of the status quo will result only
in persistence by the strong and already intransigent party
in flouting international legality.
Should the Council fail to break the deadlock by
choosing not to adopt the anticipated resolution, the States
concerned will have the right to invoke Article 51 of the
Charter, and, under Article 103, individually or collectively,
provide Bosnia and Herzegovina with the means of selfdefence. The international community cannot stand by as an
impassive spectator, given the gravity of the current
situation.

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
Egypt participates in the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR) with fully equipped military
contingents. The Egyptian Government has also proposed
strengthening its current contribution to UNPROFOR with
additional contingents. In this respect, we wish to stress
several points about UNPROFOR.
First: Egypt affirms its understanding of
UNPROFOR’s responsibilities within the context
eloquently expounded this morning by the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Second: the UNPROFOR was created by a
Security Council resolution as an international
protection force. As a result, that Force should be
mandated to provide genuine protection to the
territories it supervises and to the people of those
territories. No distinction here can be made between
territory and population. That has never been seen in
any Security Council resolution.
Third: UNPROFOR’s role as an international
peace-keeping force should be that of supporting the
Government of the Republic and the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina because that Force operates
within that Republic’s territory. The Force must
offer all possible assistance to the Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to enable that
Government to exercise its full competence in the
area where the Force is deployed. It is ultimately the
Government alone that is entitled to exercise its
inherent right to sovereignty. It is not acceptable that
international forces should obstruct the performance
by governmental bodies of their tasks.
Fourth: the Security Council has adopted a
number of resolutions which mandated clear-cut
tasks to UNPROFOR, including the protection of the
“safe areas” designated by the Council. Those areas
have also been demilitarized in accordance with
Security Council resolutions. So, from a political,
legal, and indeed moral, standpoint these Forces
must continue to perform those tasks until such time
as the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina is in
a position to exercise its effective authority over all
those areas.
Fifth: the threat to withdraw UNPROFOR at
the present juncture would create a power vacuum in
view of the demilitarization of the areas where
UNPROFOR is deployed. Most of those areas lie
within the territories of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

49

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
Such a vacuum will certainly encourage the Serb party
to hasten to acquire those territories by force since it
has the military ability to do so.
What more does the Security Council expect from the
Government and people of Bosnia and Herzegovina after all
the sacrifices they have made and the sufferings, they have
endured? Does the Council want to wait until this Member
State of the United Nations disappears from the face of the
earth under the onslaught of Serb aggressors? Or does the
Council perhaps want to sit quietly and wait for the
situation to resolve itself sooner or later and thus absolve it
from the responsibility of finding a solution? The Council
must not in any way make it possible to create a precedent
of grave defiance to international legality as that would
undermine the international order in its entirety. History
would never forgive us for that.
Therefore, Egypt once again appeals to the Security
Council to shoulder its responsibilities clearly and firmly.
There have been palliatives and partial solutions and the
Security Council has turned a blind eye to Serb
intransigence and defiance for far too long over the past
three years.
The President: I thank the representative of Egypt for
his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Ecuador. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Valencia Rodriguez (Ecuador) (interpretation
from Spanish): Madam President, allow me first to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month, and also to express my gratitude
for this opportunity to address the Security Council under
your skilful leadership.
The people and the Government of Ecuador have
followed the development of the conflict in Bosnia and
Herzegovina with growing disquiet and concern. The
massive violations of human rights, and in particular the
aberrant practice of “ethnic cleansing”, have been rejected
by our public opinion. We are a multi-ethnic and
multicultural society that firmly upholds the ability of
human beings to live together in peace, enriched by the
cultural and religious diversity of the various populations
that live together in the territory of a single State.
The action taken by the delegation of Ecuador in
response to this conflict, both in the General Assembly and

50

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
in the Security Council, in whose work we participated in
1991 and 1992, has been guided by our unswerving
defence of the principles of respect for the territorial
integrity of States, the promotion of machinery for the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the rejection of the
acquisition of territory by force. This approach has led
my delegation to support a number of resolutions on this
issue in both organs, including General Assembly
resolution 49/10 of 3 November.
My Government has observed with rekindled hope
developments in the negotiations in the peace process, and
particularly the acceptance by all the Governments of
States parties to the conflict of the peace proposals
presented by the Contact Group. Only a non-governmental
party, the Bosnian Serb paramilitary forces, persists in its
refusal to accept those proposals. We believe that the firm
action of the international community, and in particular
the positive steps taken by the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) —
including the border closing that has cut off supplies to
those irregular forces — will make it possible to
surmount this last obstacle.
We understand the impatience of the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, faced with prolonged suffering,
and its call for more resolute international action on its
behalf. At the same time, Ecuador believes that, now that
there is some hint of an improvement in the situation, it
would not be wise to take measures that might imperil the
significant progress being made in the peace process. For
this reason, in explaining its vote on General Assembly
resolution 49/10, my delegation expressed its doubts about
the desirability of lifting the arms embargo imposed on all
the parties to the conflict. Such a decision might, we fear,
lead to the widespread use of force being perceived as the
ultimate arbiter in the settlement of the conflict. It could
also impede the humanitarian activities undertaken in the
area by the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations, which would exacerbate the already tragic
suffering of the civilian population.
Ecuador calls on the Security Council once again to
persevere in the pursuit of the peaceful settlement of
disputes and to remain steadfast in its quest for peace in
that tortured region.
The President: I thank the representative of Ecuador
for his kind words addressed to me.

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
The next speaker is the representative of Cambodia. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Prince Sisowath Sirirath (Cambodia): First of all,
may I congratulate you, Madam, on the manner in which
you have been presiding over the work of the Council this
month.
My delegation is indeed privileged to be addressing
the Council for the first time since Cambodia regained its
truly democratically elected Government last year, under
United Nations organization and supervision. This happy
outcome resulted from the Council’s continued support for
the suffering Cambodian people over many years. Thanks
to all the members of the Council, and in particular to the
permanent members, Cambodia is today enjoying its longlost freedom, a market economy, freedom of the press and
the protection of human rights.
Today my delegation is pleased to see the Council
once again taking up a topic of the utmost importance: the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. My delegation hopes
that the meeting will finally lead to concrete measures that
will change the course of the war. My delegation is
therefore pleased to participate for the first time in the
debate on this issue, and hopes to share with the Council
the experiences of the horror of over two decades of war,
the Pol Pot/Khmer Rouge genocidal regime and foreign
occupation. With this in mind, my delegation was pleased
to vote in favour last week of General Assembly resolution
49/10, on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
My delegation listened with great attention to the
statement that has just been made by the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and fully joins in his
heartbreaking plea for the lifting of the arms embargo
imposed on his country. Taking into account its image as
one of the founders of the Non-Aligned Movement and its
close, longstanding relationship with the former Yugoslavia,
Cambodia refrained in the past from debating this issue
because of its sensitivity, and felt that more time was
needed to pave the way for an approach to a peaceful
settlement. But, as time passed, as negative results
continued to be seen and the offer of a lasting political
solution was constantly rejected by the stronger Bosnian
Serb party, it became obvious that the war in Bosnia and
Herzegovina was a one-sided war of aggression perpetrated
by the Bosnian Serb army against the weaker Croats and
Bosnian Muslim peoples.

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
Cambodia sincerely empathizes with the profound
suffering which the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
have experienced ever since the outbreak of war and the
adoption by the Bosnian Serb army of the policy of
“ethnic cleansing”. With the death of the charismatic
leader Josip Broz Tito and the disintegration of the former
Yugoslavia, new factional leaders, unwilling to
compromise, emerged as feared warlords and tyrants,
refusing to see the changes that were taking place all
around them in Europe and elsewhere.
This senseless, bloody conflict has been going on
much too long. It continues to ravage innocent lives on all
sides, because people have not accepted the fundamental
truth of their common humanity — that life is the most
precious gift of all. The number of victims, refugees and
displaced persons in Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to
rise each day. Their lives are being wasted needlessly,
and this is going on without end. Living an undignified
existence and in the constant fear of being killed, they
have been reduced to a level unworthy of human beings.
This is the saddest and most tragic story of all. It
represents a challenge to all of us.
The Bosnian Serbs in their aggression have not
hesitated to attack towns and zones that are protected by
the United Nations peace-keeping forces. This situation
strongly reminds me of a similar problem that arose in
my country two years ago, when the Khmer Rouge,
having agreed to come to the peace table in Paris with the
rest of the Cambodian factions and the international
community, in 1991, refused to allow the United Nations
to demobilize its troops and supervise its zones of control,
as agreed in the Paris Peace Accord. Instead, it captured
and threatened to kill members of the Blue Helmet forces.
This same action is being repeated today. The Bosnian
Serbs are applying the same tactics as the Khmer Rouge
is applying in my country. The precedent has now been
set.
This grave situation has consumed much of the
United Nations limited financial and manpower resources.
While other countries, my own among them, enjoy the
fruits of the reconstruction and development activities
being carried out in various fields by donor countries
through the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), Bosnia and Herzegovina has been reduced to
practically nothing.
Cambodia has always striven for peace and believed
that all avenues leading to talks and negotiations must be
explored. It has become clear to my delegation that the

51

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
road to a negotiated settlement may be impossible to find.
The Council should perhaps seriously consider lifting the
arms embargo against Bosnia and Herzegovina, as proposed
by the President of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in his address to the General Assembly last September. It
is clear to the whole world that the stubbornness of the
Bosnian Serbs is equal to that of the Khmer Rouge.
Cambodia feels that the time is ripe for, and is strongly in
favour of, lifting the arms embargo against Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
My delegation recalls the frustration experienced by
many nations involved in the peace-keeping operations in
Cambodia, when most of them favoured military action
against the Khmer Rouge for its refusal to participate and
to cooperate with the United Nations. A similar frustration
is now being felt by those who wish to see a lifting of the
arms embargo against Bosnia and Herzegovina. Cambodia
is also frustrated by the fact that its requests to friendly
countries for arms to combat the Khmer Rouge have not
been answered, while the massacre of innocent civilians has
continued, including the recent killing of young Australian,
British and French citizens. Cambodia’s situation is perhaps
not as alarming as that of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but the
similarity should be carefully considered and studied by the
Council.
A small faction like that of the Bosnian Serbs cannot
be allowed to continue to hold the international community
hostage by rejecting every effort and every proposal for
peace, as the Khmer Rouge are doing in my country. How
much longer can we allow this to go on, how much longer
are we willing to wait? My delegation hopes that the
situation will not deteriorate to the point of anarchy, the
point at which all hell breaks loose, as happened in
Cambodia in 1975 and as happened recently in Rwanda,
when the situation became hopeless. The Council has the
power to give peace a chance, but peace cannot be achieved
without stronger military pressure on the Bosnian Serbs.
We have seen such situations before in every theatre of war
throughout the world’s history; no peace can be achieved
when one side is weaker than the other and continues to
offer to talk while the other side is stronger and continues
to wage war.
The international community continues to view this as
a highly important issue, and Cambodia will continue to
pray for a negotiated settlement and to hope that national
reconciliation can be achieved soon among all the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We call upon all the rival factions
to stop the fighting and to cooperate with the United
Nations. My delegation commends the tireless efforts being

52

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
made by the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) and its outstanding performance. Like the
lives of the Bosnian people, the lives of UNPROFOR
personnel are in constant danger. They are dedicated to
their duty to uphold peace and security for the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Cambodia, of course, is well
acquainted with the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative in the former Yugoslavia,
Mr. Yasushi Akashi, and we are full of admiration for
him and confident that his efforts to restore peace and
security to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina will
succeed, as they did, with the Council’s help, in my own
country.
Whatever decision the Council takes today on this
terrible situation, my delegation hopes that it will be on
the right path towards a lasting peace. If not — and it
may be ironic and unprofessional of me to say this —
then the unfortunate people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
will have to wait a little longer, until their death toll
reaches that of Cambodia under Pol Pot, or perhaps
equals that of Rwanda. Only then, perhaps, can peace be
found for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The President: I thank the representative of
Cambodia for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Nicaragua.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Vilchez Asher (Nicaragua) (interpretation from
Spanish): I should like to join preceding speakers in
congratulating you, Madam President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Your diplomatic skills and experience, with which we are
all familiar, will surely bring success to the Council’s
present endeavours.
Nicaragua asked to speak during the consideration of
the item now before the Council because it feels it has a
duty to contribute to the strengthening of international
peace and security, just as it had a duty to support the
General Assembly’s adoption of draft resolution
A/49/L.14/Rev.1, “The situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina”, which became General Assembly
resolution 49/10.
Nicaragua, a country with a deep respect for human
rights and a country undergoing an intensive process of
national reconciliation, encouraged by our President,
Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, after a decade of fratricidal

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
war, feels solidarity with the present terrible suffering of
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. My Government has
on many occasions appealed for peace and a negotiated
settlement to the conflict in the former Yugoslavia and
expressed its strong condemnation of the atrocities
committed in Bosnia, which constitute not only a threat to
international peace and security, but a flagrant violation of
the elementary norms of peaceful coexistence and
fundamental human rights.
The international community has made many appeals
and exerted great efforts to end the continuing aggression
against the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which has
caused tens of thousands of deaths and the displacement of
entire populations, with well-known consequences not only
for that country, but for the region as a whole. The massive
violations of human rights and the war of territorial
expansion cannot continue, nor can the systematic
destruction of this new State, which is a Member of the
United Nations and committed to the building of a new
international order, as was demonstrated by its participation
in the second International Conference for New and
Restored Democracies, held recently in Managua,
Nicaragua.
Our delegation believes that General Assembly
resolution 49/10 contains the elements necessary to promote
a political, negotiated settlement of the conflict in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We also consider that the measures it
contains are intended not to widen the scope of the war but,
rather, to enable the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
defend themselves with dignity against the agony that has
been inflicted on them for several years. In this connection
it is important to mention that the Special Rapporteur on
the human rights situation in the former Yugoslavia has
stated that the arms imbalance between the parties to the
conflict is the major factor contributing to “ethnic
cleansing”.
The Council’s consideration of this item is taking
place at a critical moment for the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which, lacking an adequate military force to
defend itself, faces the tragic fact of being a nation on the
brink of extermination. This is a historic opportunity for the
Council, in keeping with its mandate, to help end this
injustice and to protect one of the inalienable human rights,
in this case the right to life, not just of an individual, but of
an entire people.
Our country for reasons of principle supports the
peaceful settlement of disputes between States and has
reaffirmed the need to continue an exhaustive exploration

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
of creative formulas for a lasting solution to the conflict
in the former Yugoslavia. However, we are aware of the
fact that these efforts have not been fruitful so far, despite
the many initiatives that have been considered, and that
the obvious realities of the conflict — in particular the
hundreds of innocent victims every day, the suffering of
women, children and the elderly and the importance of
providing emergency humanitarian assistance — make it
essential for the Council to consider the possibility of
lifting the arms embargo inherited by the Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina from the break-up of the former
Yugoslavia. This would, at the same time, help to assist,
strengthen and balance the peace process and the efforts
of the Contact Group, and protect a defenceless Republic,
its territorial integrity and its political independence.
Nicaragua shares the view that the continued brutal
atrocities directed against Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
still inexplicable lack of effectiveness of the efforts
undertaken appropriately to respond to this savagery make
it vital for the Security Council to allow the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to exercise the right to which it
is justly entitled, that is, the inalienable right to selfdefence in keeping with Article 51 of the Charter.
We appeal to the international community and the
Security Council to take all the necessary steps to bring
about the prosecution of the war criminals who have
inflicted such pain and suffering on Bosnia. The
international community should provide financial
assistance to support the effective operation of the
International Tribunal created for this purpose.
On the eve of the fiftieth anniversary of the
Organization created with the aim of saving mankind
from the scourge of war, and on the threshold of the
twenty-first century, the United Nations cannot permit the
continued recurrence of atrocities the likes of which we
have not seen since the end of the Second World War.
The President: I thank the representative of
Nicaragua for the kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Albania. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table to make his
statement.
Mr. Kulla (Albania) (interpretation from French):
Madam President, allow me first of all to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and also for your remarkable skills
in guiding its work. I would also like to pay tribute to

53

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
your predecessor, Sir David Hannay, for the competent
manner in which he handled the Council’s work in the
month of October.
My delegation has already, on several occasions,
expressed its views on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. My country was one of the sponsors of the
draft resolution on this question which was recently adopted
by the General Assembly. I would, however, like to
emphasize at the outset that we commend the United States
for its initiative to introduce a draft resolution before the
Council and we urge the Council to consider it carefully.
It has always been clear that aggression waged by the
Serbs in Bosnia and Herzegovina was based on an obvious
imbalance of strength. We are all witnesses to the fact that
the continuation of the arms embargo against the Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina has unjustly punished the
Bosniacs, particularly at a time when everyone knew that
the Serbs had never wanted full support from Belgrade.
Despite the intensive humanitarian involvement of the
international community, this has practically prevented the
Bosniac people from exercising their legitimate right to
self-defence and has considerably influenced the course of
the war.
There is only one party in the conflict that has
consistently refused any initiative aimed at a peaceful
solution of the crisis, the Serbs. They should be punished
and brought, by any means the international community has
the right to use, to respect the decisions of the Security
Council.
We are both moved and concerned by what has just
been said by the Permanent Representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We hope that his wishes and his arguments
will be given due consideration by the Council.
We know that there can be no fair and readily
acceptable agreement between parties that are not on the
same footing. If the arms embargo is not lifted, then the
Serbs will obviously continue to challenge the international
community’s will for peace. Furthermore, an accumulation
of the consequences of aggression and of "ethnic cleansing"
will seriously increase the danger of the conflict spilling
over to other hot spots. Therefore, it is necessary to lift the
arms embargo against the Bosniacs; and this will clearly
indicate to the Serbs that the time has come unconditionally
to accept peace, and to look for a better future not only for
themselves but also for all the peoples living there.

54

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
The President: I thank the representative of Albania
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Indonesia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table to make
his statement.
Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): Madam President, I
should like, at the outset, to extend my delegation’s
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month. We remain fully confident
that during your tenure, our deliberations on the issues
now under consideration will lead to the introduction of
effective measures. May I also take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to your predecessor, Sir David
Hannay of the United Kingdom, for his able guidance of
the Council last month.
For almost three years the Security Council has been
seized of the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
is posing a continuing threat to international peace and
security. The death and destruction it has brought and the
suffering and the atrocities it has inflicted are of such
magnitude that they have galvanized the attention of the
world. These horrible scenes have been repeated in all
their intensity, particularly in the past year, and have had
ramifications for the future not only of Bosnia but also of
the Balkan region as a whole. We are gravely concerned
that a continuation of this unequal war may lead to a new
situation as Bosnia and Herzegovina faces the dangerous
prospect of a forcible dismantling of its multi-ethnic,
multicultural and multireligious society, the brutal
decimation of its people and the diminution of its
independence and sovereignty.
The continued refusal to allow the Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to defend itself and to protect its
people from slaughter can only be seen as a denial of the
right to individual or collective self-defence as enshrined
in the Charter. It has been self-evident that aggression has
been sustained due to the stark military imbalance in
armaments that has assured a huge advantage for the
Bosnian Serbs in terms of weapons. Consequently, it has
led to the unleashing of a reign of terror, massive
violence and the brutal violation of human rights and
international humanitarian law, causing untold human
suffering. The inexorable process of "ethnic cleansing"
and mass expulsions has been intensified. None the less,
the pleas of the people of Bosnia for effective
international intervention, or at least the lifting of the
arms embargo, have gone unheeded. The consequences of
a continued arms embargo on both the aggressors and

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
their victims will ensure that atrocities and the killing of
defenceless civilians will continue unabated. In fact,
preventing the victims of aggression from defending
themselves has already led to the slaughter of hundreds of
thousands of innocent men, women and children and the
maiming and torturing of countless others. In the face of
such unspeakable horrors, the Bosnians have no choice but
to defend themselves.
My delegation and an overwhelming majority of
Member States have been calling for the past two years for
the lifting of the embargo unjustly imposed on the Republic
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this connection I wish to
recall that Indonesia was a sponsor of the draft resolution
on this matter recently adopted by the General Assembly.
The lifting of the arms embargo has become imperative in
the present circumstances, in which Bosnia and
Herzegovina has to fight aggressors who have no intention
of seeking a just and durable settlement. It is therefore
incumbent upon the Council to pronounce itself
unequivocally on the non-applicability of Security Council
resolution 713 (1991) to the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We would regard it as a grave injustice if the
ill-conceived arms embargo were not lifted.
We are not convinced by the arguments advanced by
some States for the maintenance and enforcement of the
ban on armaments. Lifting the embargo, it has been
contended, would only widen and deepen the war and
jeopardize the role of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR); the influx of arms would inevitably lead to
more casualties; it would even intensify hostilities, with all
their consequences; it would not contribute to a durable
peace and would be counter-productive; and all this would
undermine the negotiating process, which still represents
our best hope.
Despite those self-serving arguments, it cannot be
denied that the embargo imposed in 1991 on the former
Yugoslavia froze the advantage in weapons in favour of the
Bosnian Serbs, who used it effectively to rout the nascent
Bosnian army and seize large chunks of Bosnian territory.
Condemnations, warnings, sanctions and international
isolation have not deterred them from their murderous
campaign and wilful violation of their commitments. Not
being compelled to negotiate, the aggressors have
unashamedly continued to use their superiority in weapons
to achieve their political and military goals of uniting in a
"Greater Serbia". Their intransigence and their rejection of
the latest peace plan has rendered the lifting of the arms
embargo unavoidable. It has also put the peaceful
settlement of the conflict in jeopardy.

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
The peace plan launched by the five-nation Contact
Group offered both incentives and disincentives to the
parties directly concerned. While the former were
reflected in the prospects for an immediate end to the
hostilities, the latter consisted of warnings of punitive
measures if the peace plan were rejected. It is very
regrettable that although the Bosnian Serbs have spurned
the peace proposals they have largely escaped retribution.
The Bosnian Government, on the other hand, which has
accepted the peace plan despite its serious shortcomings,
continues to be denied the means to defend itself.
When the world community has failed to take
effective measures to terminate aggression, it is neither
legal nor morally tenable to use the blanket enforcement
of the ban on the delivery of arms to prevent Bosnia and
Herzegovina from defending itself. It should not be
denied its inherent right to defend itself in accordance
with Article 51 of the Charter. If the Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina has the necessary means to repel
aggression, that will compel the Bosnian Serbs to reassess
their options and realize the futility of imposing their will
through force. It will bring about a comprehensive and a
durable cessation of hostilities, ensure compliance with
the principles of the Charter as well as the decisions of
the Council, and thereby create conditions conducive to a
political settlement on the basis of the peace plan
proposed by the Contact Group. In view of this, the
lifting of the arms embargo is the only viable option open
to the international community.
In conclusion, those who are responsible for the
tragedy that has befallen the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina cannot be allowed to continue their deeds
with impunity. Hence, a settlement of this conflict can
brook no further delay. We cannot allow the Bosnian
Serbs to dictate their own terms for a political settlement
and thereby undermine the latest peace plan. We believe
that it provides a viable basis for a peaceful solution to
the conflict. I wish to emphasize that, in order to ensure
its acceptance by the Bosnian Serbs, it is imperative for
the members of the Security Council to support any
initiatives to lift the arms embargo. Meanwhile, such
action should be complemented by sustained diplomatic
efforts to achieve that acceptance.
The President: I thank the representative of
Indonesia for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Honduras.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

55

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
Mr. Martínez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from
Spanish): First of all, allow me to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of November. I should also
like to express my appreciation to the representative of the
United Kingdom, Sir David Hannay, for the way in which
he conducted the affairs of the Council in October.
As a peace-loving State that upholds the rule of law,
Honduras has requested to speak at this meeting of the
Security Council in order to state its views on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina — a sovereign and independent
Member State of the United Nations which is beset by
continued aggression, despite all the resolutions on the
subject adopted by the Council with a view to resolving the
situation; despite the intense efforts of the United Protection
Force (UNPROFOR), to which my country pays tribute for
its lofty spirit of sacrifice, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other
associated agencies; and despite the efforts of the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE)
and the Contact Group on the implementation of the
Washington Agreements on the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. None of these efforts has yet borne fruit.
On 3 November 1994 the General Assembly adopted
resolution 49/10, in which the Assembly reaffirms the
relevant principles of the Charter and the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of territory through the use of force,
condemns the Bosnian Serb party for its refusal to accept
the proposed territorial arrangement, demands that it lift the
siege of Sarajevo and other “safe areas” as well as other
besieged Bosnian towns, and condemns the Bosnian Serbs
for their military activities against the territory of Croatia
and their actions in pursuit of ethnic cleansing”, which
has been completely repudiated by the international
community.
Honduras supported that resolution not only because
the continued armed hostilities pose a threat to international
peace and security but also because of all the flagrant
violations of human rights and breaches of international
humanitarian law that have been committed against the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We wish to recall in
this connection the following comments made by the
President of the Republic of Honduras, Mr. Carlos Roberto
Reina, when he addressed the General Assembly at the
present session:

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
“... with a sadness that I cannot conceal, I must say
that events in Bosnia and Herzegovina ... cause us
considerable distress and anguish. These fratricidal
conflicts should impel us to act urgently to eliminate
armed aggression, genocide and the practice of
ethnic cleansing' once and for all. We cannot
continue to waver in implementing Security Council
resolutions. Although this Organization has never
played as big a leadership role as it is now playing,
it is also true that compliance with its resolutions in
the framework of operations to maintain
international peace and security has been called into
question.
“My Government deeply regrets the resulting
tragic events that have claimed hundreds of
thousands of lives and caused a massive exodus of
refugees. We therefore urge parties in conflict to act
in a spirit of reconciliation, certain that the
international community will continue to extend
humanitarian assistance to them.”(Official Records
of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session,
Plenary Meetings, 6th meeting, p. 4)
My country once again calls on the parties to
comply fully with all the resolutions adopted in this
forum in connection with Bosnia and Herzegovina, to
respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of that State and the fundamental rights and
freedoms of its people, and to bring to trial those
responsible for violations of international humanitarian
law.
With respect to the embargo on arms and military
equipment, my delegation takes the view that the
possibility of an influx of arms into the region would not
in any way promote the cause of peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. For this reason, we advocate that the
diplomatic efforts already under way to find a peaceful
settlement to the conflict be intensified.
The President: I thank the representative of
Honduras for the kind words he addressed to me.
In view of the lateness of the hour I intend, with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3.30 this afternoon.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

56
