SECURITY COUNCIL
OFF'CIAL RECORDS
,

SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
I~·. "

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 3
Ninety-first l\feeting

Quatre-vingt-onzieme s6mce

10 January 1947

10 janvier 1947

Lake Success
( 22 p.)

11'

New York

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Ninety...flrst meeting

Quatre-vingl-onzieme seance
Page

Pages

9. Provisional agenda

43

9. Ordre du jour provisoire. . . . . . . . . . . . ..

43

10. Adoption of the agenda.....

44

10. Adoption de l'ox:dre du joir

44

'"

11. Letter from the Chairman of the Council
of Foreign Ministers concerning the .
Statute of Trieste
44

11. Lettre du President du Conseil des Ministres des Affaires etrangeres relative au
Statut de Trieste (document S/224/
Rev.1)
44

Documents

Documents
Annex

Annexes

The following document relevant to the
ninety-first meeting appears in Supplement
No. 1, Second Year:

Le document suivant, se rapportant a la
quatre-vingt-onzieme seance, figure au Supplement No 1, Deuxieme Annee:

Letter from the Chainnan of the Council
of Foreign Ministers to the SecretaryGeneral of the United N~tions, dated
12 December 1946, received 20 December
1946, with enclosures concerning the
Statute of Trleste (document S/224/
Rev.1) ..

Lettre adressee par le President du
Conseil des Ministres des Affaires etrangeres au Secretaire general des Nations
Unies, en date du 12 decembre 1946,
re~ue le 20 decembre 1946, avec pieces
jointes relatives au Statut de Trieste
(document S/224/Rev.1)

2

2

UNITED NATIONS

NAT ION S UNI ES

SE CU RI TY
CO UN CI L

CO NS EIL
DE SE CU RI TE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS

SECOND YEAR

No. 3

NINETY-F'RST .MEETING
Held at Lake Success, New York, on
Friday, 10 January 1947, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. N. J. O. MAKIN (Australia).
Present: The representatives of the following

countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

9. Provisional agend a
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter from the Chairm an of the Council of
Foreign Ministers to the Secretary-General,
received 20 December 1946, concerning the
Statutt: of Trieste (document S/224/ Rev.1) .1
3. The resolution of the General Assembly on
the "principles governing the general regula. tion and reduction of armaments" (document
S/231) 2 and the proposals regarding its implementation:
(a) Letter from the representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on
the Security Council to the SecretaryGeneral, dated 27 December 1946
(document S/229 ) .3
(b) Draft resolution submitted by the representative of the United States of
America at the eighty-eighth meeting of
the Security Council
(document
S/233) ,4
(c) Draft resolution submitted by the representative of France at the ninetieth
meeting of the Security Council (document S/243) .5
4. The resolution of the General Assembly concerdng "information on armed forces of the
United Nations" (document S/230) .6

--'See Security Council

Official Records, Second Year,
Supplement No. 1, Annex No. 2
3 Ibid., Annex No. 5.
.
• Ibid., Annex No. 3.
.Ibid., Annex No. 6.
• Ib~d., Annex No. 7.
Ibzd., Annex No. 4.

DEUXIEME ANNEE

No 3

QUATRE-VINGT-ONZIEME SEANCE
Tenue aLake Success, New-}"ork,
le vendredi 10 janvier 1947~ a15 heures.
President: M. N. J. O. MAKIN (Australie).
Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:

Australie, Belgiq ue, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Po!ogne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.

9. Ordre du iour provisoire
1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. Lettre du President du Conseil des Ministres
des Affaires etrangeres all Secretaire general,
re~ue le 20 decembre 1946, relative au
Statut de Trieste (document S/224 /Rev.) I.
3. Resolution de I'AssembIee generale sur les
"principes regissant la reglementation et la
reduction generales des armements" (document S/231 )2 et les propositions relatives a
leur application:
a) Lettre, datee du 27 septembre 1946, du
representant de rUnio n des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques aupres du ConseiI
de securite adressee au Secretaire general
(document S/229 ) 3.
b) Projet de resolution soumis par le representant des Etats-Unis d'Amerique a la
quatre-vingt-huitieme seance du Conseil
de securite (document S/233 ) 4.

c) Projet de resolution soumis par le representant de la France a la quatre-vingtdixicme seance du Conseil de securite
(document S/243 ) 11.
4. Resolution d~ l'AssembIee R'~nerale sur les
"informations relatives aux forces armees des
Nations Unies" (document S/230)'8.
I Voir les Proces-verbaux offidels
du Conseil de securiti ,
Dl"uxieme Annee, Supplem ent No. 1, Annexe 2.
• Ibid., Annexe No 5.
.
• Ibid., Annexe No 3.
• Ibid., Annexe No 6.
• Ibid., Annexe No 7•.
• Ibid., Annexe No 4.

10. Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

11. Letter from the Ch~irri1an of the
Council of Foreign Ministers concerning the
Staiute of Trieste

10. Adoption de I·ordre du jour
L~ordre du jour est adoptl.

11. Lettre du f'resident du Conse61 des
Ministres des Afliaires etrangeres relative
DU Statut de Trieste

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l~anglais) : La quesThe PRESIDENT: Item 2, the letter from the
tion ~, c'est-a-dire la lettre du President du
Chairman of tbe Council of Foreign Ministers
Conseil des Ministres des Affaires etrangeres
to the Secretary-General, received 20 December
adressee au Secretaire general et re~ue le 20 de1946, concerning the Statute of Trieste (document S/224/Rev.l), is now before the Council . cembre 1946 au sujet du Statut de Trieste (document S/224/Rev.l), est maintenant presentee
for discussion. It is the item that was adjourned
au Conseil pour discussion. C'est le sujet dont,
from a previous meeting. Any member of the
a une seance precedente, l'examen avait ete renCouncil wishing to speak will now be in order.
voye it plus tarde Les membres du ConseiI ont
maintenant toute latitude de prendre la parole
a ce sujet s'ils le desirent.
Before actually proceeding with the discusCependant, avant de commencer la discussion,
sion, howevf:, the Assistant Secretary-General
le Secretaire general adjoint 'desire faire une
desires to :. ,ake a statement to the Council on
declaration au Conseil sur cette question.
this matter.
M. SOBOLEV (Secretaire general adjoint)
Mr. SOBOLEV (Assistant Secretary-General):
(traduit de l'anglais): Le Secretaire general m'a
I am directed by the Secretary-General to submit to the Sec.urity Council the following stateprie de soumettre au Conseil de securite la declaration suivante au sujet des points de droit que
ment with regard to the legal issues raised in
souleve l'exa len, an Conseil de securite, des
connection with the consideration by the Council
trois instruments se "apportant au Territcire libre
of the three instruments relating to the Free Terde Trieste.
ritory of Trieste.
Voici ces points de droit:
Th~ legal questions raised are:
1. Le droit du Conseil de securite d'ac1. The authority C?f the Security Council
cepter les responsabilites imposees par cea insto accept the responsibilities imposed by these
truments, et
instruments, and
2. L'obligation dans laqueIIe St~ trouve2. The obligation of Members of the
raient eventuellement les Membres des NaUnited Nations to accept and carry out the
tions Unies d'accepter et de mettre en vigueur
decisions of the Security Council pursuant to
les decisions du Conseil de sccurite decoulant
these instruments.
de ces instruments.
1. Pouvoirs du Conseil de securite
1. Authority ofthe Security Council
On a fait remarquer qU'il serait contraire a la
It has been ~uggested that it would be conCharte que le Conseil de securite acceptat les
trary to the Charter for the Security Council.to
accept the responsibilities proposed to be placed
responsabilites qu'on projette de lui confier sous
le regime du Statut permanent du Territoire libre
on it by the permanent Statute for the Free Terde Trieste et des deux instruments connexes.
ritory of Trieste and the two related instruments.
Cette fa~on de voir se fonde sur le fa)'.; que les
This position has been suggested on the ground
pouvoirs du Conseil de securite se limitent aux
that the powers of the Security Council are limited to the specific powers granted in Chapters
cas specifies aux Chapitres VI, VII, VIII et XII
VI, VII, VIII, and XII of the Charter, and that
de la Charte, et que la delimitation de ces pou··
these specific powers do not vest the Council
voirs ne permet pas au Coriscil d'assumer les reswith sufficient authority to undertake theresponponsabilitcs que lui imposeraient les instruments
en question.
sibiIities imposed by the instruments in question.
In view of the importance of the issue raised;
Etant donne l'importance de la question, le
Secretaire general estime qu'il est de son devoir
the Secretary-General has felt bound to make a
de presenter une declaration de nature a faire la
statement which may throw light on the constitutional questions, presented. Paragraph 1 of
lumiere sur les points d'ordre constitutionneI qui
se presentent. Le paragraphe 1 de l' Article 24
Article 24 provides: "In order to ensure pi'ompt
prevoit que: "Afin d'assurer l'action rapide et
and effective action by the United Nations, its
Members confer on the Security Council priefficace de l'Organisation, ses Membres conferent
au Conseil de securitc la responsabiIite princimary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, and agree that in
pale du maintien de la paix et de la securite
carrying out its duties under this responsibility
internationales et reconnaissent qu'en s'acquitthe Security Council acts on their behalf." The
tant des devoirs que lui impose cette responsawords, "primary responsibility for the maintebiIite, le Conseil de securite agit en leur nom."
nance of international peace and security", couLes mots: "responsa:bilite principale du maintien
pled with the phrase, "acts on their behalf", conde la paix et de la securite internationales", rapstitute a grant of power sufficiently wide to
proches des mots: "agit en leur nom", constituent
enable the Security Council to approve the docuen fait une delegation de pouvoirs d'une portee
ments in question and to assume the responsibilsuffisante pour permettre au Conseil de securite
ities arising therefrom.
d'approuver les documents en question et d'assumer les responsabilitcs qui en decou!ent.
r

J

Furthermore, the records of the San Francisco Conference demonstrate that the powers
of the Council under Article 24 are not restricted
to the specific grants of authority contained in
Chapters VI, VII, VIII and XII. In particular,
the Secretary-General wishes to invite attention
to the discUssion at the fourteenth meeting of
Committee IIIII at San Francisco, wherein it
was clearly recognized by all the representatives
that the Security Council was not restricted to
the specific powers set forth in Chapters VI, VII,
VIII and XII. (I have in mind document 597,
Committee IIIII/30.) It will be noted that
this discussion concerned a proposed amendment
to limit the obligation of Members to accept decisions of the Council solely to those decisions
made wider the specific powers. In the discussion, all the delegations which spoke, including
both proponents and opponents of this amendment, recognized that the authority of the Council was not restricted to such speciflc powers. It
was recognized in this discussion that the
responsibility to maintain peace and security
carried with it a power to discharge this responsibility. This power, it was nuted, was not unlimited, but subject to' the purposes and principles of the United Nations.

It is apparent that this discussion refle(~s a
basic conception of the Charter, namely, that
the Members of the United Nations have
conferred upon the Security Council powers
commensurate with its responsibitity for the
maintenance of peace and security. The only
limitations are the fundamental principles and
purposes found in Chapter I of the Charter.

2. Obligation of the Members to accept and
carry out the decisions of the Security
Council
The question has been raised as to "what
countries will be bound by the obligation to en~ure the integrity and independence of the Free
Territory". The answer to this is clear. Article
24 provides that in carrying out its duties, the
Security Council acts in behalf of Members of
the United Nations. Moreover, Article 25 expressly provides that "the Members of the United
Nations agree to accept and carry out the decisions of the Security Council in accordance with
the present Charter".
The record at San Francisco also demonstrates
that this paragraph applies to all the decisions
of the Security Council. As inc:licated above,
there was a proposal in Committee 11111 to
limit this obligation solely to those decisions of
the Council undertaken pursuant to the specific
powers enumerated in Chapters VI, VII, VII
and XII of the Charter. This amendment was
put to a vote in the Committee and rejected
(document 597, III/I/30). The rejection of this
amendment is clear evidence that the obligation
of the Members to carry out the decisions of the
Security Council applies equally to decisions
made under Article 24 and to the decisions made
under the grant of specific powers.

De plus, les proces-verbaux de la Conference
de San-Francisco demontrent que les pauvoirs du
Conseil, decoulant de l'Article 24~ ne se limitent
pas aux attributions specifiques d)autorite mentionnees am: Chapitres VI, VII, VIII et XII.
Le Secretaire general desire en particulier attirer
l'attention sur la discussion qui cut lic::u ala qua~
torzicme seance de la Commission HI/I, a. SallFrancisco, au cours de laque11e tous les representant~ ont reconnu que les pouvoirs du Conseil
de securite n'etaient pas limites aux pouvoirs
specifiques enonc~\ aux Chapitres VI, VII, VIII
et XII de la Charte. (J'ai a l'esprit le document
597, Comite 111/1/30.) On remarquera que
cette discussion portait sur une proposition
d'amendement visant a limiter aux seules decisions pr'~ en VeJ.tu des pouvoirs specifiques du
Conseil, l'obligation qu'ont les Membres d'accepter les decisions du Conseil. Au cours de cette
discussion, toutes les deIegations qui prirent la
parole, a la fois en faveur de cet amendement,
ou contre, reconnurent que l'autorite de ce
Conseil n'etait pas iimitee a ces pou\'oirs spedfiques. n fut reconnu egalement que la responsabilite du maintien de la paix et de la securite
entrame avec e11e le pouvoir d)assumer cette responsabilite. On a vu que ce pouvoir n'6tait pas
illimite, mais il etait soumis aux exigences que
comportent les buts Lt les principes de 1'0rganis.ation des Nations Unies.
semble que de cette discussion se degage une
conception fondamentale de la Charte; en
d'autres termes, que les Membres des Nations
Unies ont reconnu au Conseil de securite des
pouvoirs en rapport avec les responsabilites qui
lui incombent relativement au maintien de la
paix et de la securite. Les seules restrictions
sortent des principes et buts fondamentaux qui
figment au Chapitre ler de la Charte.
2. Obligation qui incombe aux M embrcs d'accepter et d'executer les decisions du Conseil
de securite
La question s'est posee de savoir "quels pays
seront soumis l'obligation d'assurer l'integrite
et l'independance du Territoire libre". La l'eponse est fort simple. L'Article 24 pr~voit que,
dans l'accomplissement de ces fonctions, le
Conseil de securite agit au nom des Membres
des Nations Unies. Par ailleurs, l'Article 25
stipule expressement que "les Membres de l'Organisation conviennent d'accepter et d'appliquer
les decisions du Comeil de securite, conformement a la presente Charte".
Les deliberations de San-Francisco ont demontre que ce paragraphe s'applique a toutes les
decisions prises par le Conseil de securite. Comme
il est indique plus haut, une proposition fut presentee au sein de la Commission HIII visant a
limiter cette obligation uniquement aux decisions
prises par le Conseil en vertu des pouvoirs specifiques enonces aux Chapitres VI, VII, VIII et
XII de la Charte. Mis aux voix au Comite, ce
projet d'amendement fut repousse (document
597, HIll/3D). Le re.iet de cet amendement.
demontre clairement que l'obligation qui incombe aux Membres d'executer les decisions du
Conseil de securite vautegalement paurles decisions prises en vertu de l'Article 24 et pour les
I decisions prises en vertu des pouvoir specifiques.

n

res-

a

Mr. Quo TAI~CHI (China): I was not quite
Slware of the trend of our present discussion
when I asked for your attention. I thought that
the draft proposal by the representative of the
United States of America was before the Council. Even so, I would like to make just one small
editing alteration to the draft resolution.
The PRESIDENT: You are quite in order.
Mr. Quo TAl-CHI (China): As you direct
me to proceed with the discussion of this draft
resolution, Mr. President, I !Should like to point
out, as I said at the previous meeting on this
question, that, in principle, the Chinese delegation is in hearty support. In the last two lines
of the draft resolution before us, inste~d of directing the Secretary~Generalto notify the United
States of America, France, the United Kingdom
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics of
its action, I would suggest now that the words,
"Council of Foreign Ministers concerned" should
replace the names of the four countries which
are to be informed of this action. I think it ~s
preferabl~ to substitute this general term for the
specific names of the four countries. For one
rc~son, I do not think the Council should really
limit the number of those who are to be informed of this action. I presume that the Council
of Foreign Ministers, after receiving thi" notification of our action, may wish to inform the
countries immediately concemed, 'for instance,
Yugoslavia and Italy. For another, the Council
of Foreign Ministers may also wish to inform the
members of the Paris Conference; indeed, it may
be that the Council of Foreign Ministers may
wish to inform all the Members of the United
Nations, in view of the fact that this action is
taken by one of the principal or~ans of the
United Nations and consequently deserves the
attention and interest of all its Members. I do
not know whether this amendment is agreeable
to the delegation of the United States of America, but this is what I should like to propose.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America): I
exchanged a few remarks yesterday with the
representative of China with. regard to his
suggested change. I think the suggestion for
changing the last sentence of the resolution is an
excellent one; it greatly improves it for record
purposes. I gladly accept it, and I am sorry that
I did not think of it myself.
I should also like to suggest a further revision
of my own resolution. The original resolution
which you have before you refers to Annexes
to the proposed peace treaty with Italy, and I
should like to distribute to you now a revised
text which lists the specific papers that the Council is called upon to approve. This change suggests itself to me from the useful remarks made
yesterday by the representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics. It is merely a
clarification and a more precise wording of the
resolution. This revised text also contains the
change suggested by the representative of China.

M. Quo TAI~CHI (Chine) (traduit de l'anglais): Je n'avais pas bien compris l'orientation
de la presente discussion lorsque j'ai demande la
parole. Je pensais que le Conseil etait saisi du
projet de proposition presente par le representant
des Etats~Unis d'Amerique. Quoi qu'il en soit,
je desirerais apporter une Iegere modification de
forme au projet de resolution.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Votre
demande est conforme au reglement.
M. Quo TAl-CHI (Chine) (traduit de ['anglais): Puisque vous m'invitez a poursuivre la
discussion de ce projet de resolution, j'aimerais
souligner, Monsieur le President, ainsi que je I'ai
deja dit a la precedente seance sur cette question,
que la delegation chinoise y apporte en principe
son appui total. Les deux: dernieres lignes du
projet de resolution actuel mentionnent que le
Secretaire general doit informer les Etats-Unis
d'Amerique, la France, le Royaume-Uni et
I'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques
de cette decision; je propose de remplacer les
noms des quatre pays qui doivent etre informes
de cette mesure, par les mots "le Conseil des
Ministres des AfJaires etrangeres des pays interesses". Je pense qu'il est preferable de substituer
cette expression generale aux noms respectifs des
quatre pays parce que, a mon avis, le COllseil
ne devrait pas, en fait, limiter le nombre de ceux
qui doivent etre informes de cette decision. Il
est vraisemblable que le Conseil des MinistrCli
des AfIaires etrangeres, apres avoir ete informe
de notre decision, desire a son tour en informer
les pays directement interesses, par exemple la
Yougoslavie et l'Italie. Le Conseil des Ministres
des AfIaires etrangeres peut egalement desirer en
informer les membres de la C:mference de Paris;
en realite, il se pourrait que le Conseil des Ministres des AfIaires etrangeres desirat informer tous
les Membres des Nations Unies, etant donne que
cette decision est prise par l'un des principaux
organismes des Nations Unie::> et merite rattention et l'interet de tous les Membres de l'Organisation. J'ignore si cet amendement parrot acceptable a la delegation des Etats-Unis d'Amerique; mais il repr~sente ce que nous voudrions
proposer.
M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit'de i'anglais): J'ai echange hier quelques
remarques avec le representant de la Chine au
sujet de la modification proposee. J'estime que
la proposition, visant a changer la derniere phrase
de la resolution, est excellente; eUe ameliore con~
siderablement le texte; je l'accepte tres volontiers
et regrette de ne pas y avoir pense moi-meme.
Je desirerais egalement proposer une revision
suppIementaire de ma propre resolution. La resolution primitive que vous avez devant vous se
rapporte aux Annexes au projet de traite de paix
avec I'Italieet j'aimerais vous faire distribuer un
texte revise ou figure la liste precise des documents que le Conseil aura a approuver. Cette
modification m'est venue a l'esprit a la suite des
remarques utiles que fit hier le representant de
l'Union des RepubIiques socialistes sovietiques.
C'est simplement une redaction plus exacte et
plus precise de la resolution. Ce texte revise com'JX>rte egalement la modificatiohpresentee par le
representant de la Chine.
.

-

The PRESIDENT: The representative of the
United States of America asked for leave to re~
vise the resolution he submitted to the Council
at the last meeting when this matter was con~
sidered; the resolution will now read:

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): Le representant des Etats~Unis d'Amerique a clemande
a reviser la resolution qU'll avait presentee au
Conseil a la derniere seance OU cette question fut
e."amince; la resolution se pn5sente maintilllant
sous la forme suivante:
liThe Security Council, having' received and
"Le Conseil de securite, ayant regu et exa~
examined the Annexes to the proposed Peace
mine les Annexes au futur Traite de paix avec
Treaty with Italy, relating' to the creation and
l'Italie, relatives a la creation et au gouvernegovernment of the Free Territory of Trieste
meut du Territoire libre d~ Trieste (y compris
(including' an arrangement for a Free Port),
les dispositions ayant trait au Port franc) ,
hereby records its approval of the three fol~
signifie par la presente son approbation des
lowing' documents:
..
trois documents ci-apres:
1. The instrument for the prOVISIOnal
1. Instrum ent ayant trait au regime proregime of the Free Territory of Trieste;
visoire du Territoire libre de Trieste;
2. The perma nent Statute for the Free
2. Statut perma nent du Territoire libre
Territory of Trieste;
de Trieste;
3. The instrument for the Free Port of
3. Instrum ent relatif au Port franc de
Trieste;
Trieste;
and its acceptance of the responsibility deet son acceptation des responsabilites qui lui
volving upon it under the same.
incombent aux termes desdits.
"The Security CO..tncil directs the Secre"Le Conseil de securite charge le Secretaire
tray-General to notify the Council of Foreign
general de repondre a la communication du
Ministers of its action."
Conseil des Ministres des Affaires etrangeres
en I'informant de cette decision."
Is there any objection to the revisicn being
Voit-on quelque objection a ce que le texte
made?
soit modifie en ce sens?
Mr. Quo TAl-CHI (Chin a): I am grateful to
M. Quo TAl-cH! (Chine ) (traduit de I'anthe representative of the United St. ~s of Amerglais): J e remercie le representant des Etatsica for accepting the suggestion I made to him
Unis d'Amerique d'avoir accepte la proposition
yesterday. I only received a copy of the revised
que je lui ai soumise hier. Ce n'est qu'aujo urdraft resolution today, after I ha.d made my
d'hui, apres avoir presente mes observations, que
remarks; otherwise I should not have spoken at
fai re~u copie du projet de resolution revise,
all.
sinon, je n'aurais pas pris la parole.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist ReM. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodapublics) (translated from Russia n): I have no
listes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je ne vois
objections to the alterations introduced into the
pas d'objections aux modifications que le repretext of the United States resolution by the repre~
sentan t des Etats-Unis d'Amerique a apportees
sentative of the United States of America at this
aujour d'hui a sa resolution. J'ai meme l'impresmeeting. Moreover, it seems to me that these
sion que ces modifications ameliorent dans une
alterations somewhat improve the text and in
certaine mesure le texte, "et qu'en tous cas, elles
any case. render it more precise.
le rendent plus precis.
As regards the amend ment submitted by the
Quant a l'amen demen t du representant de la
representative of China, I consider that there is
Chine, je l'estime inutile. En effet, la decision au
no need for it. Indeed, the deciflion reg'arding
sujet de Trieste a ete prise par les quatre PuisTrieste was adopted by the four Powers in the
sances au Conseil des Ministres. C'est pourquoi
Council of Foreign Ministers. It is completely
II serait parfaitement logique que ce soit cell
logical, therefore, that the Security Council
q uatre Puissances que le Consell de securite inshould inform these four Powers of its decision.
format de sa decision.
In view of this, I do not think the last senPar consequent j'ai l'impressioll que la dertence of the resolution of the United States of
niere phrase de la resolution des Etats-Unis
America should be altered.
d'Amerique ne devrait pas etre modifiee.
The PRESIDENT: I should like to point out to
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Je vouthe Council that there are difficulties, I think,
drais faire remarq uer au Conseil qu'a man avis
with respect to that last aspect of the resolution;
la derniere partie de la resolution presente cerfor, as is known the constitution of the Council "taines
difficultes: comme on le sait, la composiof Foreign Ministers varies at the different stages
tion du Conseil des Ministres des Affaires etranand in regard to the diverse questions which
geres diffefe se10n l'epoque et la nature des queshave to be discussed; and the Council of Foreign
tions a discuter; le Conseil des Ministres des MMinisters discussing one question may not be the
faires etrangeres qui discute d'une question peut
same as a Council of Foreign Ministers dealing
avoir une composition differente du Conseil qui
with another. Thus, I find that in the document
traite d'une autre question. Ainsi, je vois que
that has been forwarded to the Security Council,
dans le document qui a ete transInis au ConseiI
specific mention is made of the nations which
de securite sont specifiquement mentionnees les
are represented at that particu lar Council
nations representees a la seance en question: on
meeting, and it indicates the representatives of
precise qu'll s'agit des representants des Etatsthe United States of America, of France, of the
Unis cl'Amerique, de la France, du RoyaumeUnited Kingdom and of the Union of Soviet
Uni et de l'Unio n des Republiques socialistes
j

Socialist Republics, mteting as a COll."lcil of
Foreign Ministers.
Thus, I should like just to draw the attention
of the Council to that aspect, that in actually
mentioning the Council of Foreign Ministers, it
m.ay be essential to indicate the exact composi~
tion of that Council of Foreign Ministers and to
name the nations which are really responsible
for having brought thin to the notice of the S~
curity Council.
Does the representative of China wish to
speak?
Mr. Quo TAI~om (China): Mr. President, I
have heard with intere..1l1: both your observations
and the observations of the representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics with regard
to the revision I suggested. I must confess that I
am still partial to my own suggestion and still
oppose specifying the countries represented on
this Council by name.
Both the USSR representative and you, Mr.
President, seem to have misunderstood my original motion. I said that, instead of mentioning the
four countries by name, I would suggest that
the Secretary-General be directed to notify the
members of the Council of Foreign Ministers
concerned of its action, which means that I do
not intend to smuggle China into that phrase;
although China is a member of the Council of
Foreign Ministers, she has not taken an ,active
part in the drafting of the treaties concerned. It
was far from my intention to include China in
that phrase. I said: "to the ,Council of Foreign
Ministers concerned", referring to the four coun~
tries which were concerned in the chafting of the
treaties in question.
Thus, I do not think there' CZll be any difference between us on that score. I do, object to
naming the countries in this Council, because
we should leave it to the Council of Foreign
Ministers to. do what it may desire with the infOrIn'iltion we may pass on to it.
Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America): I
regret this misunderstan<lmg, and I must say
that the fact that it has arisen is of some surprise
.tq me. In putting forward this suggested change,
I had taken it for granted that the fact that the
Secret'll'Y~General is replying to a specific commUllkation, which is the principal document
under discussion, would be sufficient indication
that the reply would be directed to the specific
group which sefit the document to the Council,
and that we could leave to the internal regulations of the Secretary-General the way in which
this notification would be made. I do not even
have any ideas or preferences as to whether or
not the reply should be sent to Mr. Bymes, who
is no long~r the Chairman of the Council of
Foreign Ministers, if for no other reason than
that it is not at present in session in New York.
I had imagined that it would probably .be sent
to the respective Governments of all four countries~

I think personally that, although it is a matter

sovietiques reunis en Conseil des Ministres des
Maires etrangeres.
Je desire done simplement attirer l'attention
du Conseil sur eet aspect de la rr.solutiol\ afin
qu'en mentionnant le Consei1' des Ministre'J des
Affaires etrangeres, on juge indispensable d'en
indiquer la composition exaete, et de nommer Ies
pays qui ont porte cette question devant le
Conseil de seeurite.
Le representant de la Chine desire-t~il prr.ndre
la parole?
M. Quo TAX-cm (Chine) (traduit de ['anglais): Monsieur le President, j'ai ecoute avec
interet les observations que vous et le representant de l'Unien des Republiq1.1eB socialist~ sovietique& avez presentees all sujet de I'amendement
que j'ai propose. Je dais avouer que je m'en tiens
toujours a ma proposition, et que je continue de
m'opposeX' a. ce que scient dCsignes par leur nom
les pays representes au Conseil des Ministres des
Maires etrangeres.
Le representant de l'URSS et vous, Monsieur
le President, semblez avoir donne tous deux une
interpretation erronee de ma premiere motion.
Au lieu de mentionner les quatre pays par leur
nom, ai-je dit, je propose que l'on charge le
Secretaire general d'informer de la decision les
membres du Conseil des Ministres des Maires
etran.geres qu'elle interesse; en d'autres terines,
je ne cherche pas a plaider pour ma paroisse «;n
introciuisant cet amendement; bien que la Chine
soit membre du Conseil des Ministres des M~
faires etrangeres, elle n'a pris aucune part active
a la redactlon des traites en question. Loin de
moi l'intention de vouloir comprendre la Chine
dans cette phrase. I'ai dit: "au Conseil des
Ministres des .J..ffaires etrangeres intlresses."
Cela signifie: les quatre' pays interesses a la redaction des traitesen question.
Ainsi, je n'ai pas l'imprc ion qu'il puisse
exister ~ucune divergence de vues entre nous a
ce sujet. Je desapprouve que 1'0n mentionne
nommement les pays, car nollS devrions laisser
au Conseil des Ministres des Maires etrangeres
le .'loin de disposer a son gre des informations que
nous lui transmettons.
M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d~Amerique) (tra- .
duit de l'anglais): Je regrette ce 'malentendu
et m'etonne qu'il ait pu se produire. En proposant le changement demandi:, je tenais pour
admis que le fait pour le Secretaire general de
repondre a une commuI,Jication determinee, a
savoir, le document dont nous discutons, constituait une indication suffisante que la reponse
serait transmise au m~me groupe de personnes
qui avait soumis le document a l'attention du
Conseil, et que nous pouvions laisser au Secre~
taire general le soin de decider en conformit6 du
reglement interieur, de quelle maniere cette com~
munication devait etre faite. Je ne sais meme
pas, et cela m'est egal, si la reponse sera envoyee
a M. Bymes, qui n'est plus President du Conseil
des Ministres des Maires etrangeres, quand ce
ne serait que parce que le Conseil ne siege pas
actuellement a New~York. J'imaginais qu'elle
serait probablement adressee aux Gouvemements
respectifsdes quatre pays.
PersonneUement, bien qu'il appartienne au

for the Council to determine, my resolution is
now clear C1"'1ough to indicate that the Secrotary-GC'neral should reply to those Foreign Ministers who sent him the letter on which we are
now taking a decision.
The· PRESIDENT: This matter, I think, could
be met quite satisfactorily and adequately by just
adding one word, which was mentioned by the
representative of China, by inserting the word
"concerned" after the words, CCCouncil of Foreign Ministers". That possibilitY would meet the
situation adequately, because the reply would
then be addressed to those Ministers VI' ha were
actually concerned.
Mr. LANGE (Poland): The representative of
China may wish to answer first directly.
Mr. Quo TAl-CHI (China): Mr. President,
although I do not admit that your objection is
valid, that was exactly the word I was going to
suggest out of a spirit of conciliation and in order
to meet any possible oQjection from you and
from the representative of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics.
Mr. LANGE (Poland): I think the point is a
purely technical one, and I do not think we
should attach any political significa"lce to this
discussion.

Consei1 de trancher la question, j'estime que ma
resolution indique maintenant avec su:ffisamment
de clarte que le Secretaire general reSpond aux
Ministres des Affaires etrangcres qui Iui Ont
envoye la lettre au sujet de laquelle nous prenons
une decision en ce moment.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): A mon
avis, on pOUITait regler la Cl.uestion de fagon tout
a- fait satisfaisante en ajoutant un sew mot. celui
qui a ete mentionne par le representant de la
Chine, c'est-a.-dire en inserant le mot CCintereJ.l'es'''
apres les mots: CCCons.eil des Ministresdes Affaires etrangeres". Cela pourrait re.soudre le probleme de maniere satisfaisante, puisque ainsi on
adresserait la reponse aux Ministres des Maires
etrangeres effective.ment interesses a- la question.
M. LANGE (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais):
Le representant de la Chine derne peut-etre rep-mdre directement.
M. Quo TAl-CHI (Chine) (traduit de fanglais) ~ Monsieur le President, hien que je ne
tienne pas votn~ objection pour valable, ce mot
est precisement celui que j'allais proposer d'ajou- .
ter, par esprit de conciliation, et afin de prevenir
toute objection possible de vOtrc part, ou de la
part du representant de rUnion des R6p~bliques
socialistes sovi6tiques.
.
M. LANGE (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais):
C'est une question d'ordre purement technique;
je ne pense pas que nous devious attachcr une
quekonque signification politiqne a- cette discussiOil.

The problem is simply to state the legal status
clearly. As I see it, the difficulty concerns the
question._whether the Council 3f FO:Leign Ministers at this moment exists as a continuing legal
institution, or whether we only have the four
Governments which meet from time to time and,
during such meetings, name themselves "Council
of Foreign Ministers".
Now, the letter we have here from Secretary
Byrnes mentions the representatives of the United
States of America, of :France, of the United
Kingdom, and of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics meeting as the Council of Foreign
Ministers in New York. And later, it says that
"the Ministers for Foreign Affairs have instituted
a Committee which will hold itself at the disposal of the Security Council ...".
And in the final passage we read: "The Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the United States of
America, of France, of the United Kingdom,
and of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
are desirous that the text submitted ...".
Now, I thinlc we could probably adopt two
phrases which should prove satisfactory. Either
we could use the terminology which is used at
th~ ~nd of the letter. and say: cc••• to notify the
Mt:·usters for Foretgn Affairs of the United
States of America, of France, etc."-that
would be one possibl~ phrasing; it is actually
~he one .which is used in Mr. Byrnes' letter-or,
if tha~ IS more acceptable to the representative
of China, we could use instead a phrasing simila: to the one which the President suggested. I
".' '. thmk a more explicit phrasing would be: C'The

~~=-~--_.

PreciseI' le statut juridique du Conseil des
Mmistres des Affaires etrangereS, voila. a- quoi se
resume seulement le prob!eme. Si je comprends
bien, la difficulte reside en ce qu'il convient de
savoir si !e Conseil existe a- l'heure actuelle en
tant qu'institution juridique permanente, Oll si
nous nous trouvons en presence de quatre Gauvernements qui se reunissent de temps en temps
et, pour ces reunions, s'appellent "Conseil des
Ministres des Affaires etrangeres".
Or, la lettre de M. Bymes, que nous avons
sous les yeux, mentionne que les representants
des Etats-Unis d'Amerique, de la France, du
Royaume-Uni et de rUnion des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques se reu.uissent en Consei1 des
Ministres des Affaires etrangeres a- New-Yo,,~.
Plus loin, M. Byrnes ueclare que "les Ministres
des Affaires etrangeres ont cree une Commission qui se tiendra a- la disposition '<iu Conseil de
securite ...".
Dans le dernier passage, nous lisons: "Les
Ministres des Affaires etrangeres des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique, de la France, du Royaume-U~ et
de l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques
desirent que le texte presente ...".
Je pense que nous avons le choix entre deux
phrases susceptibles de nous donner satisfaction.
Nous pourrions employer les mots qui figurent ala fin de la lettre: cc• • • informer les Ministres
des Affaires etrangeres des Etats-Unis d'Amirique, de la France, etc."'-e'est la une redaction
possible, c'est precisement celle adoptee dans la .
lettre de M. Byrnes,-ou bien, si cela paraltplus
acceptable au representant de la Chine, nous
pourrions employer' une expression similaire acelle proposee par le President. Je pense qu'll
serait plUs explicite de dire: ccLe Conseil de

Security Council directs the Secretary-General to
notify the Governments which pm·ticipated in
the Council of Foreign Ministers held in New
York • • •n or something like that.

securite charge le Secretaire general d'informer
les Gouvcrnements qui dtaicnt reprcscnMs au
Conscil des .Ministres des AI/aircs etrangeres a
NewMYork • ••n ou quelque chose de scmblable.

I think either of these phrasings would not be
open to any legal objections as to their meaning.

A mon avis, on ne pourrnit soulever aucune
objection de caractcre juridique quant au sens
de l'une ou l'autre de ces deux redactions.
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (tradttit dtt russc): Je remcrcie le representant de la Chine d'avoir precise
son point de vue. Il est done, lui aussi, d'avis que
le Conseil de securite doit communiquer sa. decision aux Gauvernements des quatre Puissances,
a savoir les Etats-Unis d'Amerique, la France,
le Royaume-Uni et l'Union des Republiqucs socialistes sovietiques. Pourtant, le representant de
la Chine, tout comme celui des Etats-Unis
d'Amcrique, se sert, on ne sait trap pourquoi, de
formules generales, et evite de dire explicitement
que ce sont bien les Puissances interessees que le
Conseil doit informer de sa decision.

Mr. GROl\XYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Rcpublics) (tra1~slated from Russian): I should
like to thank the representative of China for the
explanation which he has given. It appears that
the representative of China also has in view that
the Security Council should inform the Governments of the four countries of its decision,
namely, the United Kingdonl, France the
United States of America, an':1 the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics. At the same time, the
representative of China and the representative of
the United States of America are for some
reason juggling with general algebraic formulae;
they are reluctant to state frankly that the
Security Council should inform the Governments
concerned.
I do not quite understand the sense of this
amendment. To say that the Security Council
should inform the Council of Foreign Ministers,
having in view the Council of Foreign Ministers
of the four countries, is tantamount to enumerating these countries. What is the difference? I
cannot understand why preference is given to
a general formula as against a specific indication
of the countries concerned.
I wish somebody would explain this matter,
the sense of this amendment.
Mr. Quo TAl-CHI (China): I am sorry that
a small suggestion from me should have raised
so much discussion around this table. But I am
quite ready to oblige the representative of tht'!
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. I will give
him the reason why I object to the Security
Council's naming the individual States in this
resolution.
My reason is quite simple. The representatives
of the four Powers communicated with the Seurity Council in the name of the Council of
Foreign Ministers. It was as a corporate body
that they acted, and this Council should reco~­
nize that fact. Instead of communicating with
the members of that corporate body individually,
we should simply recognize the Council of For-.ign Ministers as such, as a corporate body, because it is as a corporate body that it has definite
function and power; as individual members or
States, they have no legal standing before the
Security Council. Furthermore, the representatives on the Council of Foreign Ministers may
change, while as a corporate body, the Council
of Foreign Ministers remains; that is why I object to naming the fClUr different States individually.
j

In order to meet your point, I went so far as
to compromise, by suggesting that the word
tcconcerned" should be added, which would
make the resolution perfectly clear beyond any
possibility of a doubt.
'~

i

Je ne comprends pas tres bien le sens de
l'amendement en question. Dire que le Conseil
de securite doit informer le Conseil des Ministres,
qui, on lie sait, se compose de Ministres des
quatre Puissances, equivaut tout simplement a
enumerer ces Puissances. Du est la difference?
Pourquoi choisir une formule generale au lieu
d'enumerer les pays interesses?
Je voudrais que quelqu'un me fournisse des
ec1aircissements ace sujet.
M. Quo TAX-CHI (Chine) (traduit de l'ti.nglais) : J e regrette que la suggestion que j'ai faite
sur un poin.t de detail ait donne lieu ici a pareille
discussion. Mais je suis dispose a acceder au desir
du representant de l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques et dirai donc pourquoi je
m'oppose a ce que, dans cette resolution, le
Conseil de securite designe les Etats par leur nom.
Le motif que j'invoque est tres simple. Les
representants des quatre grandes Puissances se
sont mis en relation avec le Conseil de securite
au nom du Conseil des Ministres des Affaires
etrangeres. C'est en tant que corps constitue
qu'ils ont agi, et le Conseil de securite devrait
reconnaitre ce fait. Au lieu de communiquer avec
chacun des membres de ce corps constituc en
particulier, nous devrions simplement reconnaitre
le Conseil des Ministres des Afl'aires etrangeres
comme un corps constitue, parce que c'est en
tant que corps constitue qu'il a des fonctions et
des droits bien precis; Membres ou Etats, agissant a titre personnel, n'ont aucun statut juridique devant le Conseil de securite. En outre, les
representants du Conseil des Ministres des Affaires etrangeres peuvent changer, alOI'S que le
Conseil des Ministres des Affaires etrangeres,
corps constitue, n'est soumis a aucun changement. Tels sont les motifs pour lesquels je m'oppose a ce que le Conseil de securite designe les
differents Etats par leur nom.
.
Pour me conformer a votre desir, j'ai mt:me
ete jusqu'a accepter un compromis, en proposant
d'ajouter le mot "interesses", ce qui rendrait la
resolution parfaitement claire et dissiperait tout
doute possible.

a

51
I hope this explanation may answer your
query and dispel the doubt you have in mhd.
It concerns the difference between individual
members and a corporate body, which is the
Council of Forei'¥l :Ministers, as such.
Mr. El KHOURY (Syria): I see that this draft
resolution, as presented to us by the representative of the United States of Am~rica, is not in
itself coherent. There is no connection between
the last paragraph and the rest of the resolution.
It says "the Security Council, having received
and examined", without mentioning from whom
they have been received 0; why these drafts and
instruments have been examined, as if the
Security Council were volunteering to do this of
its own volition without having been asked or
requested by any body to take such an action.
Then, at the end, it says: "The Security Council
directs the Secretary-General to notify the Council of Foreign Ministers ..."
Why? What is the connection between the
Foreign Ministers and the first resolution? The
resolution is a separate thing; it will be published
as a specific document. It must contain all the
elements and the reasons for which such a resolution is taken and must indicate at whose request and by whom it must be taken.

I think it would certainly be more appropriate if the resolution began in a different form:
"The Security Council having received from the
Foreign Ministers [enumerating them] a request
and a proposal. to approve these documents ..."
Then the Security Council approves them and
notifies the Foreign Ministers in question.

If we read this resnlution separately, as it
stands, nobody can know the reason why, and at
whose demand, the Security Council has taken
this action, unless you connect it with the whole
document, and unless one first reads the document and the letter from the Foreign Ministers.
In this resolution, there is no mention of the letter of the Foreign Ministers. I think the matter
should be set in a better form, which would be
more explicit and clearer than it is in its present
form.
The PRESIDENT: With a view to reaching
some conclusion on this particular aspect, I
would ask the representative of the United
States of America if he wishes his resolution to
remain in the present form, as it has been submitted?
Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America): In
my personal view, the suggestion made by the
representative of Syria, while entirely logical, is
not D~cessary. I think the provenance of this
paper is implicit in the whole record of our proceedings, and I think there is no one who would
misunderstand. Furthermore, this resolution
would never be used or published by itself for
any serious purpose. I have no objection, however, to the insertion, as an amendment to this
resolution, of such words as might commend
themselves to the acceptance of the: Council,
which would indicate precisely where the document came from. If that is the sense of the Coun-

J'cspere que l'explication que je viens ne donner constitue une reponse votre question et met
fin vas deutes. Il s'agit de la difference entre
des particuliers et un corps constitu6, savoir,
le Conseil des Ministres des Affaires etrangcres.
M. El KHOURY (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais): A mon avis, le projet de resolution prcsente par le representant des Etats-Unis d'Amerique manque de coherence. Il n'y a aucun rapport entre le dernier paragraphe et le reste de la
resolution. La resolution se lit "le Conseil de
sccuritc, ayant re~u et examine', sans mentionner I'origine de ces projets et instrument.3, ni
pourquoi illes a examines, comme si le Conseil
de securite se proposait d'agir de son propre chef,
selon son bon plaisir, sans que personne lui ait
demande, ou qu'aucun organisme I'ait pric;, de
prendre une decision. La resolution declare en
dernier l:~u: "Le Conseil de securite charge le
Sccretaire general d'informer le Conseil des
Ministres des Affaires Hrangeres .•." .
Pourquoi? Quel :rapport y a-t-il entre le
Conseil des Ministres des Affaires etrangeres et
la premiere resolution? La resolution est une
chose a part; eUe sera publice a titre de document distinct. EUe doit contenir tous les elements
et les motifs pour lesquels cUe est prise; eUe doit
indiquer qui a introduit la demande, et par qui
la decision doit etre prise.
A mon sens, il conviendrait de rediger le debut
de la resolution sous une forme differente: "Le
Conseil de securite ayant re~u des Ministres des
Maires etrangeres [suivent leurs noms] une
requete et une proposition visant a l'approbation
de ces documents . . ." Ensuite le Conseil de
securite les approuve et informe les Ministres des
Maires etrangeres interesses.
Si nous lisons eette resolution separement, tene
qu'elle est redigee maintenant, personne ne peut
savoir pour quelle raison le Conseil de seeurite
a pris cette decision, ni qui a introduit la demande, a mains qu'on ne la rattache au document tout entier, et a mains aussi qu'on ne lise
d'abord le document et la lettre des Ministres
des Maires etrangeres. La resolution sous sa
forme actuelle ne mentionne pas la lcttre des
Ministres des Makes etrangeres. n me semble
qu'il conviendrait d'ameliorer le texte de eette
resolution POllf qu'il soit plus precis et plus clair.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'ang1ais): Pour
nous permettre de prendre une decision sur ee
point en particulier, je demande au representant
des Etats-Unis d'Amerique s'il desire que sa
resolution soit maintenue sous sa forme actueUe,
telle qu'ill'a presentee?
M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'ang1ais): A mon avis, la proposition
que vient de faire le representant de la Syrie, bien
que parfaitement logique, n'est pas necessaire.
Si on consultait le praces-verbal de nos debats,
on y trouverait implicitemeilt indiquee la provenance de ce document, et je pense qu'raucun
malentendu n'est possible. En outre, cette reso,.
lution ne sera jamais utilisee ni publiee separement pour quelque raison importante. Je ne
m'oppose pourtan~ pas a ce qu'on modifie eette
resolution, en y inserant des termes quipermettraient au Conseil de I'approuver et qui indiqueraient clairement l'origine du document. Si

a

a

a

cH, 1 should gladly accept an amendment and

insert some suitable formula which I will circulate subsequently. I have something here
which is being prepared. I have no further comment to make on the suggestion. I think it is
C'.ntire1y a matter for the Council to decide, and
I am willing to follow what the Council wishes
in the matter.
The PRESIDENT: We can come back to that
aspect immediately before we register our decision on this matter; by that time, the representative of the United States of America will have
the complete text of the resolution tllat might
be presented to the Council for its adoption.
With regard to the general discussion, does
any other representative wish to speak?
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): It is clear
that the more we discuss the draft resolution the
more variants are put forward.
I should like to put a question to the representative of China. Would h~ not agree to the
following proposal? I suggest we say at the end
of the resolution: "The Security Council directs
the Secretary-General to notify the Council of
Foreign Ministers, namely the following countries: the United Kingdom, France, the United
States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics of its action." Mter mentioning
the Council of Foreign Ministers, we should say:
namely, such and such countries ...
This proposal may be acceptable to the representative of China and may prove acceptable to
other members of the Council.
Mr. Quo TAl-cm (China): I should like to
agree with Mr. Gromyko; I always like to agree
with him, but I am afraid, on this question, I
still find myself unable to do so. In the first instance he refers to the Council of Foreimt Ministers; then immediately afterwards he says,
"namely, such-and-such countries". But China. is
still a member of the Council of Foreign Ministers, and in naming the four countries without
making any reference to China, you may imply
that China is no longer a member of the Council
of Foreign Ministers. Thus, I am still in favour
of the word "concerned". That explains everything without specifically naming the countries
concerned. I think that is perfectly clear and
logical, and it has the merit of brevity as well, .
without prejudicing China's case with regard to
the Council of Foreign Ministers.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Perhaps the
representative of China would agree to the following wording in the last part of the resolution.
I suggest we say "the Security Council directs
the Secretary-General to notify the following
countries, members of the Council of Foreign
Ministers: the United States of America, the
United Kingdom, France and the Union of s@viet Socialist Republics, of its action." I repeat,
". . . to notify the following countries, members
of the Council of Foreign Ministers ..."; then
follow the names of the countries.
Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America): If

telle est l'opinion du Conseil) je suis tout a fait
dispose accepter un amendement et inserer
uno formule plus approprice que je vais frore
distribucr. On est en train d'cn ctablir le texte.
Je n'ai plus d'observation a faire sur cctte pro•position. J'estime que c'est une question qu'il
appartient au Conseil de trancheI', et suis prct a
me ranger son avis.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de IJanglais): Nous
pouvons revenir imm6diatement sur ce point
avant de consigner notre decision; le represemant
des Etats-Unis d'Amerique sera alors en possession du tcxte complet de la resolution qui sera
presente pour approbation au Conseil de securite.
Un representant desire-t-il prendre la parole
sur la question qui nollS occupe?
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sacialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Apparemment, plus nollS discutons ce projet de resolution,
et plus on nous propose de variantes.
Je voudrais demander au representant de la
Chine s'li accepterait que la fin de la resolution
soit redigee comme suit: "Le Conseil de securlte
charge le Secretaire general d'informer de sa
decision le Conseil des Ministres des Affaires
etrangeres, asavoir, les pays suivants: RoyaumeUni, France, Etats-Unis d'Amerique et Union
des Republiques socialistes sovietiques." Apres
avoir mentionne le Conseil des Ministres, il convient de dire: a savoir, tel et te! pays ...

a

a

a

Peut-etre cette proposition sera-t-eUe acceptable au representant de la Chine, aussi bien
qu'aux autres membres du Conseil.
M. Quo TAI-CHI (Chine) (traduit de I'anglais): J'aimerais me ranger a l'avis de M. Gromyko; d'ailleurs, j'aime toujours etre d'accord
avec lui, mais je crains que ce1a ne me soit pas
possible en ce moment. En premier lieu, il 'mentionne le Conseil des Ministres des Affaires etrangeres et immediatement apres, il cite les noms de
tel et tel pays. Mais la Chine est toujours membre du Conseil des Ministres des Affaires etrangeres et, si 1'0n cite les noms des quatre pays
sans mentionnercelui de la Chine, on pourrait
en conclure que la Chine n'est plus membre du
Conseil des Ministres des Affaires etrangeres.
En consequence, je tiens a ce que le mot Uinter~sses" soit ajoute. Ainsi, on explique tout, sans
designer par leur nom les pays interesses. A
mon avis, cette formule est parfaitement claire et
logique, et eUe a aussi l'avantage d'etre breve,
sans porter prejudice a la Chine en ce qui concerne le Conseil des Ministres des Affaires etrangeres.
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Peut-etre,
le representant de la Chine pourra-t-il approuver
la redaction suivante de la derniere phrase de la
resolution: uLe Conseil de securite charge le
Secretaire general d'informer de sa decision les
pays suivants qui sont membres du Conseil des
Ministres: Etats-U?Zis d'Amerique, RoyaumeUni, France et Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques". Nous disons done:
informer
les pays suivants qui sont membres du Conseil
des Ministres . . ." et nous enumerons ces pays.
Cl • • •

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (tra-

»

iJ.;,] .

the members of the Council would be good
enough to look at the text of the resolution which
they have before them, I would suggest, in order
to meet the point made by the representative of
Syria, that in the first line the two words U and
examined" be eliminated and that the following
expression be inserted instead: ttfrom the Chair-

man of th~ Council of Foreign Ministers meeting in New York on 12 December 1946".
Then, in the fourth line, after the parenthesis
following the words "Free Port", insert the words
uand having examined the same, hereby records
its approval of the following three documents".
That paragI:aph would then read as follows:
"The Security Council, having received from the
Chairman of the COl,mcil of Foreign Ministers
meeting in New York on 12 December 1946 the
Annexes to the proposed peace treaty with Italy
relating to the creation and government of the
Free Territory of Trieste (including an arrangement for a Free Port), aud having examined
the same, hereby records its approval of the
three following documents ..."
May I inquire from the representative of Syria
if that slight revision meets the point?
Then, further, if I may continue briefly, in
order to try to phrase a reading of the last sentence which could obtain the approval of all
members of the Council, I suggest the following:

crthi1 Security Council directs the Secretary-General to reply to the communication from the
Council of Foreign Ministers informing it of its
action"-the communication having been referred to in the first paragraph.
May I inquire of the representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialic;t Republics whether he
will agree to that?
Mr. El KHOURY (Syria) : Yes, I think the
text which' has been read just now by the representative of the United States of America would
eliminate the incoherence which existed before
and would give full satisfaction to everyone, be.cause in not naming the four Ministers, it is
understood that those who presented the documents to us for our examination would receive
the reply. Thus,J am in full agreement.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): It seems to
me that the amendments submitted here by the
representative of the United States ef America
complicate the text. Firstly, as regards the suggestion to include the words crfrom the Chairman" after the words "the Security Council
having received", this wording may lead people
to draw tlte conclusion that the Council of For·eign Ministers has a permanent Chairman. This
is not'i:he case. The Council of Foreign Ministers
has .no permanent Chairman. It is the Foreign
Ministers of the countries represented on the
-Council who each take the chair in turn; thus
the Chairman varies depending on ,e constitution of the COlmcil of Foreign Ministers and the
period at which it meets. It seems to me that the
addition of an indication that these documents
were received from the Chairman is thus undesirable.
.
Furthermore, I have not received an answer
",'.. . :from the representative of China to my last prom.~~~>:l.'i'\'.,w",,,,.,,,,,,,,.,,,,._....,,.. ,-,.. ,,.. ,.,.

duit ds l'anglais): Si les membres du Conseil
voulaient avoir la bonte d'examiner le texte de
la resolution qu'ils ant devant eux, je proposerais,
afiu de rlunner satisfaction au representant de la
Syne, qu'a la. premiere ligne les deux mots:
<tet examineJJ soient supprimes et remplaces par:

"du President du Conseil des Ministres des Atfaires etrangcres reuni aNew"Yark le .! 2 decembre 1946J1•
Puis, a la quatrieme ligne, (\\pres les paren-

theses qui suivent les mats: "Port franc", je proposerais d'inserer les mats: etetJ ayant examine
ceux-ci, signifie son approbation des documents
suivants."
Le texte de ce paragraphe scrait alors ainsi
COll!tU: "Le Conseil de securite, ayant r~u du
President du Conseil des Ministres des Affaires
etrangeres, reuni a New-York le 12 decembre
1946, le!> Annexes au projet de traite de paix
avec l'Italie relatives a la creation et au gouvernement du Territoire libre de Trieste (y compris les dispositions concernant le Port franc) et
ayant examine ceux-ci, signifie son approbation
des trois documents suivants ..."
Puis-je demander au representant de la Syrie
si cette Iegere modification lui donne satisfaction?
En outre, si je puis me permettre de poursuivre
rapidement afin d'essayer d'obtenir, pour la der..
niere phrase, un texte qui ait l'approbation de
tous les membres du Conseil, je proposerais ce
qui suit: "le Conseil de securite charge le Secre-

taire geniTal de repondre ala communication du
Conseil des Ministres des Aflaires etrangeres et de
lJinforme.r de cette decision JJ J la communication

ayant ete citee au premier paragraphe.
Puis-je demander au representant de l'Union
des Republiques socialistes sovietiques s'iI est
d'accord? •
M. El KHOl,TRY (Syrie ) ( traduit de lJanglais): Oui, je pense que le texte qui vient d'etre
lu par le representant des Etats-Unis d'Amerique
ferait disparaitre l'incoherence qui existait auparavant, et donnerait satisfaction a tous, car, si
on ne nomme pas les quatre Ministres, oh comprend que la reponse sera adressee a ceux qui
nous ant remis les documents pour t'.xamen.
Ainsi, je suis pleinement d'accord. ,
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je crois
que les modifications que vient de nous proposer
le representant des Etats-Unis d'Amerique cornpliquent le texte. Je m'arreterai d'abord sur la
premiere d'entre elles. Si, a la formuIe ''le Conseil
de securite ayant re!tu", nous ajoutions encore
les mots: "du PresidentJJ, nous risquerions de
donner l'impression que le Conseil des Ministres
des Affaires etrangeres est dote d'un President
permanent, aIors qu'il n'en est rien. Le Conseil
des Ministres n'a pas de President permanent. Ce
sont les Ministres des Affaires etrangeres des pays
representes a ce Conseil qui en assument tour it
tour la presidence; la personne du President
varie done seIon la composition du Conseil, et
l'epoque a. laquelle il se reunit. Je crois qu'il n'y
a pas lieu de mentionner que ces documents ont
ete communiques par le President.
Je n'ai pas, d'autre part, re~u de reponse du
representant de la Chine a ma derniere proposi-

posal. I proposed that the last part of the resolution should be worded approximately as follows:
uThe Security Council directs the Secretary-General to notify countries, members of the Council
of Foreign Ministers, namely, the United States
of America, the United Kingdom, France and
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, of its action." I should like to know the opinion of the
representative of China on this proposal. It seems
to me that it removes the grounds for the slight
misunderstanding which he expressed in connection with my previous proposal.
Finally, as regards the last amendment submitted by the representative of the United
States of America, it seems to me that the adoption of this last amendment would also complicate the situation, because the difficulty which
we encountered in drafting the last part of the
resolution would simply be doubled. We have not
found a formula for the end of the resolution. At
the same time, we must find an analogous
formula for the beginning of the resolution. We
could, of course, proceed as follows: we could
reach a decision on one part of the resolution,
and apply this decision to the other part. If we
can agree on a formula for the last part of the
text, this text could be used to improve the first
part of the resolution. However, it seems to me
that there is no need to alter the first part of the
resolution. I agree with the representative of the
United States. I think it is clear to everyonefrom
whom this document has been received. No one
has expressed any doubt, and no one has asked
the question: where did this document come
from?
These are thus the observations which I
thought it necessary to make. I would like particularly to receive an answer from the representative of China to my last proposal regarding the
drafting of the last part of the resolution.
Mr. Quo TAl-CHI (China): Personally, I
really dislike to prolong this discussion, which
seems to me rather unimportant. I am afraid my
reply to the query from my colleague of the
USSR is not what he would like or expect.
I am partial to the revised draft resolution
proposed by the representative of the United
States of America, which would seem to obviate
any further discussion concerning the point of
difference between us. I think the wording of his
revised resolution makes it obvious that there is
no permanent Chairman of the Council of Foreign Ministers. I believe it states that the Security Council received a communication from
the Chairman of the Council of Foreign Ministers which met in New York on such and such
a date. It thus makes it perfectly clear who was
there, and who is concerned. At the end, it
simply refers the matter to the Secretary-General
or directs him to inform the members of the
Council of Foreign Ministers concerned. This
makes the wording much simpler.

If I were to answer your question-I am
afraid that you did not quite go far enough to
meet my point-I should have to say that the
Secretary-General should be directed to inform

tion; j'avais propose de r6diger la demim-e
phrase de la resolution, par exemple, comme
suit: "Le Conseil de sccurit6 charge le Secl'Ctaire general d'informer de sa decision les pays
qui sont membres du Conseil des Ministres, a
savoir: les Etats-Unis d'Amcrique, le RoyaumeUni, la France et l'Union des Rcpubliques
socialistes sovietiques." Je voudrais connaitre
l'opinion du representant de la Chine sur cette
proposition. Il me semble qu'elle enlCve toute
base au certain etonnement manifeste par le
representant de la Chine au sujet de ma prece..
dente proposition.
Enfin, fai l'impressioil que si nous adoptions
le demier des amendements proposes par le representant des Etats-Unis d'Amerique, nous cornpliquerions egalement la situation. En efret, nous
ne ferions que doubler Ies difficultes auxquelles
nous nous heurtons pour la redaction de la
derniere partie de la resolution. La phrase finale
ne serait pas redigee, et nous aurions a chercher
une redaction analogue pour la partie initiale
de la resolution. Certes, il serait possible de proceder de la fa!ton suivante: apres avoir resolu
le probleme quant a l'un des points de la resolution, on pourrait appliquer la solution a l'autre
point. Apres nous etre entendus sur la redaction
de la derniere phrase, nous pourrions utiliser le
meme texte pour mettre au point le debut.
Toutefois, je ne vois pas la necessite de modifier
la premiere partie. Je me range sur ce point a
l'avis du representant des Etats-Unis. 11 me
semble que nous savons tous de qui emane ce
document. Personne n'a exprime de doutes a
se sujet,. ni n'a pose la question: de qui ce document provient-il?
Telles sont les observations que j'ai estime
indispensable de presenter. Je tiens surtout ~
obtenir une reponse du representant de la Chine
sur le texte de la derniere phrase, tel que je
l'avais propose en dernier lieu.
M. Quo TAl-CHI (Chine) (traduit de ['anglais): Personnellement, il m'est desagreable de
prolonger une discussion qui me semble sans importance. Je crains que ma reponse a la question de mon collegue de l'URSS ne soit pas celle
qu'll attendrait.
Je suis en faveur de la modification de la
resolution proposee par le representant des EtatsUnis d'Amerique qui parait eliminer toute nouvelle discussion sur l'objet de nos divergences de
vue. Je pense que son texte revise fait clairement
ressortir qu'll n'existe pas de presidence permanente du Conseil des Ministres des Affaires
etrangeres. Je crois qu'll indique que le Conseil
de securite a. rec::u une communication du president du Conseil des Ministres des Maires etrangeres, qui s'est reuni a une certaine date a
New-York. n fait ainsi parfaitement ressortir qui
etait present et qui etait en cause. A la fin, il
renvcie simplement la question au Secretaire
general, ou bien le charge d'informer les Membres du Conseil des Ministres des Affaires etrangeres interesses. Le texte est ainsi beaucoup plus
simple.
Si je devais repondre .30 votre question-je
crains que vous ne soyez pas alMs assez loin pour
tomber d'accord avec moi-je devrais dire que
le Secretaire general devrait etre charge d'in-

those members of the Council of Foreign Ministers who were concerned in the drafting of the
treaty in question. You would have to make the
text longer in order to render it perfectly clear;
otherwise, one might conclude from your phrasing that China is no longer represented in the
Council of Foreign Ministers. That objection
still remains. If it is your desire to simplify the
phraseology of the resolution, I am partial to the
revised proposal of the United States of America.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The representative of the United States of America has
very rapidly drafted a number of variants of his
original proposal, but I have not yet seen its
final version, and it is therefore difficult for me
to discuss it, since my knowledge of its content
is only derived from what I could hear. It seems
to me that the amendments submitted by the
United States representative, which take into
account the remarks made by the Chinese representative, do not improve the text, but as I have
said alrl"ady, they complicate it still further.
Thus, if this is acceptable to the other members
of the Security Council, I am prepared to agree
that the last part of the resolution should state
that "the Security Council directs the SecretaryGeneral to notify the countries, members of the
Council of Foreign Ministers concerned, of its
action". As far as I can gather, this conforms
with the wish expressed by the representative of
China, not at the beginning of the debate, but at
a later stage, when he requested that the word
re concerned" should be added, in view of the
fact, and I wish to emphasize this, that in this
particular case fOLlr countries are concerned: the
United Kingdom, the United States of America,
France, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. If we are in agreement on this, as nobody seems to have voiced any objection, but,
on the contrary, as this proposal seems to have
been supported by everybody, I shall hold no
objections to agreeing to such a resolution.
The PRESIDENT: I think it might be advisable
at this stage to continue with the general discussion and permit the Secretariat to prepare the
text of the resolution as proposed by the representative of the United States of America; we
shall then have it circulated.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Inasmuch
as I have agreed with the proposal of the
representative of China that the last part of the
resolution should read "the Security Cpuncil
directs the Secretary-General to . ')tify the
countries, members of the Council ~ Foreign
Ministers concerned", there is no need to add
anything more. It seems to me that the additions proposed by the representative of the
United States of America automatically become
redundant. I do not think that the representative of China has withdrawn his proposal.
The PRESIDENT: I still think it would be preferable to await the actual text of the resolution
being typed by the Secretariat; then we can return to an active consideration of this particular
subject. In the meantime, I suggest that we
might proceed with the general discussion on this

former un tel et un tell' membres du Conseil des
Ministres des Affaires etrangeres, interesses a la
redaction du traite en question. Il nous faudrait
alors allonger le texte pour le rendre parfaitement clair; sinon, on pourrait conclure de votre
texte que la Chine n'est plus representee au
Conseil des Ministres des Affaires etrangeres.
Mon objection tient toujours. Si vous d6sirez
sim!,Ufier la redaction de la resolution, je pencherais pour la proposition des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique revisee.
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Le representant des Etats-Unis d'Amerique est prompt a
fournir des variantes de sa proposition, mam je
n'ai pas encore re9u copie de la derniere. Il me
serait donc difficile d'en parler, n'ayant pu juger
de sa teneur que par ce que mon oreille a pu en
saisir. Je crois que les modifications proposees par
le representant des Etats-Unis, qui tiennent
compte des remarques du representant de la
Chine, n'ameliorent pas le texte. Mais, comme je
I'ai deja dit, elles le rendent encore plus complique. C'est pourquoi, si les autres membres du
Conseil pouvaient accepter ma suggestion, je suis
pret a consentir a ce que nous disions, dans la
partie finale de la resolution, que "le Conseil de
securite charge le Secretaire general de communiquer sa decision aux Puissances interessees,
membres du Conseil des Ministres". Si je comprends bien, tel est aussi le desir durepr.esentant
de la Chine qui a propose au coursde cette
seance d'ajouter le mot CCinteressees" afin de pre~
ciser, notons-le, qu'il s'agit, dans le cas donne,
des quatre Puissances suivantes: Royaume-Uni,
Etats-Unis d'Amerique, France, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques. Si nous nous
mettions d'accord sur ce point--et il me semble
que personne n'a eleve d'objection a ce sujetje ne m'opposerais pas a l'adoption de cette
resolution.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je pense
qu'a ce stade il serait bon de poursuiv:"e la discussion generale et de permettre au Secretariat
de preparer le texte de la resolution proposee par
le representant des Etats-Unis d'Amerique; nous
le ferons alors distribuer.
~. GROMYKO (Union des RepubliquC3 sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Etant
donne que fai accepte la proposition du representant de la Chine qui etait de dire, a la fin de .
la resolution, que "le Conseil de securite charge
le Secretaire general d'informer les Puissances
interessees, membres du Conseil des Ministres",
je ne vois pas la necessite d'y fake d'autres additions. J'ai l'impression que celles que propose le
representant des Etats-Unis d'Amerique tombent
d'elles-memes. Je crois que le representant de la
Chine n'a pas retire sa proposition.
Le PRESID;l!:NT (traduit de l'anglais): Je con:'
tinue de penser qu'il serait preferable d'attendre
que le texte exact de la resolution ait ete tape
au Secretariat; nous pourrons alors reprendre la
discussion de cepoint particulier. Entre temps,
je propose que nous poursuivklllS la discussion

matter. Does any member of the Council wish
to offel any observations?
As the representative of Australia, I wish to
make certain observations. When the question of
Trieste was first under discussion, the Australiarl
delegation drew attention to certain. constitutional difficulties which lay in the way of
approval by the Council of the documents
transmitted to it by the Council of Foreign Minister! and the acceptance of the responsibilities
which it proposed to place on the Security Council in regard to the administration of the Free
Territory.
Replica made to the specific objections raised
by us did not, in our opinion, dispose of the constitutional arguments, but rather tended to place
the chief emphasis on the political necessities of
the present situation. The principal answers given
by the representatives of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom and the
United States of America to the legal objections
were to the effect that the Security Council had
general competence under Article 24 of the
Charter. The representative of the United States
of America said that the Security Council was
charged with the duty of watching over and
maintaining international peace and security,
and that any spot on the surface of the earth
where, for any reason, conflict might break out,
was a spot of legitimate concern to the Council.
This argument appeared to us to be fundamentally one for some form of international action in
respect of Trieste rather than a fine argument
regarding the kind of 'action that should or
could be taken.
The question is not whether a particular situation now existing is of concern to the Security
Council, but whether the Security Council has
power to act in a certain way ill the future. The
political arguments, however real they may be,
do not dispose of the constitutional difficulties.
The real issue is whether-if there is general
competence of the Security Council under Article 24 in respect of matters affecting international peace and security-this competence is of
such a character as to cover those precise functions which the Security Council will be required
to undertake after the setting up of the Free Territory of Trieste.
Let us assume for our present purpose that Article 24 does confer a general responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security .over and above the specific powers listed
in Chapters VI, VII, VIII and XII of the Charter. This general authority would not, in our
view, authorize .Lhe assumption by the Council
of the functions assigned to it in the Trieste
Statute.
The reasons for taking this view are the following:
1. The functions to be assigned to the Council by the Statute are not necessarily limited to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
2. The giving of a categorical guarantee of
the integrity and independence of the Free Territory goes farther than is warranted by the purposes and principles of the United Nations, and

gen6rale de la question. L'un des membres du
Conseil a-t-il des observations a. presenter?
En tant que representant de l'Australie, je
desire presenter certaines observations. Lorsque
nous avons aborde la question de Trieste, la delegation australienne a attire l'attention sur certaines difficultes d'ordre constitutionnel qui s'opposent a. l'approbation par le Conseil des documents qui lui ont ete transmis par le Conseil des
Ministres des Makes etrangex-es et a. l'acceptation des responsabilites qu'il propose d'imposer
au Conseil de securite en cc qui concerne I'administration du TerritoiJ:e libre.
Les reponses qui ont ete faites aux objections
specifiques que nous avions soulevees, n'ont, pas
a. notre avis, elimine les objections d'ordre constitutionnel; elles ont plutot tendance a. souligner
les necessites politiques de la situation actuelle.
Les principales reponses faites par les representants de rUnion des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, du Royaume-Uni et des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique aux objections d'ordre constitutionnel visaient le fait que le Conseil de securite a
une competence d'ordre general en vertu de
l'Article 24 de la Charte. Le representant des
Etats-Unis d'Amerique a declare que le. Conseil
de securite avait pour tache de veiller au maintien de la paix et de. la securite internationales
et que tout point de la surface du globe ou,
pOUf u..'le raison quelconque, un conflit risque
d'ec1ater, est pour le Conseil un objet de souci
legitime. Get argument nous parait ctre un argument de fond en faveur d'une forme quelconque
d'action internationale au sujet de Trieste plutot
qu'un argument particulier quant au genre d'ac. tion qui de.vrait ou pourrait ctre entreprise.
La question n'est pas de savoir si une situation particuliere existant actuellement concerne
le Conseil de securite, mais si le Conseil de securite a le pouvoir d'agir d'une certaine maniere
dans l'avenir. Les arguments politiques, quelle
qu'en puisse ctre la valeur, n'eJiminent pas les
difficultes d'ordre constitutionnel. Si, en vertu de
l'Article 24, le Conseil de securite possede la competence generale sur les questions touchant la
paix et la securite internationales, la veritable
question en jeu consiste a. determiner si· cette
competence est d'un tel caractere qu'elle englobe
ces fonctions mcmes que le Conseil de ·securite
serait appeIe a. assumer apres la constitution du
Territoire libre de Trieste.
Supposons, en l'occurrence, que l'Article 24
confere une responsabilite generale. quant au
maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales qui depasse les pouvoirs speciaux enumeres
aux Chapitres VI, VII, VIII et XII de la
Charte. Ces pouvoirs generaux n'autoriseraient
pas, a. notre avis, le Conseil a. assumer les fonctions qui lui sont octroyees dans le Statut de
Trieste.
Ce point de vue s'appuie sur les raisons suivantes:
1. Les fonctions qui doivent ctre attribuees
au Conseil par le Statut ne sont pas necessairement limitees au maintien de la paix et de la
securite internationales.
2. L'octroi d'une garantie categorique de
l'integrite et de l'independance du Territoire
libre depasse ce qu'exigent les buts et principes
des Nations Unies, et le Conseil de securite est

-

the Security Council is specifi~ally required by
Article 24 to act in accordance with such purposes and principles.
The statement read this afternoon on behalf
of the Secretary-General contained the following
sentence: "The only limitations are the fundamental principles and purposes found in Chapter
I of the Charteru • It is precisely that limitation
to which the Australian delegation now refers.
It is, in our submission, a limitation which is very
real, and if the statement of the Secretary-General had not stopped at that point, but had proceeded to an examination of Chapter I, it would
inevitably hav~ revealed that such a limitation
does in fact exist.
'Regarding the first of these two points, the
Australian delegation wishes to point out that
the proposed Statute for the Free Territory designates the Security Council as the supreme administrative and legislative authority and gives it
wide powers, not only to assure the integrity and
independence of the Territory in the international sphere and in its international relations,
but also to ensure the maintenance of public
order and security and good conduct of its Government in the ordinary domestic affairs.
We submit that this question may affect the
peace or the welfare and good government of
the Territory without in any sense affecting international peace and security.
Regarding the second of these two points, I
would recall what we said in our previous statement, that both the Dumbarton Oaks and San
Francisco Conferences rejected proposals for the
inclusion in the purposes and principles of the
United Nations of a guarantee of territorial i~­
tegrity, and chose instead a method by which
Members undertook not to use force or threat of
force against the integrity or independence of a
territory.

Furthermore, we do not feel that a satisfactory answer has been given to the question raised
as to what countries would be bound by the
obligati.ons to ensure the integrity and independence of the Free Territory. As I have already pointed out, there is no obligation on
Members, under the Charter, to ensure the integrity and indepedence of any territory, and
this omission is deliberate.
If the Security Council now, by its own act,
&ives such an assurance, on whom will the obligation rest? The representative of the United Kingdom suggested that it would fall upQn the
Security Council as an organ and that the responsibility would be shared by those Members
of the United Nations who happened to be
members of the Security Council at any
particular time. Does this mean that the present
members of the Council, and in particular the
non-permanent members, are now being asked
to assume obligations which they themselves may
not have to bear in the future and which some
other Member of the United Nations which is
not participating in the present decision would
be required to bear? That would seem to be the

precisement tenu, aux tel'mes de l'Article 24,
d'agir c~nformement ces buts et principes.

a

La declaration lue cet apres-midi au nom du
Secretaire general contenait la phrase suivante:
"Les seules restrictions sont les principes et buts
fondamentaux figurant au Chapitre ler de la
Charte". C'est preciscment de cette restriction
que le representant australien parle actuellement.
C'est, a notre point de vue, une veritable restriction et, si la declaration du Secretaire general,
au lieu de s'arreter sur ce point, avait poursuivi
par un examen du Chapitre ler, e1Ie aurait in6vitabIemcut revele I'existence de cette restriction.
En ce qui concerne le premier de ces deux
points, la delegation australienne desire souligner
que le Statut propose pour le Territoire libre
designe le Conseil de securite comme l'autorite
administrative et legislative supreme et lui donne
de larges pouvoirs, pour assurer non seulement
l'int6grite et l'independance du Territoire dans
la sphere internationale et dans ses relations intemationales, mais egalement le maintien de la
securite et de l'ordre public et une bonne administration de son Gouvernement pour les affaires interieures courantes.
Nous estimom que cette question peut affecter
la paix, le bien.-etre ou la bonne administration
du Territoire sans aucunement affecter la paix et
la securite internationales.
"
En ce qui concerne le second de ces deux
points, je rappelle ce que nous avons dit dans
notre precedente declaration, a savoir qu'aussi
bien la Conference de Dumbarton Oaks que
celle de San-Francisco ont rejete les propositions
visant a inc1ure dans les buts et principes des
Nations Unies la garantie de l'integrite territoriale, et ont, au lieu de cela, arrete leur choix
sur une methode par laquelle les Memhres de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies se sont engages
a ne pas recourir a la force, ni a la menace de
la force, contre l'integrite ou l'independance d'un
territoire.
En outre, nous ne pensons pas qu'une reponse
satisfaisante ait etC donnee a la question de savoir
a quels pays incomberait l'obligation d'assurer
l'integrite et l'independance du Territoire libre.
Comme je I'ai deja souligne, la Charte n'impose
pas aux Membres l'obligation d'assurer l'inregrite
et l'independance d'un territoire quelconque, et
cette omission est voulue.
Si, maintenant, le Conseil de securite donne,
de son propre' gre, une telle assurance, a qui incombera l'obligation? Le representant du
Royaume-Uni a propose qu'elle incombe au
Conseil de securite en tant qu'organisme, et que
la responsabilite soit partagee par ceux des
Membres des Nations Unies qui se trouveraient
etre membres du Conseil de securite aun moment donne. Cela signifie-t-il que les membres
actuels du Conseil, en particulier les membres
non permanents, doivent assumer maintenant des
obligations qu'ils pourront ne pas avoif a assumer a l'avenir, et que quelque autre Membre
des Nations 'Unies, qui ne participe pas a la
decision actuelle, devra les assumer? n semble
que ce soit la la position puisque la mesure que

JO

position in view of the fact that the action which
it is now proposed the Security Council should
take does not have the backing of the General
Assembly.
The Australian delegation is not convinced by
the answers which have been given to the constitutional points which it has raised. Our doubts
have not been removed. Nevertheless, as we
stated previously, we do not wish to obstruct or
delay the proceedings of the Council. If the majority is prepared, for reasons which they find
satisfactory, to approve the resolution placed before the Security Council by the representative
of the United States of. America, the Australian
delegation will not vote against the majority.
However, for the reasons already given, it cannot bring itself to vote in favour of the resolution. We will therefore register our view on the
matter before the Council by abstaining. Does
any member wish to contribute further to the
general discussion?
Mr. PARODI (France) ( translated from
French): I think that in a matter such as this
it would be regrettable if the decision we are
about to take should appear to be a borderline
one or even a violation of the provisions of the
Charter.
I should like to state, more precisely than in
my last intervention, why I consider the decision
I have asked you to take as being in conformity
with the Charter. I shall be as brief as possible,
but on one particular point I should nevertheless
like to make what I said the other day a little
clearer.
I pointed out that Article 24 of the Charter,
which is drafted in very general terms, did not,
in the case now before us, come up against any
principle which might justify a narrow or limited interpretation of its terms.
The case is not one where the principle of the
sovereignty of States, the rule according to which
there must be no interference in a country~s domestic affairs, is at stake. That principle can only
be invoked by those States whose peace treaties
have already been drawn up. Now, the task entrusted to us relates precisely to the examination
of a peace treaty which has not yet been ratified.
Consequently) we cannot run against any provision or principle of this kind.

le Conseil de securite est invite a prendre n'a pas
l'appui de rAssemblCe generale.
La delegation australienne n'est pas convaincue par les reponses donnees aux points d'ordre
constitutionnel qu'elle a souleves. Nos doutes
n'ont pas disparu. Neanmoins, comme nous
l'avons declare precedemment, nous ne desirons
pas faire de l'obstruction, ni retarder les travaux
du Conseil. Si la majorite est disposee pour
d'autres raisons qu'elle estime satisfaisantes, a
approuver la resolution presentee au Conseil de
securite par le representant des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique, la delegation australienne ne votera
pas contre la majorite. Toutefois, pour les raisons
deja donnees, elle ne peut se resoudre a voter en
faveur de la resolution. Nom; exprimerons done
notre opinion sur cette question en nous abstenant. D'autres membres desirent-ils presenter des
observations?
M. PARODI (France): Je crom qu'en une affaire semblable, il y aurait inconvenient a ce que
la decision que nous allons prendre paraisse intervenir en marge ou en violation des dispositions
de la Charte.

Je voudrais dire, d'une fa~on plus precise que
je ne I'ai fait lors de ma derniere intervention,
pourquoi je considere la decision que je vous ai
demande de prendre conforme a la Charte. Je
serai le plus bref possible, mais voudrais cependant preciser, sur un point particulier, ce que
j'ai dit I'autre jour.
, J'ai indique que I'Article 24 de la Charte, dont
la redaction est tres generale, ne se heurtait, dans
le cas qui nous est actuellement soumis, a aucun
principe pouvant motiver une interpretation
etroite ou limitee de ses termes.
Nous ne sommes pas en presence d'un cas ou
le principe de la souverainete des Etats, la regIe
selon laquelle on ne doit pas intervenir dans les
affaires interieures d'un pays, soit en jeu. Ce
principe ne peut etre invoque que par les Etats
pour lesquels les traites de paix ont deja ete etablis. Or, la mission qui nous est donnee se rapporte precisement a l'examen d'un traite de paix
non encore ratifie. Par consequent, nous ne pouvons nous heurter a al,lcune disposition, ou aucun
principe de cet ordre.
I should also like to bring forward another arJe voudrais egalement faire valoir un autre
gument. The case of Trieste is extremely delicate
argument. Le cas de Trieste est extremement
and intricate. It is one of these cases which are
delicat et difficile. 11 est de ceux susceptibles de
provoquer des difficultes, et meme, de mettre la
liable to create difficulties and even endanger
peace. The case was not referred to us under
paix en danger. Ce cas ne nous a pas ete presente
that aspect, but in connection with the drafting
sous cette forme, parce qu'il a e,te soumis en
of the peace treaties. We did not draw up these
relation avec 1'etablissement des traites de paix.
treaties ouselves, but we are nevertheless aware
Ce n'est pas nous qui ftablissons ces traites. Nous
that the question, by its very nature, constitutes
savons cependallt qu'il s'agit d'une question
a danger to peace. I think we should look at it
dangereuse pOUJr la palx, de par sa nature. resfrom this angle.
time que nous devons l'envisager sous cet anJ:!:le.
If the question has been brought before us
Si nous avions ete ~aisis de la question au titre
under Chapter VI and, particularly, Chapter
du Chapitre VI et notamment du Chapitre VII,
VII, we should be invested with extremely wide
nous serions investis de pouvoirs extremement
powers extending even to, these are the very
larges pouvant meme aller, ce sont les termes
memes de l'Articl(~ 42, jusqu'a comporter des
words of Article 42, demonstrations and the use
of force.
demonstrations et des mesures de force.
It would be rather extraordinary, if in a case
II serait assez singulier, dans un cas reelIement
really liable to endanger, if not peace itself, at
susceptible de mettre en danger, sinon la paix,
~i!~~~f~~4"~:~:.7r.;;:M:>:1A',<Ji,(~'i;;..;,,'1;;'.·':,"i";';'1-~'t'f:.::;-,~H.~";::;·.:ir~;~~.,\~~~··0':''i;.~'~_'''i''Y:~W''''~':;;~·~3'~~''''~''.'?::;;~i~'~';:;""''':'T~le-,,;;''i~'''-,,'t'~~:,-r':'';;.''--;·'·-;::-~r-'':"-.'- .-' ..--"""-_.~. , ,--~~-.'~~""
"~'-'::"I>!i.:"-'r..tc",,,,,,-,-:,,'.-'~-":':);,,.;"~
-"'c"',' --,:

a

.....

55

least the maintenance of peac~, the Security
Council, which, in that event, would have such
extensive powers of intervention, should not even
be able to take administrative measures, far less
serious than the use of force, in order to ensure
the maintenance of peace.
As I said the other day, we are dealing with
a case where the Security Council must take a .
full view of its responsibilities. It is responsible
,for the maintenance of peace. It is my opinion
that we should not shrink from the task, however
delicate, which the drafters of the peace treaty
have asked us to assume.
I thought it desirable to add these explanations
to what had already been said, in order to support the legal observations made at the outset
of this meeting.
Mr. ]OHNSON (United States of America): In
order to reach a. conclusion quickly, and bearing
in mind the various points of view which have
been expressed at variance with my original resolution, I am going to suggest to the Council that
it should take the resolutipn as placed before it
originally at today's meeting, and simply eliminate the last sentence, which is entirely unnecessary in substance. Thus, the resolution which the
Council would be asked to vote upon would be
the text of the revised resolution put before you
at the beginning of this meeting, the last paragraph being eliminated. This might, I think, sufficiently meet objections to permit the Council
to reach a unanimous decision. If no one objects,
Mr. President, I move that the resolution be
voted upon in its original form, with the elimination of its last sentence.
The PRESIDENT: Let me read it, then, and I
shall see whether it conforms with what is desired by members:
"The Security Council, having recei.ved and
examined the Annexes to the proposed Peace
Treaty with Italy relating to the creation and
government of the Free Territory of Trieste
(including an arrangement for a Free Port),
hereby records its approval of the three following documents: .
.
1. The instrument for the provisional
regime of the Free Territory of Trieste;
2. The permanent Statute for the Free
Territory of Trieste;
3. The instrument for the Free Port of
Trieste;
and its acceptance of the responsibilities devolving upon it under the same."
Mr. PAROD! (France) ( translated from
French): We have just spent two hours over a
debate which, in my opinion-and I believe it is
share~ by certain of my colleagues-is of no
great Importance. I have had the impression that
we were going too deeply into an issue whose
substance did not warrant it.
The proposal just made by the representative
of the United States of America is extremelv
simple, and has the advantage of eliminating
the problem. The Secretariat would be left free
to transmit the information as it would deem
fit, without asking the Security Council's opinion.

du moins le maintitn de la paix, que le Conscil
de securite, qui aurait, en c.ette hypothese, des
pouvoirs d~intervention d'une telle arnpleur, n'ait
pas le pouvoir de prendre des mesures d'administration, beaucoup moins graves que des mesures
de force, pour assurer le maintien de la paix.
Comme je I'ai dit I'autre jour, nous sommes en
presence d'un cas ou le Conseil de securite doit
prendre largement ses responsabilites. Il a la
responsabilite du maintien de la paix. Je ne
pense pas que nous puissions reculer devant la
tache, meme si elle est delicate, que les redacteurs du traite de paix nous ont demande d'assumer.
]'ai estime qu'il etait utile d'ajouter ces precisions a ce qui avait ete dit, afin de renforcer les
observations juridiques presentees au debut de
cette seance.
M., ]OHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Afin d'aboutir rapidement a
une conclusion et, compte tenu des differents
points de vue qui ont ete exprimes a l'encontre
de ma premiere resolution, je propose au Conseil
qu'il pl'enne la resolution telle qu'elle lui a ete
primitivement presentee a la seance d'aujourd'hui, et elimine simplement la derniere phrase
qui, en substance, est entihement superflue.
Ainsi la resolution sur laquelle le ConseiI sera
appele a voter sera le texte de la resolution revisee qui vous a ete presente au debut de cette
seance, le dernier paragraphe excepte. Ced, je
pense, repondrait de fa~on suffisante aux objections pour permettre au Conseil de prendre une
decision unanime. Si personne ne s'y oppose,
Monsieur le President, je propose qu'on mette
la resolution aux voix sous sa forme primitive,
en eliminant simplement la derniere phrase.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): ]e vais
donc Ja lire, et nous venons si elle est conforme
aux desirs des membres:
'
"Le Conseil de securite ayant re~u et examine les Annexes au futur Traite de paix
avec I'Italie, relatives a la creation et au gouvernement du Territoire libre de Trieste (y
compris les dispositions concernant le Port
franc), signifie par la presente son approbation des trois documents ci-apres:
1. Instrument relatif au regime provisoire du Territoire libre de Trieste;
2. Statut permanent du Territoire libre
de Trieste;
3. Instrument relatif au Port franc de
Trieste;
et son acceptation des responsabilites qui lui
incombent aux terines desdits."
M. PAROD! (France): Nous venons de consacrer deux heures a un debat qui, a mon aviset je pense que c'est egalement celui de certain!
de mes collegues-ne revet pas une tres grande
importance. I'ai eu 1'impression que nous approfondissions trop un point qui ne le meritait pas.
La proposition que vient de faire le representant des Etats-Unis d'Amerique est extremement
simple, et a 1'avantage de supprimer le probleme.
Le Secretariat .serait laisse libre de faire sa transmission comme il l'entendrait, sans demander
pour cela l'avis du Conseil de securite. Ce dernier

:::;;

The latter would thus not be committed in
either direction.
I therefore ask my colleagues from China and
the USSR to accept the proposal of the United
States of America in order to avoid further discussion on this matter of little importance.

ne serait ainsi engage, ni dans un sens, ni dans
l'autre.
Je dem.ande donc a. mes collegues de Chine et
de l'URSS d'accepter la proposition qui vient
de nous etre faite par le representant des EtatsUnis d'Amerique, afin que la discussion ne
reprenne pas une fois encore sur cette question
de peu d'importance.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of So\iet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): We have
various opinions concerning the utility of discussing the last part of the resolution of the
United States of America. Mr. Parodi holds an
opinion which differs from mine. If the question
were unimportant, we should not be discussing
it. However, I fully agree with the proposal of
the United States representative to delete in its
entirety the last paragraph of his resolution, as
the question of notifying the Governments concerned, that is to say the Governments of the
four great Powers, of the action of the Security
Council is settled automatically, since these
countries are at the same time members 0_' the
Security Council.
It is precisely the reason for which I consider
that the last paragraph of the resolution may
be deleted without any harm, and that the text
of the resolution may be left in the amended
fonn, as submitted by the representative of the
United States of America, without its final paragraph. Evidently, this may also be useful from
the point of view of reaching an agreement on
this draft resolution.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques soda-.
!istes sovietiques) (trad1lit du russe): Les
opinions different quant a l'utilite d'une discussion sur la partie finale de la resolution des EtatsUnis d'Arne!ique. M. Parodi soutient une opinion differente de la mienne. Si cette question
n'avait pas d'importance, nous ne la discuterions
pas. Je suis toutefois entierement d'accord avec
le representant des Etats-Unis pour supprimer
cOlllPletement le dernier paragraphe de sa resolution. Car la question de faire part de la decision du Conseil de s~curite aux Gouvernements
interesses, c'est-a.-dire ceux des quatre grandes
Puissances, se resout d'elle-meme, etant donne
que ces Puissances sont en meme temps membres
du Conseil de securite.
C'est precisement pourquoi j'estime que nous
pouvons sans inconvenient supprimer le dernier
paragraphe de la resolution, et maintenir pour
le reste le texte presente par le representant des
Etats-Unis d'Amerique, avec les precisions qu'il
y a apportees. Non seulement cela n'offrirait
aucun inconvenient, mais encore cela nous
permettrait de nous entendre sur le texte de la
resolution.

Mr. Quo TAl-CHI (China): I am entirely
agreeable to the revised text of the representative
of the United States of America. I think that
omitting the last paragraph has the merit of
simplicity and suppresses the ambiguity which
was the main point of difference.

M. Quo TAl-CHI (Chine) (traduit de l'anglais): Je suis entierement d'accord sur le texte
revise du representant des Etats-Unis d'Amerique. J'estime que le fait d'omettre le dernier
paragraphe a l'avantage de la simplicite et supprime l'ambiguite qui constituait le principal
point de desaccord.

The PRESIDENT: Are there any other members of the Council who wish to offer observations on this particular matter? If not, we shall
proceed to a vote . . . I would ask that we wait
a moment or two for the representative of
Syria.
.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): D'autres
membres du Conseil desirent-ils presenter des
remarques sur ce point particulier? Dans la negative, nous passerons au vote ... Je vous demanderai d~attendre quelques instants le representant
de la Syrie.
Je vais donner lecture du texte de la resolution
au Conseil:
"Le Conseil de securite, ayant re~u et examine les Annexes au futur Traite de paix
avec 1'ltalie, relatives a la creation et au gouvernement du Territoire libre de Trieste (y
compris les dispositions concernant le Port
franc), signifie par la presente son approbation des trois documents ci-apres:
1. Instrument relatif au regime provisoire du Territoire libre de Trieste;
2. Statut pennanent-du Territoire libre
de Trieste;
3. Instrument relatif au port franc de
Trieste;
et son acceptation des responsabilitt~s qui lui
incombent aux termes desdits."
Que tous les membres qui sont en faveur du
texte de la presente resolution veuillent bien lever
la main.

I shall read the text of the resolution to the
Council:
"The Security Council, having reached and
examined the Annexes to the proposed Peace
Treaty with Italy relating to the creation and
government of the Free Territory of Trieste
(including an arrangement for the Free Port),
hereby records its approval of the three following documents:
1. The instrument for the provisional
regime of the Free Territory of Trieste;
2. The permanent Statute for the Free
Territory of Trieste;
3. The instrument for the Free Port of
Trieste;
and its acceptance of the responsibilities devolving upon it under the same/'
Will all members who support that text of the
resolution please raise their hands?

•

61

It est procede a un vote a mains levees et la
A vote was taken by show of hands, and the
resolution des Etats-Unis d'Amenque est adoptee
resolution of the United States of America was
par dix voix et une abstention.
carried by ten votes to nil with one abstention.
V otent pour:
Votes for:
.
Belgium, Brazil, China, Colombia, France,
Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Palogne, Syrie, Union des RepuPoland, Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist
bliques socialistes sovietiques, RoyawneRepublics, United Kingdom, United States
Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
of America.
Votent contre:
Votes against:
Neant.
None.
S'abstient:
Abstention:
Australie...
Australia.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Il se
The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council
peut que les membres du Conseil estiment le
may possibly regard this as an appropriate momoment opportun pour ajourner le Conseil. J'ai
ment for the Council to adjourn. I have taken
consulte les membres du Conseil a ce slljet, et il
into account the convenience of members of the
semble que la date qui conviendrait le mieux
Council, and it appears that the most appropripour la prochaine seance serait mercredi proate time for reassembly would be next Wedneschain a 11 heures. S'il en est ainsi, je declarerai
day at 11 a.m. If that is agreeable to members,
I shall announce when we rise that we adjourn
a la cloture de la presente seance que le Conseil
est ajourne jusqu'a cette date.
to that date.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): J'aurais
Republics) (translated from Russian): I should
prefer a meeting of tIle Security Council on
prefere que le Conseil de securite se reunisse
Monday or, at least, on Tuesday in order to conlundi, ou le cas echeant mardi, afin de pourtinue the discussion of the question which we
suivre l'examen de la question que nous avons
began to consider at the last meeting of the
abordee lors de notre derniere reunion, c'est-aCouncil, namely, the question of the General
dire la discussion de la resolution de l'Assemblee
Assembly resolution on the principles governing
generale sur les principes de la reglementation et
the general regulation and reduction of armade la reduction generales des armements. Pourments. If we cannot meet on Monday or on
tant, s'il etait impossible de nous reunir lundi ou
Tuesday, however, I shall have no objection to
mar(~i, je ne m'opposerais pas a ce que notre
a meeting on Wednesday. I would, however,
prochaine seance ait lieu mertredi. Je prefereprefer an earlier meeting of the Security Council,
rais cependant que le Conseil se reunisse plus
that is to say, on Monday or Tuesday.
tot, c'est~a-dire lundi,ou mardi.
The PRESIDENT: I would like to indicate
Le 1?RESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je dethat I have sought to ascertain the most
sire preciseI' que j'ai cherche a savoir quelle etait
convenient time for members of the Council
la date qui convenait le mieux aux membres du
generally. To meet the wish that the USSR
Conseil en general. Pour repondre a l'objection
representative has expressed, it has been sugformulee par le representant de I'URSS, on a
gested that we might meet at 11 a.m. on
propose que le Conseil se rcunisse mercTe~i a
Wednesday, and then, if it was thought that the
11 heures et, s'il estime alors necessaire de siegeI'
une seconde fois ce jour-la, rien ne l'empechera
Council should hold a second meeting that day,
de le faire. Cela fera compensation pour quelthere "is no reason why it should not do so. That,
ques-uns des jours indiques par le representant
then, makes good at least some of the days that
de l'URSS et pourra contribuer a lui faire acwere mentioned by the USSR representative,
cepter la date de mercredi comme la plus comand may be a factor which would lead him to
accept Wednesday as- being most convenient to
mode pour les membres du Conseil.
the members of the Council.
Si personne ne voit cl' objection a ce que le
If there is no objection to the proposal that
Conseil se reunisse mercredi prochain a 11
the Council should meet at 11 a.m. Wednesday
heures, nous nous reunirons ce jour-la.
next, we shall meet accordingly.
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sociaMr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
listessovietiques) (traduit de l'anglais): Puisque
Republics): As we are meeting on Wednesday,
nous nous reunissons mercredi, il rn'est personit makes no difference to me whether we meet
nellement indifferent que nous nous reunissions
at 3 p.m. or at 11 a.m. Either time would suit
me.
I a 11 heures ou a 15 heures. L'une ou l'autre de
ces heures me conviendra.
. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) = Si le
The PRESIDENT: If the Council meets at
Conseil se reunit a 11 heures, il pourra decider,
11 a.m., it can determine, at the conclusion of
a la fin de la seance du matin, s'il desire ou non
the morning session, whether or not it wishes to
meet in the afternoon.
se reunir l'apres-midi.
The meeting rose at 5.53 p.m.

La seance est levee a 17 h.93..

Priated in the U. S. A. Price in the United States: 15 cents

24.February -l94t
