OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

MEETING: 3 APRIL 1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2205) , , . , , . . . . . , . . . . . . . - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . *. . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..~..............~...I.....

1

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights:
Letter dated 6 March 1980 from the Acting Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13832);
Letter dated 24 March 1980 from the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13855) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.2205

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Official Records qf the Security Council.
The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2205th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 3 April 1980, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Porfirio

MUROZ

LED0

(Mexico).

Letter dated 24 March 1980 from the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People addressed to the President
of the Security Council (~/13855)

present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

Provisional

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
In accordance with the decisions taken at the
2204th meeting, I invite the representatives of Egypt,
Iraq, Israel, Jordan and Lebanon to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote and I invite the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and the
representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) to take places at the Council table.

agenda (S/Agenda/2205)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of the exercise by the Palestinian
people of its inalienable rights:
Letter dated 6 March 1980 from the Acting
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13832);
Letter dated 24 March 1980 from the Chairman
of the Committee
on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13855)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdel Meg&
(Egypt), Mr. Baf (Iraq), Mr. Blum (Israel), Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan) and Mr. T&i (Lebanon) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
and Mr. Kane (Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation Organization) took places at the Council table.
3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
I wish to inform the members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Algeria,
India, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yugoslavia in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

The meeting was called to order at 11.30 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
At the outset of this meeting I should like to pay a
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to my predecessor
as President of the Council, Ambassador Donald 0.
Mills of Jamaica, for the great diplomatic skill with
which he presided over the work of the Council during
March. I know I speak for all the members of the
Council when I say how much we appreciated the
courtesy, efficiency and statesmanship that he unfailingly displayed. As the representative of a Latin
American country and on my own behalf I should like
to stress this fact.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bedjaoui
(Algeria), Mr, B. C. Mishra (India), Mr. Mansouri
(Syrian Arab Republic) and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT (inferpretation from Spanish):
The first speaker is the representative of Egypt.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of
its inalienable rights:
Letter dated 6 March 1980 from the Acting Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/13832);

5. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): Mr. President,
allow me at the outset to express my delegation’s
warmest congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of April. YOU
represent a great country, Mexico, with which my
1

sistent with the basic requirements of international
law, and they also faithfully reflect the principles ofthe
Charter and the relevant United Nations resolutions.
As was stated by the Chairman of the Committee
before the Council last year 12155th meeting], all the
members of the Council have at one time or another
actually spoken in favour of the rights of the Pal.
estinian people. In our opinion, this is a factor that
should be conducive to the achievement of progress,
In this context we welcome the decision of some
States in recent months to support the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people, including the exercise of the
right to self-determination.

own country, Egypt, has friendly and close relations,
and both countries have along history that has enriched
world civilization. You preside over a debate that is of
great importance, not only to my country but to the
whole world. I should like to assure you of the full
co-operation of my delegation.
6. I take this opportunity also to pay a tribute to
Mr. Mills of Jamaica, who presided over the Council
during the month of March and guided its deliberations
with great skill and warmth.
7. The Council is once more considering the most
important issue in the Middle East, an issue that affects
directly the peace and security not only of our region
but of the entire world. It has become universally
accepted now, more than ever before, that the attainment of a just and comprehensive peace should be
based firmly on the legitimate rights of all the peoples
in the area-foremost
among them, the Palestinian
people. We believe that all sincere efforts should be
exerted to enable the valiant and long-neglected
Palestinian people to exercise their inalienable rights.
The application of the,United Nations Charter and the
rules of international law necessitates that such a prerequisite be realized without delay. It is no longer
adequate to utter words of support for the Palestinian
cause without their being translated into concrete
action.

11. Egypt fully recognizes the dimensions of the
Palestinian question. Hence it has consistently striven
for the realization of the Palestinian people’s inahenable rights. Egypt’s policy has therefore been to tackle
this question directly and without any hesitation,
President Sadat expressed Egypt’s position in this
context in his message to the special meeting to
commemorate the International Day of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People, on 29 November 1979, when he
stated:
“Egypt, supported by all countries that cherish
peace and justice, supported the call emphasizing
the necessity for the Palestinian people to obtain its
inalienable rights in order to bring about a just and
lasting peace which would enable all the peoples in
the area to live in peace in their own countries,
safe from threats or aggression. In all its endeavours,
Egypt has made it clear that the achievement of
peace in the Middle East should be based on the
principles of international legitimacy and justice and
on the recognition that the Palestinian issue is the
crux of the conflict.

8. I wish to repeat that the establishment of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, which my country has
always supported, was a concrete and timely step
taken to enable the United Nations to elaborate the
measures to redress past injustices. The General
Assembly, in endorsing the recommendations
of the
Committee, requested the Council, on several occasions, to examine those recommendations
and the
programme of action contained therein. It is our
earnest hope that the Council, the highest organ
responsible for the maintenance of the peace and
security of the world, will not fail to assume its responsibility for the realization of a just and durable
peace in the Middle East, especially for the Palestinian
people.

“The initiatives undertaken by Egypt are but a
continuation of the sacrifices it has made in the past
so that the Palestinian people might obtain its freedom and exercise its right to self-determination,
We
believe that those initiatives are now paving the way
for the Palestinian people to recover its rights and
establish its national
entity in its homeland.
* * . The people of Palestine, after such a long period
of suffering and oppression, is waiting for the international community,
and particularly the countries
of the area, to translate their words of solidarity
into actual deeds so that the Palestinian people inaY
attain its freedom and right to self-determination”,

9. The Council has in fact been seized of this question on various occasions throughout
the past
30 years and it is high time it took the necessary action.
The Palestinian people ask no more than to regain and
be enabled to exercise their inalienable national rights,
like any other people in the world, so that they can,
with all the peoples of the region, contribute positively
to its prosperity and development.

12. I need not emphasize that President Sadat’s
initiative has put an end for ever to a stagnant situstion of “no war, no peace” that has been forced en
the Middle East and on the Palestinians in particnlaro
The movement we witness today, whether here in the
United Nations or in other parts of the world or in the
region itself, has been affected by this initiative. His
initiative opened the door to serious work and cop
Crete action for the achievement of a just and comPre
hensive peace in the area and for the realization of the
inalienable national rights of the Palestinian People.

i0. I should like to seize this opportunity to pay a
special tribute to Ambassador Falilou Kane of Senegal,
the Chairman of the Committee, for his admirable and
dedicated work in guiding the Committee in its deliberations. I wish to state once more that the recommendations of the Committee are balanced and con2

13. It is to be noted with regret that Israel is every
day creating more and more obstacles to impede the
achievement of this comprehensive
and just peace.
The decisions of the Israeli Government to confiscate
land in Arab Jerusalem or elsewhere in the occupied
Arab territories or t0 establish new settlements affirm
fcr us the Israeli Government’s continued disregard of
international law and the relevant binding international
conventions. Such decisions have, moreover, created
serious obstacles which hinder the faithful implementation of the Camp David accords, under which Israel
is committed to honouring the rights of the Palestinian
people. The Egyptian Government strongly condemns
such measures and considers them null and void, In
this regard, the Egyptian Government stresses the
special importance it attaches to the status of Jerusalem and the preservation of the legal, historical and
spiritual rights of all Arabs and Moslems in the Holy
City in order to create conditions for coexistence
among the adherents of the three monotheistic
religions. The Israeli Government’s
decision contravenes its international obligations and constitutes a
flagrant defiance of the will of the international community as expressed in the recent resolution, unanimously adopted by the Security Council, that deplored
Israel’s settlement policy in the occupied Arab territories, including Jerusalem [resolution 465 (19&l)].

frustrated the realization of peace in our region had to
be dissipated. Genuine attempts to begin a meaningful Peace process had to be made. Egypt did wage
war, in the exercise of its inherent right of self-defence,
when circumstances dictated no other course of action,
But at a certain moment, peace had to be our sole
objective and its attainment our sacred obligation. We
recognized this obligation. Only those who have
experienced the scourge of war could appreciate and
cherish the true meaning of peace. That is why President Sadat, at the height of the October 1973 war,
proposed convening a peace conference to resolve
the Arab-Israeli conflict. Peace, however, cannot
prevail in our region unless it is just and comprehensive
and unless it embraces all the peoples in the area,
including the Palestinians and the Israelis. The time
has come for serious work, without rhetoric or
polemics. Let us unite our efforts to establish peace
in the Middle East on the basis of respect for the
rights of States and peoples, mutual respect and
mutual recognition.
16. It is therefore high time that the international
community,
represented in the Security Council,
recognized the plight of the Palestinian people. As is
now apparent, the core of the Middle East problem is
the Palestinian question. Any delay will only lead to
more tension, instability and even bloodshed, and
more waste of energy-not for progress, but on war
effort and destruction.

14. As I did in my statement to the Council in
August last [2161st meeting], I should like once again
to aftirm in very clear terms that Egypt has wholeheartedly supported and continues to support all
meaningful and constructive efforts aimed at facilitating the implementation
of Council resolution 242
(1967) and of all relevant United Nations resolutions.
Our record in this regard is unparalleled and our
contributions have been acclaimed by the international
community. We realize, however, that the implementation of resolution 242 (1967) has eluded the
international community for over a decade by reason
of divergent interpretations
of its provisions. It is
therefore of great importance to note in this context
that the principle of the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by war, as stipulated in that resolution was finally affirmed in practical terms in the
Peace treaty between Egypt and Israel, article I of
which confirms that the Israeli withdrawal shall be to
the international boundary, This principle of withdrawal to international boundaries is applicable to the
territories of the other parties concerned in the conflict. At this crucial stage, the legitimate and inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including their
right to self-determination,
should be fully addressed
and realized so that a just and lasting peace may be
achieved in the Middle East. This is Egypt’s firm and
long-standing position.

18. The foregoing was the original statement which
I had intended to deliver at the last meeting; at that
time I agreed to postpone its delivery till the next
meeting because of the lateness of the hour. But in the
light of the deliberate attempts to misinterpret our
intentions, misrepresent our policies and even distort
established facts, I feel in duty bound to respond and
set the record straight. As a matter of policy, Egypt
does not engage in polemics or the exchange of diatribes. This position, however, does not emanate from
weakness, I would like to stress here that we fully
realize that some may disagree with our approach. We
respect the right of everyone to disagree, but we
strongly object when it comes to unwarranted and
irresponsible abuse. Our record is well known and we
genuinely believe that histrionics and heaped-up
slanders will not benefit the Palestinian cause. I speak
now more in sorrow than in anger.

15. Egypt’s commitment
to the Palestinian cause is
total and unwavering. We are also committed, in conformity with the Charter and the relevant resolutions,
to the achievement
of a just and comprehensive
Peace settlement. The stagnation that has plagued and

19. Certain allusions were made-and
probably
will be made again-which called in question Egypt’s
commitment to the Palestinian cause. Let me at the
outset state very clearly that such allusions are categorically rejected by my Government. Egypt has never

17. Time is running out. The peoples of the region,
and especially the Palestinian people, are looking to
the highest organ of the United Nations to act quickly
and decisively in order to restore to everyone his
inalienable rights and to prevent turmoil from engulfing the Middle East once again.

3

equipment will make it an asset to. the whole Arab
nation and an assurance of stability and legitimacyI repeat, stability. The strength of Egypt is the strength
of the whole region and a support for all just causes,
Thus attempts to question the sincerity and commitment of the Egyptian leadership are counter-productive
and doomed to failure.

claimed to speak for, or on behalf of, the Palestinian
people. It should be recalled that, following his historic
initiative in 1977, President Sadat called for a meeting
in December 1977to prepare for the convening of the
Geneva Peace Conference. The Palestinians, as well
as the other Arab parties concerned, were invited. The
peace process was attacked before it even started.
Some opted not to participate. That was their privilege.

24. It is now high time to follow the model of African
maturity, the model of the Patriotic Front which
diligently worked, in the military and political fields
simultaneously, without losing sight of its ultimate
goal: the attainment of independence. The Republic of
Zimbabwe, which will soon join us at the United
Nations as the newest independent Member State,
should teach everyone the lesson of how to rise above
rivalries and never to allow those who pay lip service
to a cause to change its course and objectives. The
leaders of Zimbabwe proved to the world at large that
they were not only genuine freedom fighters but astute
and accomplished statesmen as well.

20. I need not emphasize that Egypt never attempted
to create a Palestinian group under its domination, as
some others did and are still doing. Such divisions,
in our view, would only weaken the Palestinian cause.
Egypt’s hands are clean. Not one single Palestinian
was ever harmed by Egypt. We take pride in the fact
that all our actions, whether in warfare or in the pursuit
of peace, have tended in one direction-namely,
towards the enhancement of the Palestinian cause and
the strengthening of Palestinian national unity. It is to
be noted, however, that it was Egypt first that proposed, as far back as 1972, the formation of a Palestinian Government in exile and Egypt that has
consistently advanced Palestinian national rights in
all international and regional forums.

25. Our hands are stretched out to all the forces of
sincerity which genuinely strive for the achievement
of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
Egypt, for its part, will continue to spare no effort
until the valiant Palestinian people attains its sacred
right to determine its own future. We will not be
dissuaded by doubts, distortions or slander. TO those
who excel in rhetoric and who criticize our approach,
we simply say “Produce a viable alternative”. Any
party that can produce better results will surely enjoy
the support of Egypt. Should our approach fail, we
shall have the courage to admit it. Regardless of the
final outcome, Egypt’s contribution to the Palestinian
cause is unmatched.

21. With respect to allegations regarding the Camp
David accords, we have clearly stated, more than
once-and I repeat it here today-that those accords
constitute only the first step and not the final settlement. At Camp David, Egypt extracted from Israel,
for the first time, a pledge to apply resolution 242
(1967) to the West Bank and Gaza, to recognize the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and resolve
the Palestinian question in all its aspects.
22. We realize, however, that a pledge needs to be
translated into action and carried out, and that is the
rationale of the ongoing peace process. It should be
underlined and appreciated that a sincere attempt to
change the stagnant status quo is now under way.
Changing the status quo is the logical first step towards
the realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinians, The Palestinian people alone should determine
its future. President Sadat has emphasized that point
on many occasions. I repeat today that the Palestinian
people alone has the right to accept or refuse any
result. In its endeavours to find a solution, Egypt
was motivated by a sincere desire to alleviate the
sufferings of the Palestinians under Israeli military
occupation in the West Bank and Gaza, through
transitional arrangements. Regrettably, some who are
not actually living under the yoke of military occupation do not grasp the dimensions of our endeavours.

26. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Jordan.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
27. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): Mr. President, as
this is the first occasion on which I have spoken in
the Council this month, I wish to express my sincere
congratulations to you, on your assumption of your
high offtce. I am certain that, as a son and statesman
of valiant Mexico, you will steer the deliberations of
the Council, especially on this crucial issue, with
wisdom and prudence.
28. It is my pleasure also to express my deep appreciation to your predecessor in the presidency, Ambassador Mills of friendly Jamaica, who presided over the
work of the Council during the month of March with
his widely acknowledged statesmanship and diplomatic
acumen.

23. An attempt was made at the last meeting to raise
doubts about the Egyptian army, that same army that
bore the brunt of defending the Palestinian and Arab
causes for over 30 years. It was the Egyptian army
that fought, sacrificed and shed blood for the Arab and
Palestinian causes. It was that army that supported
all just causes in the Middle East and in Africa. The
efforts now being made to modernize and update its

29. I wish to take the opportunity of the Easter
festivities which are so closely associated with our
Holy Land to extend to you, Mr. President, and to
all the other members of the Council, my delegation’s
heartiest felicitations and best wishes.

4

30, It is saddening that SO many residents of Jerusalemand Christians of the Arab world and the Near
Eastareunable to take Part in the joyous celebrations
andit is saddening also to see those Christians who
arecelebrating doing SOunder Israeli bayonets and
machineguns.

grounds of survivability, then what should the Palestinian People think, that people whose survival and
fate are not hypothetical postulates but a fact of life
compounded by the passageof every day, every month
and every year? Is this kind of nihilism conducive to
peace in decadesto come?

31, The last thing the Council needs is yet another
discourse
on the genesis and the continual and alarming
erosionof the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. If knowledge is a spur to action, then such
knowledgeis already available in abundance. Suffice
it here to recall that those rights were brutally
butcheredin an unprecedented manner, ironically
enoughshortly after the United Nations came into
existence,almost 35 years ago-presumably to reestablishan international order based on the rule of
law,moral norms, justice and peace.

36. What the Council is seized of in the current
deliberations is, in the simplest terms, the ongoing
and relentless cannibalization of Palestinian rights,
and hence the very fate and survival of the Palestinian
people. What does the international community proPose to do to restore them to the mainstream of
national and international existence,as we witness the
final chapter of their agonizing demise being written
blatantly, openly, admittedly, and with full speed, by
their tormentors?

32, Succeeding generations of statesmen, many of
whomhave now passed away, have been arguing this
tragedybefore the Security Council and other internationalforums for decades on end, but to no avail.
Retrogression-and not one iota of redemption-has
beenthe outcome of those sustained efforts.

37. It is sad to reminisce and reflect, having lived
through the original sin and the grind, that the dismemberment of Palestine and the uprooting of its
people occurred in an overheated, irrational atmosphere not dissimilar from that which we are living
through today. The people to pay the ultimate price
are once again the Palestinianpeople.

33. Prudentchoice of time and timing, we are advised 38. In the fateful years 1947to 1948,the Palestinians,
-and we are also fully aware-are of crucial impor- who constituted two thirds of the inhabitants of Paltance. That could well be so, but only if time were by ,estine and owned upwards of 90 per cent of its lands,
somemiracle to come to a standstill, to a standoff, found themselves the hapless victims of awesome
to allow for a breathing spell and avert the capricious forces which they were powerless to countervail.
exploitationof time. But, alas, that is not the case. A global rivalry, chilling into a cold war, on the one
Time is Israel’s most precious commodity, or so it
hand, and the most unscrupulousand ruthless applicacalculates,to enable it to bring in new immigrants, tion and misuse of internal Zionist pressure, on the
sequesteras much land as it can imminently absorb other, had conspired to bring about the undoing of the
-it already has close to 32 per cent of the 1967 Palestinians.So intense had beenthe abuse of internal
occupiedterritories in Jerusalem and the West Bank parochial naked power that even a sympatheticPresialone-and thus fulfil its long-standing designs to take dent Truman bitterly complained in his memoirs of
over the whole of Palestine and well beyond, as the intensity of the heat to which he had been subcircumstances
permit. The whole gameis a race against jected to subvert his judgement, and the judgement of
those celebrities around him, like James Forrestal,
timeto confront the world with a newfair accompli.
George Marshall and many others, who were trying
34. Aggressive and expansionist Israel has set its to serve their country’s national interest as they
navigational instruments in pursuit of its goals of perceived it. It is hardly surprising, therefore, that
“expanded conflict”, and not peaceful coexistence anyone who indicates some understanding of the Palbasedon mutual benefit. That this is, in the final estinian and Arab plight is immediately maligned and
analysis,a collision course, a time-bomb which can branded a “damned Arabist”.
leadonly to an “expanded explosion”, is cavalierly
andominously spelt out, and relished, in the book 39. Today we face a similar situation-but with a
fundamental difference. In the earlier cataclysmthere
entitledNone Will Survive Us: The Story of the Israeli
were,
in the perception of segmentsof the intemaA-Bomb, by Eli Teicher and Ami Dor-On, two Israeli
journalists.That book has been banned and its publica- tional community, two sides to the coin, some leeway
tion has been barred by the Israeli military censor, and some glimmer of hope for rectification and
GeneralShani, The A-bomb development, asthe Coun- accommodation. Today Israel has eliminated all
cil is aware, has been the accomplishment of Israel- reasonable, or even minimal, options andis confronting
South Africa collaboration since the mid-1960s, the world with only one, monolithic side, with its face
becausethose two countries are united in their common protruding menacingly from both sides of the coin,
racistgoal of blackmailing and subjugating the vast emitting nothing but lethal and sinister signals, for all
to see and hear, that the Palestinian people’s destiny
massesof humanity in Asia and Africa.
and survival in their ancestralhome are sealed,and the
33. If Israel has seen fit to acquire an atomic arsenal process is being systematicallytargeted and pursued in
and endanger world peace on alleged and paranoic a one-way trek to non-existence.

40. Israel, in letter and in spirit, has actually and
factually, by words and by deeds, torpedoed Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), not to speak
of the legally valid, long-standing United Nations
resolutions on Palestinian national as well as individual
rights.
41. That fact alone would have prompted and
warranted the urgent convening of the Council to
consider what practical steps should be taken to confront present and continuing aggression and defiance
by a recalcitrant Member State, in accordance with
the provisions of the Charter. This course of action
would have been called for even if the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, established by the General Assembly in 1975,
had not had to meet a deadline, set at the last, the
thirty-fourth, session of the General Assembly, which
had mandated that Committee to seek Council action,
not later than 31 March 1980, on the implementation
of its recommendations towards resolving the Palestinian issue. Indeed, the clear-cut statement at the
last meeting by Israel’s representative is an audacious
messagethat there is no longer a Palestinian question.
42. The Committee and its Chairman, Ambassador
Kane, deserve the highest commendation for their
tireless, persistent and painstaking work over a span
of several years and for their genuine efforts to
promote the achievement of a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East by redeeming Palestinian rights
which, since they are long delayed, are rights denied.
It is a truism to reiterate that the core of the Middle
East conflict is the question of Palestine. If its centrality is almost universally recognized and if the overwhelming majority of mankind, as represented in the
General Assembly, has endorsed the validity of the
Committee’s recommendations at the thirty-first,
thirty-second, thirty-third and thirty-fourth Assembly
sessions, then it is incumbent upon the Council to
take positive action on the Committee’s recommendations, whose validity has been undiminished by
the passage of time and whose urgency has been
highlighted by events.
43. If the situation pertaining to the question of
Palestine is to be unlocked from its prolonged stalemate, then something must be done about that. The
Committee’s recommendations are a synthesis of
United Nations resolutions, made in the light of present
conditions. They comprise a policy programme of
implementation which grapples with almost all the
conceivable variables which might arise in the longentangled issue and which endeavours pragmatically,
following a coherent time-table, to find appropriate
solutions, Positive action by the Security Council on
the recommendations endorsed year after year by the
General Assembly could create the necessary conditions for a just and lasting peace in the Middle East
because, as the Committee’s last report stresses,
“the recommendations , , . are the basic principles
relating to the problem of Palestine within the
Middle East situation”.’

And what is the alternative? An unending drift towards
disaster?
44. It is becoming more and more meaninglessto talk
about Palestinian rights in the abstract, as though
accomplishing a ritual, an exercise to lighten an
afflicted conscience. The Palestinian people, whether
under occupation for 13 years or in exile, find little
sustenance in such soothing words or in decisionsand
pledges unfulfilled, while all they see is the ground
disappearing from beneath their feet like quicksand.
45. The time is long overdue when the Israelis
should cease being over-obsessed with claims about
security, for the ultimate security-carried to
absurdity-is the security of the grave. It is the Palestinians whose security and survival have been
massively undermined. Under conditions of ajust and
lasting peace, excessive obsessions with security
would become meaningless, and people’s minds and
energies would be devoted to more productive and
rewarding pursuits. This is human nature, which must
not be belittled or overlooked.
46. The time is equally long overdue when the Israelis
should recognize their guilt in the destruction of the
lives of the Palestinian people. Such recognition can
only be attained within a framework of real justice,
real restoration and real dignity. Then and only then
will we look forward to a new era free from fear,
guilty consciences, suffering and a future disaster
which would engulf us all.
47. There have been attempts by the myopic and
the blind supporters of Israel, right or wrong, to disparage the work of the Committee as though it
were a self-appointed private study group. It may be
appropriate to remind them that the recommendations
of that dedicated Committee reflect the common
purpose, the decisions and the conscience of the vast
majority of mankind.
48. While hoping against hope that the Council will
not be prevented from shouldering its responsibilities
under the Charter by taking positive action for an
equitable resolution of the Palestine question, the
international community is determined, in the caseof
the Council’s failure to reach unanimity, to call for
an emergencyl:iypecial session of the General Assembly, as the repository and trustee of Palestinian rights,
Firm solidarity among the overwhelming majority of
mankind in indisputably righteous causes, suchas the
questions of Palestine and southern Africa, can be
formidable indeed; sufficiently so, when adequately
marshalled, to support the Charter and to uphold the
rule of international law.
49. It is inconceivable that the will and the whims of
the privileged few should silence, stifle or otherwise
subvert what the international community believes
to be just, lawful and humane. Finding the key to
success, however, is contingent upon true and effec6

J

y ‘J

tivesolidarity, which, in spite of temporary setbacks,
is assuredlyemerging. Mahatma Gandhi did not have
lethalweaponsto achieve the emancipation of Indiaaadeven if he had had them, he would not have used
them.His message was more powerful than all the
weapons that might have been arrayed against his
s&]e mission. And SO it is with a newly emerging
world, seeking freedom and justice for all and determinedto attain it.
50, Last, yet foremost, is the question of Jerusalem.
Therehave been disturbing developments to which the
Committeemakes reference in paragraph 30 of its
report. I wish to make it crystal clear that the heart
andsoul of the entire Palestine and Middle East questionis the destiny of holy Jerusalem, which under no
circumstanceswhatsoever can be forsaken. This is an
immutabletruth which I need not reiterate. This is our
unshakableconviction-and each country is, of course,
entitledto its convictions.

Jerusalem or to its future, then reservations would
have been understandable. Besides, Arab Jerusalem
is considerably larger than the shrunken Jerusalem of
1967; for 70 per cent of West Jerusalem-mistakenly
named Israeli-is Arab-owned, according to the
delineation madeby a commissionchaired by Mr. Fitzgerald, in the zoning of boroughs and municipalities
within the international corpus separurum decided
upon by the General Assembly. We would have had
our own reservations if the two resolutions had such
implications, which are contrary to United Nations
decisions.
54. The appropriate time to stipulate status and
delineations will be when a final solution is achieved
to the question of Palestine,including Jerusalem. But
until that is achieved, it is flying in the face of facts
to deny that Arab Jerusalem of 1967is an occupied
territory to which the Geneva Convention is applicable. Any ambivalence on this point cannot but be
construed as condoning the unlawful and unilateral
annexation of Arab Jerusalem and would be contrary
to the international community’s unanimous rejection
of that annexation by Israel in June 1967. Since the
United States has, since 1967, consistently rejected
such annexation as illegal, it is essential to have a
clarification as to whether there has been a change
in that position on this central issue.

51, But there is another aspect to the problem of
Jerusalem which has aroused, and continues to
arouse,the gravest concern and puzzlement because
ofits possible implications. Strangely enough, it stems
from a misreading of a physical fact rather than from
asubjectivevalue judgement. When the United States
abstainedlast July on Council resolution 452 (1979),
whichcondemned Israeli settlements in the occupied
territories,including Jerusalem, it explained its abstention on the grounds that the resolution included Arab
Jerusalemas an occupied territory. A similar difficulty
seemsto have arisen in relation to the mention of
Jerusalemlast month in resolution 465 (1980). It is
incomprehensiblethat references to Jerusalem should
have given rise to any difficulty or confusion, considering that all those references were made in the
context of the description of an irrefutable fact
observedby at least a quarter of a million inhabitants
of the Holy City, in addition to numerous journalists,
consuls general-including the American Consul
General-and, if further verification were needed,
evenby satellites.

55. Having made what I hope has been a serious
statement on the issue before us, I had planned to
stop right here. I have been criticized for making
somewhat longer statements than I should. Not
surprisingly, however, the representative of the Zionist
entity which is in occupation of the whole of Palestine
in violation of United Nations resolutions,has adhered
to his traditional practice of diverting attention from
the serious to the comical and farcical, but not without
ominous overtones. In what he described as myths
flying in the face of history and present-day political
realities pervading the United Nations, he has indulged
in falsification and propagated myths which can only
be described as a calculated insult to the intelligence
and learned wisdom of the Council. That shouid
not surprise anyone, considering that the Zionist
movement has been, from its inception, the biggest
conspiracy of the modern era, nurtured on myths and
slogans which even the founders of the movement
knew for what they were, although they persisted in
spreading them to an unknowing world.

52. Can anybody deny that at some time after
11.00p.m. on Monday, 5 June 1967, the Israeli army
beganits advance against Arab Jerusalem? It is unnecessaryto prove what the Israeli aggressors themselveshave described in detail, what those who took
Part in that action have said in several books on the
occupation of Arab Jerusalem. It is therefore superfhUS to prove that Arab Jerusalem was physically
occupiedby the Israeli army in 1967.If that is the case,
hy what process of logic can anybody deny that it is
an occupied territory, along with the West Bank and
ether occupied Arab territories and that, therefore,
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949’
shouldautomatically apply to it?

56. They spoke of “a country without a IEOpfe"
-meaning Palestine-and “a people without a country”- meaning the Jewish citizens of the most advanced countries in the world. The truth is that
Palestinehad its indigenous population Of 800
people at a time when the continental United States
in the year 1800had only 4 million inhabitants. Another
myth concerned “making the desertsbloom”, whereas
Palestine in the eighteenth century, 200 years before
any Jews set foot there, and particularly Galilee, was
one of the largest cotton producers in the world, for

53. If the said references to Jerusalem in the two
resolutions had included any mention of the status Of
7

recognize this fact and jumped ‘over to the Balfour
Declaration,3 which was incorporated into the Mandate for Palestine on 24 July 1922, three years later,

the purchase of whose produce the three industrialized
countries of Europe, Great Britain, France and
Holland, were competing. The Jaffa oranges and all
known fruits and vegetables were in great abundance
long before the Zionist incursion, The only area of
desert, namely, the Negev, is still a desert except for
a small strip around Beersheba which the Israelis were
able to water in the 196Os, having unlawfully stolen
and diverted the Jordan River from its basin, in violation of established and recognized international law.
I might add that there are a few other things that
blossom there, such as the Daymona atomic complex
and two huge threatening airfields at present under
construction with United States financing.

60. But in spite of the illegality of the Balfour
Declaration, inasmuch as it was made behind the backs
of the Palestinian Arabs and without their consent,
and even though it favoured the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people, that
Declaration stated categorically, “it being clearly
understood that nothing should be done which might
prejudice the civil and religious rights of the existing
non-Jewish communities in Palestine”-even
though
the non-Jewish communities, of course, constituted
90 per cent of the population-“or
the rights and
political status enjoyed by Jews in any other country”. The civil rights include at least the right of an
indigenous inhabitant to remain on his land, in his
home, on his farm and in his homeland. That same
donor, namely, Great Britain, in the age of ignorance,
specifically requested of the League of Nations that the
provisions in the Mandate pertaining to a Jewish home
in Palestine should not apply to Jordan. In 1946 the
Mandate over Jordan was terminated and Jordan
achieved its independence under the name of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,

57. But let us come now to more serious falsifications
in the Israeli representative’s mythology. First is his
atrocious claim that the Palestinian Arabs long ago
achieved self-determination in what he called the
Palestinian Arab State of Jordan. He seems to be
arrogating unto himself the right not only to create
States but also to name them. How the people of
Jordan for thousands of years, their ancestors the
Nabateans, the Arabs and other races and the Palestinians have felt and feel about the identity of their
countries does not bother him in the least. Second
is his claim that two States were established on the
territory which was the Palestine Mandate between the
two world wars. One is an Arab State which he called
Jordan, and the other is a Jewish State, which he
called Israel.

“Certain communities formerly belonging to the
Turkish Empire have reached a stage of development where their existence as independent nations
can be provisionally recognized subject to the
rendering of administrative advice and assistance
by a Mandatory until such time as they are able to
stand alone. The wishes of these communities must
be a principal consideration in the selection of the
Mandatory.”

61. What about Palestine? On 29 November 1947
the General Assembly adopted resolution 181 (II),
which provided for the establishment of a Palestinian
Arab State far larger than the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip, and a Jewish State in parts of Palestine,
with Jerusalem as an international corpus sepumum.
The Security Council was requested specifically by the
General Assembly to take the necessary measures,
as provided for in the plan of partition, for that plan’s
implementation. Even though that request was made
specifically to the Council, it unfortunately failed to act
on the creation of the proposed Palestinian Arab
State. The failure to implement the establishment of
the Palestinian Arab State was not the consequence
of the verbal refusal by the Palestinian Arabs to countenance the dismemberment of Palestine, but was the
result of Israel’s implementation, three days after the
adoption of resolution 181 (II), of the “Delep” plan
to overrun by force as much of Palestine as it could,
in accordance with a long-prepared plan for that
purpose. Was there a plebiscite among the Palestinians or any other democratic process to ascertain the
wishes and views of the Palestinian people?

59. The representative of the Zionist entity in
occupied Palestine is fully aware of the fact that when
the independence of Palestine was recognized under
Article 22, the Palestinian people constituted more
than 90 per cent of the entire population. The Jewish
inhabitants were a tiny insignificant portion of that
population. The same provisional recognition of independence was conceded to Jordan, Syria, Lebanon,
Iraq and all the other Arab countries which were
a part of the Ottoman Empire. What is deceptive in
the Israeli representative’s claim is that he omitted to

62. Indeed, the Israelis seized most of Palestine while
the British Army was still there and before the entry
of any of the Arab soldiers who entered Palestine
when the Mandate ended on 14 May 1948 to save the
remnants of the Palestinian territory earmarked as
part of the Palestinian Arab State and to spare the
remnants of the Palestinian people that had not yet
become refugees the atrocities and massacres which
people like Begin of the Irgun and Shamir, the present
Foreign Minister of the Zionist entity and leader of
the Stern Gang, were perpetrating against the largely

58. Let us first take the League of Nations Mandate.
Deceptively and deliberately, the representative of
the Zionist entity has tried to confuse two issues by
omitting the most important of them as far as the
Mandate is concerned. Article 22 of the Covenant of
the League of Nations had actually recognized provisionally the independence of Palestine as far back
as 28 June 1919. That article reads as follows:

8

3 !j’./

-

,,ssrmed
palestiniah’peo’ple. I think the Stern Ganghas
somethingto do with the United Nations, inasmuch
ssthere was an involvement with the murder of the
iateCount Folke Bernadotte, and I had had luncheon
,,,ithhim on that same fateful afternoon before he
crcssedover and was murdered by the Stern Gang.
NowMr. Blum is kCturhg
the Council on terrorism,
unmindfulof the fact that it was his groups that
introducedit on a grand scale to the Middle East.

il

’

confiscate and live in someone else’s house and
plunder his property, his furniture and all he has?
Anyone can build a house on his own piece of land,
but he cannot simply live on the toil, sweat and
savings of someoneelse,
68. What Ambassador Blum called a second refugee
problem and an exchange of populations is simply
untrue. I think that people in the know are all too
well aware of the unconscionable efforts the Jewish
Agency exerted to get the Jewsout of their Arab countries and into Palestine.The meansused ranged from
the carrot and stick tactics through incitement to
anti-Jewish riots, as was later disclosed, to outright
bribery and corruption of certain peoplein those countries to help to get those citizensof Jewish faith out.
The names of some of the people who were involved
in that clandestine operation are known-or was it
clandestine? But forgetting about the past, the Arab
countries from which citizens of the Judaic faith had
emigrated have declared their readiness to welcome
those emigrants who want to go back home and to
return their property to them. Are the Israelis willing
to do the same for Palestiniansin exile? That is the
acid test of intentions and the Arab countries are
willing to accept the test at any time.

63, Clearly, therefore, the Palestinian Arabs were
severgiven the slightest chance to exercise their right
of self-determination in their ancestral homeland
before,during or after the Mandate. In short, Palestine
isPalestineand Jordan is Jordan, and it is an exercise
isfutility to try to cheat or to deprive the Palestinians
of their right to self-determination in their ancestral
homeland;it is ah0 an act of aggression against
anothersovereign independent State, recognized by
theUnited Nations for a quarter of a century as the
HashemiteKingdom of Jordan.
64. Ambassador Blum further asked why it was that
therewas no Palestinian State when the West Bank
wasunited with Jordan. That is a good question and
theansweris simple. There could have been no PalestinianState on a truncated and dismembered territory, cut off from the sea and from all sides except the
east.A Palestinian State had to await a final Palestiniansettlementbased on United Nations resolutions.
That could have been achieved at Lausanne in
194%almost30 years ago-and the Arab parties concernedsignedthe Lausanne Protocol,4 but the Israelis
renegedon it after having initialled their agreement
andof course, ensured their admission to the United
Nations.

69. Finally there is the alleged, mythical connection
between the question of Palestine and the energy
crisis. It is a slur not only on the sanctity of the
Palestine question, but also on the solidarity of the
overwhelming majority of mankind which has always
supported Palestinian rights, long, long before there
was even talk of energy, less still of an energy crisis.
But I should leave the answer to that calculated insult
to all the Statesand nations to whom it was directed.
70. As for media manipulation and mind control, I do
not have to tell anybody who controls, conditions and
manipulatespublic opinion in pivotal parts of the world,
for it is an open secret.

65. Article 2 of the Act of Unity between the West
Bankand the East Bank of 24 April 1950states:
“To assure the safeguarding of all Arab rights
[in Palestine] and, defending those rights by all
legitimate means and with full faith, and without
prejudicing the final settlement of its just cause,
within national aspirations, Arab co-operation and
internationaljustice.”

71. When the Israeli representative spoke at the last
meeting, he certainly bad an official messageto convey to the Council, a messagethat could not but have
been received with the deepest concern. It could
not have escaped the attention of the Council. It is
an extremely ominous message, particularly when
delivered before the Council. The Israeli messageis
a public repudiation of all Council and General Assembly resolutions on Palestine and the situation in
the Middle East, and principally resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) of the Council and 181 (II) and
194 (III) of the General Assembly, pertaining to total
Israeli withdrawal from the occupiedterritories andthe
Palestinian people’s right to return to its homeland
and to determine its future on its national Soil.

66. Jordan has always maintained that when the
momentcame for a final solution to the Palestine
problem,the Palestinians themselves should determine
their future and decide their destiny. The General
ArmisticeAgreements of I9495 also stressedthat those
ArmisticeAgreements would in no way prejudice the
fins1settlement of the Palestine problem.
67. As for the problem of the Palestinian refugees,
it is their inalienable and elemental right to return
to their homes and homeland. It is sanctified every
Yearby General Assembly resolution 194 (III) of
11December1948. Besides, one of the Ten Commandmentsstatescategorically “Thou shalt not steal”. BY
what right can any individual or group of individuals

72. The messageis also an open act of aggression
against the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, an independent sovereign State Member of the United
Nations, because it classifies that State as a Part Of
9

Palestine and, by the Zionists’ well-known sorcery,
names it the national homeland of the people of Palestine. In the message he alleged that the Palestinian
people had long ago established their State and determined their own future. What can one answer to such
falsifications? The fact that Jordan belongs to the
people of Jordan, as Palestine belongs to the Palestinian people, is totally abrogated by the representative of the racist Zionist entity.

Palestinian territory. This decision is an obvious sequel
to the Zionist authorities’ earlier decision authorizing
Jewish settlement in that Arab city. We would further
recall that resolution 465 (1980), unanimously adopted
by the Council, calls upon Israel to dismantle existing
settlements and, in particular, to cease, on an urgent
basis, the establishment of new settlements in the
Arab territories, including Jerusalem. The resolution
also determined that all measures taken by Israel to
change the demographic composition or statusof the
Palestinian and other Arab territories, including Jerusalem, have no legal validity. Iraq would also like to
refer to the letter dated 25 March addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representative
of Morocco, Chairman of the Islamic Group,
expressing grave concern over the expropriation by the
occupation authorities of additional Arab landsnorth of
the Holy City of Jerusalem and the confiscation by
those authorities of 150 hectares of land in the village
of Al-Khadar near Bethlehem [S/13859].

73. That statement is a most dangerous statement of
policy, one that impels both the Government and
people of Jordan, as well as the people of Palestine,
to reassess their positions, if they have not already
done so. It would also require the United Nations to
withdraw its recognition of the Zionist entity, whose
admission to membership in the Organization was
conditional upon an Israeli pledge, given by Israel’s
Foreign Minister before the General Assembly, to
abide scrupulously by the provisions of resolutions 181 (II) and 194 (III) in resolving the Palestine
problem. On the basis of that pledge, Israel was
admitted to membership in the United Nations. This
is a fact that all members can find in the records.
Those resolutions referred to Palestine as defined in the
attached maps. One can see the maps referring to
Palestine and not to Jordan, a sovereign and independent State, which was unconditionally admitted
to membership in the United Nations in 1955.

79.

Even The New York Times reported on 27 March

that
“Palestinian leaders eluded Israeli troops and held
a secret rally today to protest plans to settle Jews
in all-Arab Hebron.
“ . . . Mayor Fahd Qawasma had slipped out of
City Hall, which was being watched by a dozen
armed Israeli troops under orders to prevent a
planned sit-in demonstration.

74. It is needless to state that aggressive Israel stands
alone and condemned in defying almost the entire
world, which believes in justice, freedom and the rule
of law.

“The Mayor . . . joined a protest rally at another
site attended by about 400 West Bank civic and
religious leaders.

75. The PRESIDENT (inferpretatiorz from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Iraq. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

“[The rally] coincided with the first anniversary
of Israel’s peace treaty with Egypt.”

76. Mr. BAFI (Iraq): Mr. President, I should tike at
the outset to congratulate you on the occasion of your
assuming the presidency of the Council. The relations
between our two countries are good and friendly and
benefit the interests of both our countries and peoples.
I should also like to express the Iraqi delegation’s
appreciation for the way in which Mr. Mills of Jamaica
conducted the Council’s work during the month of
March.

80. The attitude of the Zionist occupation forces is
bound to aggravate the already serious situation in the
occupied Arab and Palestinian territories. The Zionist
entity alone will bear full responsibility for the grave
consequences of its expansionist policy.
81, The aggressive Zionist entity is still occupying
Palestinian and Arab territories by force andviolating
tens of relevant resolutions and decisions adoptedby
the United Nations over more than 30 years, the
fourth Geneva Convention of 19492and the established
principles of international law, Given this seriesof
provocations to the Arab nation and the Islamic world,
Iraq and several other Arab countries have many
times demanded that the Council apply the sanctions
which are provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter,
Yet in the face of all these challenges, the Counc.ilis
continually prevented from taking action against
Israel’s sinister and defiant policies. The reasonfor
that is the United States’ continued use of, or threat
to use, its veto in any decision taken againstits
pampered and protected protege.

77. The Council has been convened at the request
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, which once again
has urged the Council CO take a decision on the recommendations repeatedly endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolutions during the thirty-first, thirtysecond and thirty-third sessions and in resolution
34/65 A, adopted at its last session.
78. Iraq is profoundly concerned over the decision
of the Zionist authorities to establish two so-called
“live-in schools” in the city of Al-Khalil in occupied
10

-A

82, As if all this ,did not go far enough in hurting
tke interests of the Arab people, the United States
,x&nued its policy of defying the whole Arab nation
by engineering the Camp David accords and the
separate“peace” treaty between the Sadat regime and
the Zionist entity, thus denying the whole Palestinian
people its inalienable
right to self-determination,
in&ding the setting UP of its own independent State,
Overall of its national soil, as has been affirmed by
the two Arab Summit Conferences held in Baghdad
andTunis in 1978 and 1979 respectively.
83. One month ago the world in general, and the
Arab and Islamic world in particular, witnessed with
disbelief how the leadership in Washington bowed
in fear to the Zionist organization’s pressures in New
York and disavowed its own chief delegate’s vote.
however, we are informed by the American media
themselves that we shall continue to witness this kind
of electoral auctioneering
until the month of
November.
84. Nevertheless, Iraq and the rest of the Arab world
deeply believe that the real interests of the American
people would be served by its joining the vast majority
of the world’s countries in supporting the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people and not in backing and
encouraging the extremist, out-dated and adventurist
Zionists in Tel Aviv who are applying old Fascist
meansand methods in denying a whole distinct people
its country, suppressing the inhabitants, confiscating
their lands and even draining the waters. The imperialist circles in the United States should realize
more than anybody else where their policies of supporting injustice in the world against the legitimate
rights of peoples will lead them. The downfall of the
Shah’s regime, the fall of Somoza in Nicaragua and
the racist regime in Rhodesia, are but a few of the
events that have taken place in the last few months.
History will keep repeating itself.
85. The President of the Republic of Iraq, Mr. Saddam Hussein, took the initiative,
in line with the
Principles of the non-aligned movement, of declaring
the National Charter, which he read out on 8 February
[S/13816]. The following principles were given in the
President’s speech:
“ 1. Rejecting the presence of armies, military
forces or any foreign forces and bases in the Arab
homeland or facilitating their presence in any formula or under any pretext or cover, and for any
reason, with any Arab regime not abiding by this
Principle to be boycotted politically and economically and its policies to be resisted by all available
means.
“2. Banning recourse to the utilization of armed
forces by any Arab State against any other Arab
State, and settling any disputes that might arise
between the Arab States by peaceful means under
the principles of joint national action and the
supreme Arab interest.

“3. The principle mentioned in paragraph 2
above shall apply to the relations of the Arab nation
and Arab States with the nations and countries
neighbouring the Arab homeland.”
Naturally, as members know, the Zionist entity is not
included because the Zionist entity is not considered
a State but a deformed entity occupying an Arab
territory. It is not covered by these principles.
“Thus, recourse is not permitted to the utilization
Of armed forces in disputes with these countries
except for self-defence or defending national sovereignty against threats that might encroach upon the
security of Arab States and their vital interest,
“4. Arab States shall, all together, embark upon
solidarity against any aggression or violation by a
foreign party of the regional sovereignty of any
Arab State, or launching of an actual state of war on
it. These countries shall launch a joint retaliation
to such aggression or violation to foil it by all means
and techniques, including military action, collective
political and economic boycott and in all other fields
necessitated by national interest.
“5. Confirming the abidance of Arab States by
international laws and conventions concerning the
utilization of territorial waters, air, and land by any
country not in a state of war with any Arab State.
“6. The Arab States shall avoid international
disputes and warfare, and abide by total nonalignment to any party to such disputes or war,
unless any party of the dispute or war has committed
a violation of Arab territorial sovereignty and the
firm rights of the Arab countries guaranteed by
international laws and conventions. The Arab States
shall refrain from having their military forces participate, in full or in part, in any military wars or
disputes in the area and outside it on behalf of any
foreign country or party.
“7. The Arab States shall undertake to establish developed and constructive economic relations
among them, with a view to providing and promoting
a joint basis for Arab economic reconstruction and
development and Arab unity. The Arab States shall
avoid any conduct that might cause damage to such
relations or impede their continuance and development, regardless of differences among Arab systems
and such marginal political differences as might take
place among them, so long as the parties concerned
are abiding by the principles of this Declaration.
The Arab States shall abide by the principles of
national economic collaboration,
with the economically solvent Arab States undertaking to contribute all forms of economic assistance to the Arab
countries in such a way as to preserve them against
possible dependence on foreign powers, hence a
possible encroachment on their national independence and will.

the 21 members of the Arab League have suppo?$
it. Talks are under way at the present time for
convening of an Arab summit conference to discuss the
articles and the principles it contains.

“8. Iraq, as it presents the principles of this
Declaration, confirms its preparedness to abide by
them vis-&-vis any Arab State or any party abiding
by them; Iraq is prepared to discuss the Declaration
with the Arab brethren and listen to their remarks
about it, so as to reinforce the effectiveness of its
principles and consolidate its implications. Iraq also
confirms that this Declaration does not constitute
an alternative to the Arab League Charter or the
Treaty on Joint Defence and Economic Co-operation
between the Arab League States. On the contrary,
Iraq considers the Declaration as a consolidation
of the Charter and the Treaty, and a development
of both of them to be consistent with the emerging
international conditions and the dangers confronting
the Arab nation and the national responsibilities
involved under present and future circumstances.”

The meeting rose at 1.15 pm,

NOTES

1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-foarth Ses*
sion. Supplement No. 35, para. 55.
2 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, p. 287.
3 Official Records of the General Assembly, Second Ses.fion,
Supplement No. II, vol. II, annex 19.
4 Ibid., Fourth Session, Ad Hoc Political Cotnmit/cp,
.4 nfl~-~~
vol. 11, dot. A/927, annexes A and B.
5 Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year, SpfWial
Supplement No. I ta 4.

86. The “National Charter” has been addressed to
the Arab Governments. Up to the present time, 17 of

12

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
world. Consult
COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout
the
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLXCATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et Its agences dbpositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vow
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous & : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Genbve.

Hqqamrr
0prn~maq11~
Obze~une~~b~s
HaqeR
MOXWIO ~ynmb
B
JNH&X w areHTcT8ax
80 ncex paRoHax
nnwpa, Hnso~wre
cnpasrH
Baule”
XHI!H(H~M Mara31THe wn* ~IHIU~T~
no aqpecp
: Opraw3aqHn
Haqnll,
CeKqlrfl no npoaamte
tmAaHm2, Htm-Hopr
HRH
X63HeEa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

KHHXHLIX

06

HJAaHHfW
06aeAHHeHHblx

nmra-

B

UNIDAS

Las pubticaciones
de Ias Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoms
en
tcdas parks del mundo. Consuite a su librero o dirijase a: Nacioncs Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

83-61462-Au@Ist

1986-2.425
