Re~olntions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

( c) Evaluating the role of co-operatives and credit
agencies in facilitating programmes for the transformation of the agrarian structure ;
4. Deems it convenient that the question of land
reform, in view of its importanrc ior the economic
development of the under-developed countries, should
continue to be considerC'd hv the Economic and Social
Council in collaboration witli the Food and Agriculture
Organization and the other specialized agencies concerned;
5. Renews thr hope, expressed in its resolution
1426 (XIV), tha1 existing United Nations organs for
technical and financial assistance all(! any new organs
which may l,e set up by the U11iterl Nations give as
much ;:ssistanre as possible and the necessary high
priority to projects ccmnected with tlw exen1tion of
:1grarian reform prograrnmes.
948th p[enan.• meeting,
15 nrcrinbrr 1960.

1527 (XV). A~sist:mct' to former Trust Tnritories and other newly independf'n! State1s
The GenernJ /lssemhh:.
Recalling its rC'solutions 1414 (XIV I and 14 I 5
(XIV) of 5 Deremhcr 1959.
Considering that the great increase in the mernhership of the United Nations of countries belonging to the
under-developed S('rtor of the world economy underlines the urgency of substantially expanding the flow
of technical and capital assdancr to kss drvelopC'd
countries,
Bearing in mind the estimate made in the SecretaryGeneral's report of 3 June 1960 entitled "Opportunities
for international ro-operation on behalf of newlv independent countrie'.;''ll that the present level of technical
assistance to the newly independent States is wholly
inadequate on the basis of population and of needs, and
that their share of surh aid will need to be more than
doubled and perhaps tripkcl if it is to be brought
roughly into line with that of other Member States
of the United Nations at comparable stages of development,
Recogni:::iny the urgent necessity of taking measures
to strengthen and rnnsolidate the ec<,nomic imlepf'ndenre
of the new and emerging States.
Notiny the findings m1cl estimates contained in the
Secretary-General's report of 22 November 1960, 10
which includes an up-to-date assessment of the sitintion in the newly independent States in Africa and is
based partly on the work of a recent mission to a
number of these States,
Considcring further that diversification and industrialization are crucially important for the economic
advancement of tlwse new States,
Notiny Economic Commission for Africa resolutions
10 (II) and 11 (II) of 5 February 1960, contained in
the Commission's annual report to the Economic and
Social Council, 11 and Council rcsnlution 7(,8 (XXX)
of 21 July 1960.
O 0t]icial Records nf the Economic and Social Council, Thirtieth Session, Annexes. agenda items 2 and 4, document E/3387
:and And.1.
lO Official Records of the Gl'nera/ Assembly, Fifteenth Session, Annexes, agenda items 28, 30, 31 and 32, document A/4585.
11 O(ficial Records of the Ewnomic and Social Council, Tl:irtieth Session, Supplement No. JO (E/3320).

15

11' rlcoining the results of the recent United Nat ions
Pledging Conference, which indicate a substantial
inrrease in the resources of the Expanded Programme
of Tcrhnical Assistance and the Special Fund for the
year 1961, and the decision of the Techniral Assistance
(ommittee to increase substantially the assistanrc to thl'
newly indqwndent and emnging States.
1. Decides, within the context of an all-rmmrl c:,;
pa1i,;ion of aid, to increase technical assistance to ncwlv
independent and emerging States to a level c,m1111cn
surak with their pressing nerds and so ensure cquitalik
distribution of United N"ations aid, in such a wav that
no under-drveloped country suffers any curtailrn~nt in
th<' :issistance it was receiving or is altogether deprived
t1f the cvcnt11al increasl' of that assistance as a consl'
qtwnce of increased contrihutions to the prograrn111e,
<1f tPrhnical assistance;
' Notes with satisfaction the proposals of t lw
~,ecn·tan· General, co11tained in the report of 22 Nov
,·111lwr I lifiO. for increased assistanre tn tl1es,· State,
from the regular budget 0f the UPiterl Nations;
3. Urycs the economically advanred c:mntries tu
rontim1t· to render, and increase, effective financial and
terhnical assistance to those States through multilateral
:1nd bilateral rhannels with no conditions attached
prejudicial to their political and economic sovcreigntv;
4. lm•ites the Econo1,1ic and Soria] Council to
enc onrage and facilit'atc the provision throug-h the appropriate international organs~including the United
Nations programmes of technical co-operation. the
J,:xpancled Programme of Technical J\ssist;i11rc :111d the
Special Fund~-in co-operation with and, wltcrcver apprnpriate. through the Economic Commission for Africa
and other regional economic commissions. of assistance
requested by Governments for:
(a) Surveys of mineral, hyclroelect ric, fuel and ot hn
natural resources of their countries;
( b) Specific inquiries and rC'ports, where eronomic
development programmes exist or ar<' lieirn2, prqiarcd.
on the needs for equipment and machinery for specific
industries and for other sectors of the eronomy :
( c) The establishment, where economic development
prog-rammes do not yet exist, ef aclvisorv groups of
experts to assist in the preparation of eronomic ckvelop111ent programmes and thc cletcrrnination of investment
requirements and priorities. and to render other :1dvison
.,en-iccs as may he required;
( d) A reel crated programmes for training in practical
methods and techniques of economic development prog;ramming and related subjects, inrluding fisral policy
and lllanagement, public finance and puhlic adniinistra1inn through·
( i) The use of apprnpriate existing institutions in
individual couJ1tries;
, ii) The crC'ation of regional and sub-regional training institutes or courses serving several eo1111tries;
(iii) The organi7ation of seminars on specific subjects
of imriiediatc and prartical valut> to tlw rr 11mtrics
concernt>d;
(iv) The granting of increased fellowships and scholarships and urgent provision of facilities fnr
in-service training;
5. Requests the Economic and Social Council t"
review at its thirtv-second session in the light infer
alia of the reports' of the United Nations openitional

16

General Assembly -

programmes and of the reports of the Economic Commission for Africa and of the other regional economic
commissions concerned, the progress made in the implementation of the present resolution, and to report to the
General Assembly at its sixteenth session ;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to lend the Economic and Social Council' and the regional economic
commissions concerned his assistance in the execution
of the tasks mentioned in paragraphs 4 an<l 5 above.
948th plenary meeting,
15 December 1960.

1528 (XV). Question of assistance to Libya
The General Assembly,
Recalling the part played by the United Nations in
the creation of the independent State of the United
Kingdom of Libya, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 289 A (IV) of 21 November 1949 recommending that Libya should be constituted as an independent and sovereign State, and recalling that this
independence was achieved on 24 December 1951, in
accordance with that -resolution,
Recalling its resolution 515 (VI) of 1 February 1952,
by which it requested the Economic and Social Council
to study, in consultation with the Government of the
United Kingdom of Libya, ways and means by which
the United Nations, with the co-operation of all Governments and the compecent specialized agencies, and
upon the request of the Government of Libya, could
furnish additional assistance to the United Kingdom of
Libya with a view to financing its fundamental and
urgent programmes of economic and social development,
_giving consideration to the possibility of opening a
special account of voluntary contributions to that end,
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
seventh session,
Recalling further its resolution 529 (VI) of 29 January 1952 on th_e problem of war damages in Libya,
Recalling its resolution 398 (V) of 17 November
1950 in which it recognized the special responsibility
assumed by the United Nations for the future of Libya,
and its resolutions 924 (X) of 9 December 1955 and
1303 (XIII) of 10 December 1958,
Having noted the communication elated 13 October
1960 from the Prime Minister of Libya to the SecretaryGeneral,12
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General
on the question of assistance to Libya, 13
Noting with satisfaction the technical assistance given
to Libya under the United Nations technical assistance
programmes, in accordance with General Assembly
resolutions 726 (VIII) of 8 December 1953 and
924 (X) of 9 December 1955,
Noting also with satisfaction the assistance being
provided by the Special Fund,
1. Invites anew all Governments willing and in a
position to do so to provide financial assistance to the
United Kingdom of Libya through the appropriate
mechanisms available within the United Nations for
receiving voluntary contributions, in order to assist Libya
in the financing of its fundamental and urgent programmes of reconstruction and economic and social
development;
12 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Session,
Annexes, agenda items 28, 30, 31 and 32, document A/4576.
13 Ibid., document A/4575.

Fifteenth Session

2. Recon1-1nrnds that, if and when further means
become available for assisting in the financing of the
d('velopment of under-developed areas and for expanding technical assistance to them, the United Nations,
the spC'cializecl agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency should give due consideration to the
specific (levelopment needs of Libya;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, the Technical
Assistance B(\ard, the specialized agencies concerned
and the l nternatio11al Atomic Energy Agency to continue to waive local costs and to give all possible favourable consideration to the requests of Libya for technical
assistance, taking into account the special needs of Libya
arnl the principles of the technical assistance programmes
of the United Nations and of the specialized agencies
euumt'rated in Economic and Social Council resolution
222 ( IX) of 14 and 15 August 1949:
4. Requests the Governing Council and the Managing Director of the Special Fune\ to continue to give
sympathetic consideration to requests by Libya for
.Special Fune\ assistance;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of the Governments of
Member States and to take the necessary measures to
facilitate the implementation of paragraph 1 above;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to make a special
report on the implementation of the present resolution
in time for the report to be placed on the provisional agenda of the seventeenth session of the General
Assembly.
948th plenary meeting,
15 December 1960.
1529 (XV). Contributions to the Special Fund
and to the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance
The General Assembly,
Having heard the statements of the Managing Director
of the Special Fund 14 and the Executive Chairman of
th,· Technical Assistance Board, 15
Bearing in mind the increasing and urgent rieeds of
the less developed countries, and the increase in the
number of Members of the United Nations through the
admission of the newly independent countr-ies,
I. Takes note of the report of the Governing Council
of the Special Fund on its third and fourth sessions 16
and of Economic and Social Council resolutions 785
(XXX), 786 (XXX) and 787 (XXX) of 3 August
1%0 regarding the Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance ;
2. Urges States Members of the United Nations or
members of any of the specialized agencies or of the
International Atomic Energy Agency so to increase
their contributions to the Special Fund and to the
Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance that the
funds available to these two programmes attain, in the
immediate future, the sum of $150 million.
948th plenary meeting,
15 December 1960.
14 Ibid., Fifteenth Session, Second Committre, 694th meeting,
paras. 1-19.
1 5 Jbid., 694th meeting, paras. 19-29.
16 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 11 (E/3398).
