S

UNCI

OFFICIAL
TWENTY-

RECORDS
FIFTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

5 DECEMBER

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

1970

Page

agenda (S/Agenda/lS60) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . , . . 1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , . , , . . , . . . . , , , . . , , . , . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . 1
Complaint by Guinea:
(a) Letter dated 22 November 1970 from the Permanent Representative of
Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9987);
(b) Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea
established under resolution 289 (1970) (S/l0009 and Add.1) . . . . . . . . . 1

S/PV. 1560

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published
in quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTIETH

MEETING

Held in New York on Saturday, 5 December 1970, at 3 p.m.

P~sident:

Mr. Y, MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics).

ern Yemen fSllUO21] and Cuba [S/10022] requesting
that their delegations be invited to participate in the
Council’s meetings on this question without the right
to vote.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Zambia.

3. If there are no objections, I propose to invite the
representatives of the People’s Republic of Southern
Yemen and Cuba to participate in the debate without
the right to vote, in accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure and with the
established practice.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l560)
Adoption

of the agenda.

4. In view of the limited number of places at the Council table and in accordance with established Security
Council practice, I propose to invite the representative
of the Republic of Guinea to take the place reserved
for him at the Council table. With regard to the other
representatives, I propose to invite them to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber. Each of them will be invited to sit at the
Council table when his turn comes to make a statement.

Complaint by Guinea:
Letter dated 22 November 1970 from the Permanent Representative
of Guinea to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9987);
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to
the Republic of Guinea established under resolution 289 (1970) (S/l0009 and Add.1).

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. A, Tour.4
(Guinea) took a place at the Council table; and Mr.
I. Boye (Senegal), Mr. G. Sow (Mali), Mr. J. M.
Bal-oady (Saudi Arabia),
Mr. S. A. Ould Taya
(Mauritania),
Mr. M. Yazid (Algeria),
Mr. N. Barnes
(Liberia),
Mr. S. A. Salim (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. N. Mondjo (People’s
Republic of the
Congo), Mr. L. Mojsov (Yugoslavia),
Mr. R. K.
Ramphul (Mauritius),
Mr. M. Khalid {Sudan), Mr. M.
H. El-Zayyat
(United Arab Republic),
Mr. T. Gebre
Igzy (Ethiopia), Mr. A. M. Ismail (Southern Yemen),
and Mr. R. Alarcon (Cuba) took the places reserved
for them.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Complaint by Guinea:
(a) Letter dated 22,November 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Guinea to the United
Nations addressed ,to the President of the
Security Council (S/9987);
Report of the Security Council Special Mission
to the Republic of Guinea established under
resolution 289 (1970) (S/10009 and Add.1)

5. The PRESIDENT
(translated
from Russian):
Today the Council continues its discussion of the
agenda in document S/Agenda/l560.
The first speaker
on the list for today’s meeting is the representative
of the People’s Republic of Southern Yemen. I invite
him to take the place reserved for him at the Council
table.

1. The PRESIDENT
(translated
jFom Russian):
Before we proceed to the consideration of the question
before the Security Council, I should like to remind
members that at the 1558th and 1559th meetings of
the Council it was decided to invite the representatives
of Guinea, Senegal, Mali, Saudi Arabia, Mauritania,
Algeria, Liberia, the United Republic of Tanzania, the
People’s
Republic
of the Congo, Yugoslavia,
Mauritius,
the Sudan, the United Arab Republic and
Ethiopia to participate without the right to vote in the
Council’s debate on this question.

6. Mr. ISMAIL
(Southern Yemen): Mr. President,
may I take this opportunity to extend to you my warm
congratulations
on your being President of this
esteemed and dignified Council of the United Nations
for this month. I am sure you will succeed in guiding
the Council’s deliberations very effectively and SUCcessfully.

2.’ In addition, letters have today been received from
the repres.entatives of the People’s Republic of South-

1

7. I wish also to extend my sincere congratulations
to the previous President of this Council, Ambassador
George Tomeh, for the ability he displayed in making
the Council’s work effectivk and efficient in dealing
with matters of great importance for international peace
and security.

session. The whole world knows well that the Government of Portugal has for a long time frustrated that
hope, and that it continues to suppress and attack the
peoples of Africa with the support of its military allies
in NATO. Portugal is an aggressor by’ waging an
imperialistic military attack upon Guinea, a sovereign
State and a Member of this Organization. Portugal is
an aggressor and an offender against human rights by
waging a colonial war of suppression in Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau). There can be no
hope of peace in Africa or elsewhere until aggressors
such as Portugal and its allies are totally eliminated,

8. I wish now, on behalf of my Government and
myself, to offer heartfelt thanks and sincere appreciation to the Chairman and the members of the Special
Mission1 of this Council for the great effort they exerted
in producing an immediate factual report [S/10009 nrzcl
Add.11 concerning the armed invasion carried out by
the colonialist rCgime of Portugal against the progressive and sovereign State of Guinea.

12. My Government, on 22 November, immediately
after Guinea declared that its national territory had
been the object of an armed attack by Portuguese militqy forces, issued a statement made by my Prime
Minister, His Excellency ‘Mi; Mohamed Ali Haitham,
which was circulated in document S/9997 on 23
November 1970. I quote from that document:
“ . . 9 the imperialist aggression against Guinea
reveals the bloody methods of the new imperialist
aggressive stratkgy as evidenced by the current ferocious military aggression against the sovereignty and
independence of the African State of Guinea. This
aggression . . , is not only directed against the progressive rdgime in Guinea but also against all liberated and progressive r6gimes in the three continents
of Asia, Africa and Latin America. It also represents
a grave escalation of tension by the imperialist forces
led by the United Stated. The present open military
invasion launched by the imperialist forces against
an independent State is also closely linked with the
over-all American strategy of aggression in VietNam, the Middle East, the Gulf and Arabian Peninsu!a, including Southern Yemen.”

9. The factual report of the Special Mission of the
Security Council reveals the aggressive motives and
colonial aspirations which the Lisbon clique has for
a long time entertained and which have been put into
p.ractice against all frgedom fighters, and national,
progressive, democratic States in Africa in particular
and the world in general, in defiance of the purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter. It is time
for this esteemed Council-the
Council to which has
been given the mandate by all Member States of maintaining and preserving peace and security-to
take at
once adequate and firm action in accordance with Articles 41 and 42 of Chapter VII of the Charter.
10. My Government
professes
a policy
of
decolonization,
liberation, and full recognition and
acceptance by all nations of the fundamental dignity
and equality of all peoples. All these aims and principles
are deeply enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. We must regretfully acknowledge that there
is a flagrant discrepancy between the present international situation in which we find aggression everywhere
in the world-the most recent case, which we aredebating now, committed by a well-known old colonialist
and imperialistr&gime,
Portugal-and
the sacred principles of the Charter and of international
law that
should govern cordial relations among States. I believe
that this situation is one of grave concern. The aggression which Portugal launched against a progressive
sovereign State, a Member of the United Nations, can
be resolved only if this Council exercises its responsibilities honestly and completely, in order to stop the
aggression at once and expel the State of Portugal from
this world body for having committed a series of aggressive actions in defiance of the spirit and the principles
of the United Nations Charter.

13. In conclusion, my deiegation wishes to stress earnestly that the Council must take strong action regwding this issue of aggression by Portugal, and we cow
sider that any ordinary resolution that may be adopted
in order to minimize the seriousness of this case will
be an encouragement to the aggressor to commit further
aggressive acts that undoubtedly will be a menace to
the peace and security of States, My delegation
believes that this Council must think very seriously
about punishing Portugal, the aggressor, by expelling
it from this Organization, and must consider applying
measures in accordance with Chapter VII, Article 41,
of the Charter, which include complete interruption
of economic relations and of rail, sea, air, postal, tele
graphic, radio and other means of communication, and
the severance of diplomatic relations.

11. The United Nations has not only advocated
“peace, justice and progress”, but adopted this as its
slogan for its twenty-fifth anniversary, thus announcing
its objectives as it embarks on the next phase of its
existence. The prime form of injustice still prevalent
in this world is the denial of the right of selfdetermination to peoples under colonial rule, the right
formally endorsed ten years ago by the General Assembly in its resolution 1514 (XV), adopted at its fifteenth

14. Finally, my delegation wishes to state that this
Council should consider giving strong support ta the
liberation movements in the Portuguese colonies in
Africa, particularly in Guinea (Bissau), Angola and
Mozambique.
15. The PRESIDENT
(translated fiorn Russinn):
Thank you for your statement and for the kind word5
about me. I call on the representative of the Peopfe’s
Republic of the Congo.

’ Security Council Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea established under resoWion 289 (1970).

2

16. Mr. MONDJO (People’s Republic of the Congo)
on f ram French): Mr. President, may I be
permitted, as the representative of the People’s Republic of the Congo, to tell you both how proud and how
pleased I am-proud
and pleased to see the representative of a great country, a friend of the Congolese people
in more than one way, presiding over the work of the
Security Council, and proud also, in my own right,
at being authorized to participate, of course without
the right to vote, in your debates.

dence might be ruined simply because of the will of
the merchants of politics and of the monopolistic
and
exploiting capitalists.

(hterpretati

21 I Whether standing, kneeling, sitting or lying down,
every African State, whatever its political colouring,
is the ideal target for colonialism. There is no possible
compromise
with the enemies of our advancement.
That is why, being aware of the danger which imperialism causes to weigh over Africa and, therefore over
international
peace, our Heads of State and Government have unreservedly given to the people and
Government
of Guinea, to President Ahmed SCkou
Tour&, the ultimate proof of: their brotherly friendship,
their support and their military solidarity.

17. Having taken cognizance of the report of the committee of five, entrusted by the Security Council with
the task of obtaining information in the Republic of
Guinea for purposes of rendering an accourit in the
most objective manner possible of the circumstances
under which, against Guinea, a member State of the
Organization for African Unity and a Member of the
United Nations, there was perpetrated the most heinous and disgraceful colonialist aggression of our time,
can there be any further need to postpone action? It
seems to me that there is no room for philosophizing
in so grave and manifestly obvious a situation. The
facts are there, patently, in their brutal nakedness, in
their blinding evidence,

22. That is precisely the unequivocal position of the
People’s Republic of the Congo, of our popular institutions and of our Head of State, President Marien
Ngouabi.
23.. We already know that the oppressed peoples of
Asia, Africa and Latin America must first and above
all rely on their own strength, because in this tragic
trial, in this nightmare which our brothers in Conakry,
the indomitable,
lived with such heroism, were it not
for the long tradition of struggle of the people of Guinea,
united as one around its chief, the President, imperialism would have achieved its nefarious objectives.

18. The peaceful people of Guinea has once again
been the target of Portugal’s criminal aggression,
which, in its insane obstinacy and narrow blindness,
it ceaselessly wages against independent Africa. The
results of that aggression you already know: the people
of Guinea and all Africa mourn today for scores of
their best sons, brutally torn away from the victorious
land of Guinea. These African heroes are thus added
to the already long list of our martyrs, of the victims
of the bloody history of colonialism and imperialism.
On behalf of my people and the Government of my
country, I here wish to pay a respectful tribute to those
patriots, now gloriously enshrined in the history of
the liberation and reconquest of African dignity.

24. We know that today the United Nations forces
are more hypothetical than ever, and we are determined
to take fully into account the saying that a people without weapons is a people of slaves.
25. I said earlier that this problem concerns the international community.
Can one indeed allow to go
unpunished each day the hideous crimes committed
by Portugal against the peoples and the States of
Africa? We are told-and I believe I have read it-that
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter provides that
the Members of the United Nations must refrain in
their international
relations from the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity or the political
independence of any State.

19. The problem that brings us together today is not
at all a new one knocking at the door of the Security
Council. For are not the records of the Council filled
with facts all bearing the imprint of Portugal’s backward policy of aggression and of the constant violation
of the territorial sovereignty of African States by Portugal? Senegal, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the United Republic of Tanzania, the People’s Republic
of the Congo, Zambia, Guinea-and
this list is not
complete-all
these States bear the shameful marks
of the barbarous acts committed by that little Portugal,
encouraged by its guardian angels in NATO to remain
in the heart of Africa as the bridgehead for a most
backward form of colonialism that not only keeps African peoples under its yoke but, what is more, even
dares to attack the sovereignty of our States.

26. We are glad to adhere to these beautiful principles, but it is not sufficient to proclaim a principle;
it must be carried out in practice. Yet, every aggression-and
I say every aggression-committed
by Portugal against our continent assumes here in regard to
the United Nations the character of a tolerated event,
and it is not without reason that the envoys of that
country, assured of impunity, preen themselves in the
corridors of this building with complete scorn for the
United Nations. No, that has to change. When one
has acquired a bad habit, one must decide to give it
up. Now that the lines of the crime committed by the
fascist Government of Lisbon have been clearly drawn,
now that we have the proof of Portuguese aggression
against the people of Guinea in the most ff agrant violation of the Charter, what will the Security Council
do?

20. This problem is not exclusively a problem for
Guinea; it is a problem which wounds us all deeply,
all of us Africans, in our dignity as human beings and
as free men. It is likewise aproblemfor the international
community.
The African countries, which international
reactionary forces are actively trying to bring into dispute with one another, already know that their indepen3

34. Mr. RAMPHUL
(Mauritius): Mr. President, my
great little country and your great powerful country
enjoy the best diplomatic and friendly relations and
I am very happy to see you in the Chair. I should
like to thank, through you, Sir, the Security Council
for allowing me to participate in this debate.

27. Will it vote in favour of a resolution which, before
implementation of it is even thought of, will be obsolete
because the Portuguese, within the plan of aggression
hatched by their incendiary international masters, will
have had time to attack another African State, thus
compelling the Security Council to take note of its
impotence? To confine itself to voting for a simple
resolution hardly seems to us to be sufficient. To put
an end to an evil one must extirpate the roots.

35. On 23 November, the delegation of Mauritius,
together with a great number of other delegations,
addressed to the Council a communication [S/l0002
and Add.1) in which we dealt with the premeditated
Portuguese armed aggression against the Republic of
Guinea. Our attitude was based on the reports transmitted to the Security Council by the President of the
Republic of Guinea and our brother, Ambassador
Tour&, and we had no grounds for questioning the veracity of those reports. We were puzzled by the Council’s failure to respond positively to the request for
assistance received from the Government of Guinea
and the decision to send a fact-finding mission instead;
but we could not criticize the Security Council for
ascertaining all the facts of the situation before taking
appropriate action.

28. The roots of the Portuguese cancer are to be found
first in the obstinacy of Portugal;in this twentieth century, in subjecting the peoples of Guinea (Bissau),
Angola and Mozambique to the colonial yoke. The
other root of the evil resides, as members know, in
the logistical and financial support which certain great
Powers, permanent members of the Security Council,
lend to the success of that criminal undertaking.
29. Despite the imperialist counter-offensive which
desperately tries to falsify the truth in a thousand ways,
in particular by semantic cunning in a press with a
one-track mind; we are convinced that it is not easy
in a matter such as this one to get to the essence of
the truth. Those newspapers can, in their distortions,
multiply their extravagant accounts so as to sow
groundless doubts among the uninformed, But this will
not change the consistently aggressive nature of
imperialism.

36. I should like here to congratulate the Chairman,
Major General Khatri, and the distinguished members
of the Council’s Special Mission to Guinea for the
efficient and speedy manner in which they have carried
out their difficult and delicate mandate.

30. Honourable members of the Security Council,
you who are vested with the redoubtable mission of
guaranteeing international peace and security, Africa
ha’s always come knocking on your door so that energetic measures would be taken against the racists of
Pretoria, Salisbury and against the Portuguese colonialists, in order to put an end to the threat of that unholy
trio weighing over our continent. You have always
sent us on our way giving us lollipops to console US.
But today Africa, aware of its future potential and of
its numerous voices in the concert of nations, can no
longer be content with that type of half-measure. We
can no longer continue to tolerate that unfinished
independence, ever threatened by the racist bastion
in the south and by Portugal.

37. Now the report of the Council’s Special Mission
to Guinea is before the Council and its conclusions
corroborate what the Guinean Government has maintained all along about Portugal’s responsibility for the
armed attack, against Guinea. These conclusions
amount to an unequivocal indictment against Portugal.
It is clearly stated that “the ships used to transfer
the invading force to Guinean waters were manned
by predominantly white Portuguese troops and commanded by white Portuguese officers” l;S/lOOOS, para+
401, and that the invading force “consisted of units
of Portuguese armed forces . . . as well as of a contingent composed of dissident Guineans trained and
armed on the territory of Guinea (Bissau)” fibid].
38. In his communication
to the Council yesterday
[s/10014], the Chargk d’affaires of Portugal simply
denied that his Government had ordered, authorized
or consented to any military operations against the
Republic of Guinea, He failed to explain to the Council
the appearance off the coast of Conakry, during the
night between 21 November and 22 November, of ships
manned by Portuguese sailors, one of which has been
described by the United States Ambassador in Conakry
as an EST-type vessel. The Portuguese ChargC d’affaires also failed to explain the presence of officers
and soldiers of the regular Portuguese army on Guinm
soil, engaging in a vain attempt to overthrow the
legitimate Government bf Guinea and replace it with
dissident elements, It also happened that one of the
goals pursued by the invaders was, on the one hand,
to destroy the leadership and the headquarters of the
movement which has been struggling to liberate the
people of Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde from Par-

31. The Republic of Guinea has sustained immense,
unwarranted damages-in its property, in its flesh and
in its sovereignty. Africa, which is identified with the
cause of Guinea, has been wounded in its fundamental
rights. We come here to plead for justice before we
take a firm decision on 9 December at Lagos.2
32. The PRESIDENT
(tm&nted
fionz R~lssinrz): I
thank the representative of the People’s Republic of
the Congo for his kind words about me.
33. I now invite the representative of Mauritius to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
’ Seventh Extraordinary Session of the Council of Ministers of
the Organization of African Unity, held in Lagos from 9 to 11
December 1970.
4

tuguese colonialism
and, on the other, to free those
, Portuguese who had been taken prisoner during the
war of liberation,

44. We strongly believe that it is no longer sufflcent
to censure or strongly conde?n Portugal for its coJonia1
wars, The United Nations should devise ways to put
an end to them, as indeed to any other conflict that
endangers international peace and security. Portugal’s
allies should see that, in the final analysis, it is in the
interest of our Organization to stop providing Portugal
with assistance which enables it to wage its colonial
wars.

39. The conclusions of the Special Mission are based
on irrefutable
facts, including the testimony of a
number of diplomatic
representatives accredited to
Conakry and statements by prisoners, particularly prisoners Lopes and Sampaio. We wonder whether the
Government
of Portugal would go as far as to deny
that Lieutenant
Lopes and Chief Corporal Sampaio
did not serve in the regular Portuguese colonial army.

45. The Security Council should face up to its responsibilities as the main organ created by the United
Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security. It should also provide for any assistance that
the Guinean Government may need as a result of the
Portuguese aggression, which is an aggression against
Africa, black Africa.

40. The report that General Antonio Sebastiao
Ribeiro
de
Spinola,
Governor-General
and
Commander-in-Chief,
had visited the invading troops
before their departure would seem to indicate that the
operations had been ordered and authorized by the
Government
of Lisbon.

46. The PRESIDENT
(translu!ed from Russian):
Thank you for the kind words about my country,
spoken on behalf of the friendly country which you
represent.

41. What occurred in the Republic of Guinea between
21 and 23 November amounted to a clear case of premeditated
armed aggression carried out by Portugal
against the Republic of Guinea, a State Member Of
the United Nations. In the words of the Chairman of
the Speciil Mission, the purpose of the Mission was
fully to clarify the situation and enable the Security
Council to take any further action it might consider
necessary. Now that the report has been submitted
and all the facts of the situation are known, the Council
should act without delay. It should respond adequately
to a clear case of aggression by a Member State against
another Member State, basing its action on the relevant
provisions of the Charter. The Security Council should
take this opportunity of showing all Members of the
T-T-Qed Nations that aggression does not pay.

47. I invite the representative of the United
Republic to take a place at the Council table.

Arab

48. Mr, EL-ZAYYAT
(United Arab Republic): The
United Arab Republic delegation is grateful to you,
Mr. President, and to the members of the Council for
having granted us the opportunity to participate in this
debate, My Government has sought this participation
not only to declare its solidarity with the great people
and the Government of the Republic of Guinea, but
also because it considers the issue before the Council
today to be of universal and vital importance to all
Members of this Organization and to the Organization
itself,
49. To use the phrase of Ambassador Tour& the representative of Guinea, the latest aggression against
Conakry was neither accidental nor isolated. The
Government of the United Arab Republic has shown
and will continue to show its solidarity with the people
of Guinea and its great President, Ahmed Skkou Tour&
We consider the attack on Guinea to be only one in
a seiies of battles in the war being waged against all
nations that are determined to live free and independent
outside the imperialist,
military
and economic
alliances.

42. It will not be sufficient strongly to condemn Portugal. Its criminal acts should not go unpunished; it
should pay for all the damage caused by its treacherous
armed attack.
43. Members of the Council are aware that Portugal
is waging a colonial war against the people of Guinea
(Bissau) whose struggle for liberation has been recognized as legitimate by the overwhelming majority of
Member States. Now it appears more clearly than ever
that this colonial war, like the war in Angola and
Mozambique,
is a threat to the neighbouring States,
some of which are bound to lend assistance to the
oppressed people in the Territories concerned. The
Portuguese aggression against Guinea proves that this
type of colonial war may result in a conflict expanding
-to neighbouring
States, should the United Nations
ultimately
fail to put an end to it. It is pertinent to
recall once again that in the past Senegal has also been
the victim of Portuguese aggression and that the facts
of aggression could be traced to the war in Guinea
(Bissau). Similarly, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the People’s Republic of the Congo, Tanzania
and Zambia have suffered acts of piracy and aggression
because of the wars that are raging in Angola and
Mozambique.

50. TheUnited Arab Republic expresses its appreciation and gratitude to the brave citizens of Conakry
and all the people of Guinea for winning this latest
battle, winning it for us, for .a11of us. We assure them
that we consider their struggle. now and in the future
to be a common struggle in a common cause.
51. When, on 22 November,
the representative of
Guinea brought his complaint before this Council, as
cdntained in document S/9987, we did not think that
the complaint needed verification. We are gratified,
however, by the manner in which this Council and
its President, as well as the Secretary-General and his
ass; ?ants, have executed the decision reached by the
Council on the same day [axdufion 289 (1970)].
5

52. We now have before us the report of the Security
Council’s Special Mission representing the whole
world and presided over by one of our distinguished
colleagues with long military
and diplomatic
experience, the representative
of Nepal.
This
straightforward report reflects the serious and efficient
and speedy manner in which the Mission worked. The
physical courage required for undertaking their journey
to Guinea is paralleled by the moral courage reflected
in the style and the contents of the report itself. It
is indeed a style to be emulated.

that putting an end once and for all to the colonial
system, to alien settlement and exploitation of
countries like Guinea (Bissau) can be the only, the
real and the final remedy. Portugal would not then
have to use its colony as a point of departure to commit
aggression against others in order to protect that
colony. The United Nations would render a great service not only to the colonial peoples, but also to those
that have Governments with colonial policies, if it made
a renewed effort to grant independence to such colonies
as the Portuguese colonies in Africa. I hope that these
colonies will soon be accepted in the family of free
nations. All barriers to their freedom and independence
must be declared by the United Nations to be illegal
and void.

53. We know now beyond any doubt that the Government of Portugal, insisting on its centuries-long exploitation of vast territories if: Africa, found it-and
perhaps will find it in &a iuiure-necessary
not only
to perpetuate its acts of intimidation
and subjugation
inside these colonies, but also to resort to further acts
of aggression outside the occupied African lands in
order to consolidate its occupation. Using the occupied
lands as a base, it attacks the independent countries
outside. Using the inhabitants and the resources of
a part of occupied Africa, it attacks other parts. In
order to perpetuate its occupation, it finds it necessary
to commit other and fLIrther aggressions. This is indeed
a familiar course.

58. In the addendum to the report we see an account
of a very interesting conversation between the representatives of Finland and Zambia on the one hand
and one of the members of the Portuguese armed forces
on the other. In a reply to the representative of Zambia
who had asked whether he had been forced to be against
the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and.
Cape Verde (PAIGC) by the Portuguese authorities,
he said: “Yes, several times. I had to participate in
fighting against the PAIGC. That was not because of
my own will. I’m in the army: I received orders, and
I must obey orders. It’s not because I’m against the
PAIGC.”

54. The attack on Conakry last month was not only
the latest in a series of attacks against the Republic
of Guinea itself, not only the latest in a series of attacks
by Portugal against Senegal, Zambia, Tanzania and
other countries, but was one of the battles for the
exploitation and domination
of other peoples-Africans, Palestinians, Syrians, Jordanians, Egyptians, and
indeed the peoples of Viet-Nam and other parts of
Asia.

59. The Portuguese forces are, then, themselves the
victims of this philosophy and policy of violence, They
were ordered to fight. They will continue to be ordered
to fight, to destroy and to kill. Their release, if they
are taken prisoner, will be sought only to enable them
to fight again, to destroy again and to murder again;
to make further attempts to prevent nations from
developing in peace and achieving needed progress for
themselves and hence for the world, All this is done
in order that the age-old process of exploiting the poor
to increase the wealth of the rich should be perpetuated,
in order that the vicious circle will continue in which
the large colonial countries use that added wealth to
acquire more and more tools of violence.

55. All these acts of aggression result from the conviction that violence does pay, that force will silence the
struggle of nations, and that brutal, overpowering
force, whether that of the aggressors itself or borrowed
from its allies, is all that is needed in order to achieve
the ambitions of those who can acquire the tools of
violence, This philosophy must be shown to be bankrupt; it should never be allowed to prevail.

60. This Council will surely condemn the Government of Portugal without reservation. We hope that
it will do more. We hope that the Council will decide
that the people of Guinea should be compensated and
that they should be quickly and adequately indemnified
for the tremendous damage to property and life. We
hope that Guinea, its President and its people, will
in the end have the gratification of seeing that the aggression to which they have been subjected will awaken
the United Nations and all its organs, including this
august body, to the necessity of reflecting seriously
about the implementation
of the Charter-of
all its
Chapters. The President, Government and people of
Guinea would certainly be gratified if the present a&
gression made the Council see to it that all the Chapters,
including Chapter VII, were applied; to see to it that
the Council’s decisions and resolutions were not taken
as mere empty statements not to be heeded and to
be thrown back in the face of the community of nations.
We hope, therefore, that besides the condemnation,

56. Paragraph 38 of the report before us shows that
the objectives of the attack on Conakry last month
were: (a) to overthrow the Government and to order
the arrest, or even the murder, of one of Africa’s greatest leaders, President SCkou Tour&; (6) to install a
puppet Government; (c) to strike a blow against the
freedom-fighters who have gone into exile in Guinea
or to fight in Guinea for their lands in Guinea (Bissau).
A fourth objective was to release by force such men
who, as a result of earlier aggression, were detained
by the Government of Guinea-a
repetition,
it is
obvious, of the action taken recently in North VietNam by a great Power, the United States of America.
57. It is obvious that we are living in one world today
and that if violence is allowed to be the basis of policy
in one place it will also be the basis in others. Only
when it is made clear that violence will fail will it be
abandoned everywhere. It is obvious to my delegation
6

the reparation and the indemnification,
this Council
in its wisdom will try to put an end to all aggression
by making sure that aggression will never pay.

rations of the people of Guinea (Bissau), has enjoyed
its full sympathy and support.
66. The recent armed aggression at the same time
confirms the fact that Portuguese colonialism is becoming a more dangerous source of instability and of the
risk of war in Africa. Moreover, the international community is faced daily with a more aggressive escalation
of the imperialist activities and aspirations of Portugal
which have grown from minor border incidents into
widespread and militarily well-prepared operations of
commandos for the sole purpose of attempting to overthrow the legal Government of a sovereign country,
a State Member of the United Nations. This has confirmed once again the fact that Portugal is the enemy
of every independent and autonomous development
in Africa. It is likewise obvious that Portugal, as an
undeveloped European country, would not be in a position simultaneously
to wage three colonial wars and
to threaten the integrity of many African countries
without the full material and military support of its.
allies, among which the racist regime of South Africa
holds pride of place.

61. The Government of the United Arab Republic
hopes that, in the light of this unqualified condemnation, the Government of Portugal itself will not try
again to see if it is not in its own interest, and in the
interests of the peoples of the world, to put an end
to its colonial existence in Africa, thereby freeing itself
from the need to take any further aggressive action
in order to silence those freedom fighters that are asking
it to put an end to its colonialism.
62. The PRESIDENT
(trarzslated from Russian): I
invite the’ representative of Yugoslavia to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
63. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): I should like to
express to you, Mr. President, and the members of
the Security Council the appreciation of my delegation
for making it possible for me to participate in the-proceedings of the Security Council and to present the
views of the Yugoslav delegation on the extremely
important issue at present under consideration. At the
sametimel
wish to pay a tribute to the Security Council
Mission for having completed with great speed and
efficiency the task entrusted to it and for having prepared the report contained in document S/l0009 and
Add.1,
the addendum to which sets out in a
documented and dramatic manner the actual consequences of the armed aggression of the Portuguese
colonialists
against the territorial
integrity
and
sovereignty of the Republic of Guinea.

67, In the opinion of the Yugoslav delegation it is
obvious that we should draw some very important lessons and conclusions from this merciless act perpetrated by the armed forces of Portugal and its mercenaries, conclusions which may have far-reaching and
long-term consequences. First, the brutal act of aggression against an independent and free country, a State
Member of the United Nations, must be called by its
true name. This is not a mere incident, or unrest, or
an in-esponsible act by unauthorised persons. IS it POSsible to term as an “incident”
or as an obscure, vague
and accidental attack, an attack that was preconceived
and organized, executed in the utmost secrecy in darkness upon the capital city of an independent and
sovereign
country? Is it possible to qualify as “irresaction” an
ponsible behaviour ” or as “unauthorized
order to kill, in this barbarous attack, the Head of
State of an independent country?

64. The brutal and unscrupulous plan and the action
perpetrated at the time, of which there were many
civilian victims, among whom were the family of a
Yugoslav doctor whose innocent little daugher was
killed by the perfidious mercenaries, speaks very
clearly of the moral donduct of the aggressors and those
who had designed their action, The news of the perfidious and impudent ,aggression perpetrated by foreign
troops and mercenaries has aroused deep indignation
in Yugoslavpublic
opinion, The President of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Josip Broz Tito,
in a special statement which was also circulated as
Security Council document S/10000, stressed that the
armed interventionist incursion into Guinea constitutes
a flagrant violation of the fundamental principles of
the Charter and that once again we are confronted
with a shameless violation of the most elementary
norms of international conduct in an attempt to prevent
the people of Guinea fom being independent and from
deciding in a sovereign way on the course of its internal
social and economic development.

68. Secondly, this action and also some recent experiences demonstrate that regrettably often, due to tolerance and various influences from outside, aggression
against an independent and free country is concealed
and camouflaged. Aggression in these times of ours
is no longer conducted in the normal way: clear and
previous declaration of war adopted by the legal and
authorized organs acting in conformity with the constitution of the State declaring the war, as had been
a classical example in the not too distant past and in
the history of wars and aggressions. Actions, like the
aggression against the Republic of Guinea and the
attack upon its capital, Conakry, are comparable only
to the methods and atrocities committed by Hitler and
his allies during the Second World War. Actually the
United Nations was established precisely because of
the victory over the forces of fascism and nazism. The
United Nations, furthermore,
was created for the
explicit purpose of preventing the recurrence of such
brutal actions, repressions and tyranny and to save
succeeding generations from the repetition of horrors

65. Guinea and the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC) were the
objectives and victims of this aggression because the
Republic
of Guinea has stood in the front ranks of
the anti-imperialist
and anti-colonialist
struggle from
the very first days of its independence, while the
national liberation movement of Guinea (Bissau), as
a consistent representative of the freedom-loving aspi7

of wars such as those experienced in the Second World
War.

cil and for the United Nations as a whole, and for
its role in the safeguarding of peace and security in
the world.

69. Thirdly, this aggression is a serious warning not
only to independent African States but to all free and
independent countries of the world. By resorting to
sophisticated and modern methods of aggression, these
acts can now recur anywhere in Africa, in fact anywhere in the world. Therefore this aggression also
serves as a warning to the newly-liberated
countries
of Africa and to all small and medium-sized countries
to be constantly vigilant, to rely primarily upon their
own forces and upon the forces acting in solidarity
with them in order to combat and repulse acts of aggression and to prevent the vi,.: -1.m of their right to decide
their own fate.

73. My delegation firmly believes that the Security
Council is faced with a flagrant act of aggression committed by Portugal, unequivocally proved as such by
the report of the Special Mission of the Security
Council. In such a situation, the most effective
response would be the implementation
of Article 39
of the Charter which authorizes the Security Council:
“[to) determine the existence of any threat to the
peace, breach of the peace, or act of aggression and
I . . [to] decide what measures shall be taken in
accordance with Articles 41 and 42, to maintain or
restore international peace and security”.

70. Fourthly, the aggression against Guinea is an
ominous indication of what can happen tomorrow in
the African continent unless Portuguese colonialism
is definitely erased from the face of Africa. This armed
attack of Portugal against the Republic of Guinea
demonstrates the fact that Portuguese colonialism is
not only obstructing the liberation of the people of
Guinea(Bissau), AngolaandMozambiqueandis
waging
colonial wars in Africa, but that it also threatens the
very existence of those African States that have already
attained their independence.
What happened two
weeks ago in Conakry could happen tomorrow in any
other capital city of an independent African State
unless the reactionary forces of colonialism and racism
are completely eradicated from the African continent.

74. Furthermore, we must bear in mind the fact that
the aggression has not terminated and that the danger
to the integrity and sovereignty of the Republic of
Guinea continues to exist. The Security Council has
at its disposal a whole range of actions pursuant to
Articles 41 and 42, as well as whatever is essential
for undertaking effective action with a view to suppressing aggression, which is one of the most fundamental aims of the United Nations, as defined in Article
1 of the Charter.
75. In view of the persistent violations by Portugal
of the decisions of our Organization, my delegation
feels strongly that if there is a repetition of such an
act it will be necessary to explore the possible
implementation
of the provisions of Article 5 of the
Charter; that is, should Portugal continue to defy the
United Nations by persisting in its aggressive policy,
that country should be suspended from the exercise
of the rights and privileges of membership.

71. As was rightly pointed out by the head of the
delegation of the Republic of Guinea, Minister Ismael
Tour&, in his dignified and dramatic statement on 26
November 1970 in Conakry, at the first meeting of
the Special Mission of the Security Council:
“This is proof of the fact that Portuguese colonialism kills blindly and cynically and that the problem
is not only for Africa: it should be of concern to
the whole international community.”

76. We also feel very strongly that Portugal should
compensate the countless victims of aggression and
should also reimburse the material losses caused by
its armed forces in Guinea.

72. Fifthly, since this matter is of vital interest to
the entire international
community,
the eyes of the
entire African continent and world public opinion at
large are focused at this moment upon the United
Nations and upon the Security Council. The aggression
of Portugal against the Republic of Guinea constitutes
a challenge to the United Nations itself, to the very
foundations upon which our Organization rests: the
Charter of the United Nations. Up to now, Portugal
has been condemned by a series of resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly for its aggressive acts; but Portuguese colonialism is not only
continuing the war against the people of Guinea
(Bissau), Angola and Mozambique,
it is also committing savage and brutal acts of aggression and this is
of crucial interest to the international
community as
a whole as well as to the future of Africa. Consequently,
in the opinion of my delegation, the Security Council’s
deliberations on the aggression do not merely constitute another routine session which is to come up
with yet another routine resolution at the end of the
debate; it constitutes a test case for the Security Coun-

77. My delegation hopes that the Security Council
will this time fulfil the expectation of the international
community and that it will live up to its time-honoured
task on this occasion.
78. The PRESIDENT
(translated fbom Russian): I
invite the representative of Mali to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
79. Mr. SOW (Mali) (interpretationfr’om
French): It
seems to be agreed that in the United Nations and
in particular in the Security Council, the importance
of a question is measured mainly-if
not solely-by
the number of meetings devoted to it and by the length
of the debates, which are likewise all too often procedural rather than substantive. It also seems to be
agreed that the ,seriousness of a problem is evidenced
only by our reiuctance to assume our responsibility
for finding a just solution in conformity with the principles of the Charter of our Organization. My delegation
earnestly hopes that, for once, this custom will be
8

broken, since in our opinion it is one cause of the
weakness of the United Nations and a source of disappointment to a good many Member States that expect
great things of it.

84. The conclusions contained in the report of the
Security Council Special Mission which went to
Con&-y are clear and once again offer striking proof
of Portugal’s entire responsibility for the imperialist
aggression perpetrated against Guinea on 22 November
last. My delegation pays tribute to the members of
the Mission for the speed and objectivity with which
they did their job. It remains for the Security Council
to do the same so as not once again to disappoint the
valiant people of Guinea, united as one man behind
their President Ahmed SCkou Tour& and all the peoples
of Africa. At the extraordinary meeting of the Organization of African Unity which will take place on 9
December at Lagos, Africa, for its part, will I am sure
draw the necessary lessons from the decision which
the Security Council will take. We believe that the
measures you will quickly take against Portugal and
the reparations you will demand from the fascist
Government
of Portugal will fulfil the hopes of the
African peoples and help to bring about the early and
definitive liquidation
of Portuguese colonialism
in
Africa.

80. In view of what I have just said, and after the
speakers who have preceded me and stated irrefutable
facts, I should simply like to recall the statement made
by the Government
of the Republic of Mali which,
on receiving the news of the aggression against the
People’s Republic of Guinea, said that the people of
Mali in their entirety regarded themselves as in a state
of mobilization
and placed themselves immediately at
the disposal of the people and Government of the
Republic of Guinea; for, in the eyes of the people of
Mali, the Portuguese aggression against Guinea is
directed against all Africa.
8 1. At the request of the Head of State of Mali, current President of the Organization of Senegal River
States, a sub-regional body of West Africa, a meeting
at the foreign Ministerial level was held at Conakry
immediately
following the Portuguese aggression to
take joint measures to meet the situation, at a time
when the Portuguese and their mercenaries still harboured the mad illusion that they could break the militant faith of our brothers and sisters in Guinea.

8.5. The PRESIDENT
(trnlzsfnred from R~rssian): I
invite the representative of Senegal to take a place
at the Council table.
86. Mr. BOYE
(Senegal) (irzferpretntion
from
French): Mr. President, at the 1558th meeting held on
22 November last, I had the benefit of speaking before
this Council because of the kind indulgence of its
members. My Government is very grateful to them
and wishes to express its gratitude once again.

82. It should also be recalled that all Africa, from
the very first day of the Portuguese aggression against
Guinea, expressed its solidarity with the people and
Government
of the Republic of Guinea and is giving
them its support and assistance. Such solidarity with
and assistance to the Republic of Guinea have been
displayed throughout the world by all progressive
countries devoted to peace and justice. As the representative of Algeria has said, the complaint brought
before the Security Council by Guinea is a complaint
by all Africa against Portugal, We are thus before YOU
not as lawyers pleading a case but as accusers of Portugal and all those who give it direct or indirect
assistance, enabling it to maintain its bdious COlonialism,
and to commit aggression against independent African States, Members of our Organization.

87. On behalf of my Government, I should also like
to express my gratitude to the President of the Security
Council for the month of November, my friend Ambassador Tomeh, who, swiftly and thanks to the effective
and energetic co-operation of our dynamic SecretaryGeneral and with the collaboration
of that month’s
President of the African Group, my friend Mr. Mondjo,
was gaod enough rapidly to set up a mission which
was able to proceed to Guinea to make the findings
which are now known.
88. On behalf of my Government, I should also like
to pay a tribute to the members of the Special Mission
for their work, which was done with much speed and
objectivity at Conakry.

83. The facts have been sufficiently and eloquently
established by the representative of the Republic of
Guinea, our brother El Hadj Abdoulaye Tour& and
the speakers who preceded me. For more than ten
Years, we have attempted to alert the Council and international opinion to the misdeeds of Portuguese colonialism in Africa. Unfortunately, the innocent victims
arId the material damage done in Angola, Mozambique,
Guinea (Bissau), as well as in the independent African
neighbours
of the Portuguese colonies like Zambia,
the United Republic of Tanzania, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the People’s Republic of the
Congo and Senegal, have not always sufficed to impelI
the Security Council, which is responsibIe for the
maintenance
of international peace and security, to
take adequate measures to put an end to Portuguese
colonialism,
which constitutes a permanent threat to
peace.

89. I have not come here before the Council this afternoon to aggravate an already serious situation or for
pure political propaganda or demagogy, nor to launch
slogans which are now so well known in the United
Nations that serious people now listen to them with
mere indifference. That which can serve the cause of
a country which is seriously threatened in its integrity
and sovereignty is the effective support given it by
peoples that feel real solidarity with it. No one here
can fail to know of the friendly and brotherly relations
which have long existed between Senegal and Guinea.
My President, Leopold-Sedar
Senghor, has described
President Ahmed Sekou Tour& as an African man who
has a tyrannical
love for Africa. That is why,
immediately after the attack against our sister Republic
of Guinea, with my colleagues of the Organization of
9

Senegal River States, we placed ourselves next to our
brother EI Hadj Abdoulaye Tour& to give him all the
assistance and counsel which he needed at that time.
On 22 November, my delegation came to the Security
Council to express the opinion of my Government and
to state its views on the situation.
90. The Mission of the Security Council which went
to Guinea has collected important testimony. I personally regret that this testimony has not yet been translated into my working language. Nevertheless,
the
delegation of Senegal, which went to Conakry
immediately after the events, was able to place the
events in their real context. I should now like to quote
to you from the pronouncement
which President
Ahmed SCkou Tour6 spoke before the delegations to
the Organization of Senegal River States-Mali,
Mauritania, Guinea and Senegal:
“Since Sunday, we are the victims of Portuguese
aggression. This aggression, organized from Guinea
(Bissau), is not only intended to destroy freedom
in Guinea but is also intended to destroy freedom
in Africa. With our weak means we are meeting the
challenge to obtain a final victory, because our defeat
would be the defeat of Africa, but in particular the
defeat of the Organization of Senegal River States.”
91. Later, President Ahmed SCkou Tour-C, speaking
as a responsible man, denounced certain malicious
foreign observers who wanted to see in the events of
Conakry the manifestation of an internal opposition
supported by certain brother countries. Mr. Sdkou
Tour6 has categorically refuted the information given
by a foreign press which described a quarrel allegedly
opposing Guinea and certain brotherly neighbouring
countries. Fortunately, we all know the facts. Happily,
the reaction of the responsible people in Guinea was
swift and the aggression was repelled.
92. As regards the Organization
of Senegal River
States, I would ask your indulgence while I read out
the communique it published:
“After having been received in audience by President Ahmed Sikou TourC, as commander-in-chief
of the Guinean armed forces, the Council of Ministers of the Organization of Senegal River States met
in an extraordinary
session at Conakry on 24
November 1970 under the presidency of Mr. Daniel
Cabou, Minister for Industrial Development of the
Republic of Senegal, Acting President of the Council
of Ministers of the Organization of Senegal River
States.
“The delegation of the Republic of Guinea was
composed of Mr. Ismael Tour& a member of the
National Political Bureau, Minister for Finance and
head of the delegation,
and of Mr. Damantan
Camara, Mr. Kassoury Bangoura and Mr. Camara
NCne Khaly Kondetto, respectively Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs, Minister of Justice and
Minister of Scientific Research.
“The delegation of Mali was composed of Captain
Charles Samba Cissokho, member of the ComitC

Militaire
de Liberation
Nationale,
Minister for
Foreign Affairs, head of the delegation, as well as
Mr. Robert N’Daw, Minister for Industrial Development and Public Works.
“The delegation of the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania was composed of Dr. Mamadou Tour&,
Minister for Planning and Rural Development, head
of the delegation, Mr. Hourda and Mr. Ould Mouknass, members of the National Political Bureau, and
Mr. Sidi Mohamed Diagand, respectively Minister
of Foreign Affairs, Minister of Industrialization
and
Minister of Mines.
“The delegation of Senegal was composed of Mr,
Amadou Karim Gaye, Minister of Foreign Affairs,
chief of delegation, and Mr. S. E. Lamine Diallo,
Ambassador of Senegal to Conakry.
“The Council of Ministers, after having heard an
introductory report presented by the Executive Secretariat of the Organization of Senegal River States
and registered the information brought to its attention by the delegation of Guinea, in addition to information it had received directly from the Head of
State of Guinea, reports and information regarding
the situation resulting from the aggression perpetrated by Portugal against the Republic of Guinea,
“Notes that the city of Conakry has, since Sunday,
22 November 1970, been the subject of an armed
aggression unleashed by Portugal, which has taken
the form of bombing the city and landing troops and
foreign mercenaries from foreign ships;
“Condeelmrs with the utmost energy this barbarous
aggression, perpetrated against the Republic of
Guinea in defiance of all international laws and the
principles inscribed in the United Nations Charter;
“Sulutes the heroism and faith of the people
of Guinea, its party, its Government and its army;

’ ‘Resolves as follows:
“Zt congratulates and encourages the people of
Guinea in their prompt and vigorous action, which
permitted them to repel most of the forces of aggression and to hold in check the vessels that made incursions into the territorial waters of the Republic of
Guinea;
“piously bows before the civilian and military
tims of that unspeakable aggression;

vic-

“Znvites all freedom and peace-loving nations, as
well as all the progressive forces throughout the
world, forcefully to condemn such treachery, which
threatens peace in Africa and in the rest of the world;
“Unreservedly supports the initiative to convene
as soon as possible the Council of Ministers and
the Committee of Defence of the Organization of
African Unity to examine the grave situation resultingfrom the attempt to invade the Republic of Guinea
by the colonialist Portuguese forces;

“Considers
that the aggression against the Republic of Guinea is directed against the freedom and
independence of the four countries united in solidarity in the Organization of Senegal River States;

98. As for my delegation, despite the growing imperfections in the functioning
of the organs of our
Organization, .we continue to have faith in it. We adjure
you
to work as the responsible people that you are
and, above all, not to let our Organization lose its prestige from day to day. Think of the fate of the defunct
League of Nations. Let us all co-operate together without any discrimination, without considerations of political blocs, and let us not hesitate to apply the provisions
of the Charter when the situation requires it. You will
then have done well and the conscience of the universe
will again feel new confidence in our Organization.

“Unreservedly
supports
the brother people of
Guinea in its just struggle against Portuguese colonialism and imperialism;
“Decides
to extend to the Republic of Guinea,
besides military and political support, every kind
of assistance in the trials it is undergoing, which
constitute a precedent fraught with threats to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all African
States;

99. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Russian):
I
thank the representative of Senegal for his kind words
about the Security Council and its President.

“‘Decides to maintain contact so as to study and
consider any further concrete common measures that
developments may require in the situation resulting
from the aggression of Portugal against the Republic
of Guinea,”

100. The next speaker is the representative of Mauritania, and I now invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
101.

Mr. OULD TAYA (Mauritania) (interpretufiorz
Mr. President, alphabetical order sometimes arranges things well, and this time particularly
so. My delegation is indeed happy to see the Council,
at a time when it is discussing a question so vital to
us, presided over by a statesman and a diplomat as
eminent as yourself and who, in addition, represents
a friendly country whose contribution to the liberation
of peoples does honour not only to the socialist
countries, but to all countries that are really concerned
for peace and justice. I should like, through you, once
again to thank the Security Council for allowmg me
to take pcart in this debate. Lastly, I should like to
pay a special tribute to the Chairman and members
of the Special Mission for the courage and objectivity
which they showed in their investigation.

93. I wished to read this communique so that it might
appear in the official record of this meeting.

from French):

94. Let the Security Council not tell itself that all
is over now. It is necessary for all countries that cherish
justice and freedom to remain vigilant. Why? You will
understand when I shall have read a despatch from
Agence France-Presse, dated 28 November at Bissau.
It reads as follows:
“General Espinola, the Governor and Commander
in Chief of the Portuguese armed forces in Portuguese Guinea, affirms, in connexion with the
Government
of the Republic of Guinea, led by Mr.
Ahmed Sekou Tour& ‘For me, the downfall of the
present regime is a question of time. The Governrnent of S6kou Tour6 is unpopular and, therefore,
it will end by inevitably crumbling as a result of
a popular counter-revolution.’
”

102. My delegation had the opportunity from the outset [1558th me&kg]
to express its indignation at the
unspeakable aggression of which the sister Republic
of Guinea has been the victim and to assure that country
of the full and complete solidarity of the Government
and people of Mauritania,
At that same meeting on
22 November 1970-the first the Council devoted to
this question-we expressed our certainty that the facts
brought to our knowledge by the Government
of
Guinea were authentic and that the measures necessary
in such circumstances should be taken without delay,
measures which, for that matter, are expressly
stipulated in the Charter. To our great regret, the Council thought fit to act otherwise.

AS I have said, this is a despatch from Agence, FrancePresse.

95. After that statement, which events have fortunately proved to be untrue, is there still among you,
with whom 1 have worked here in the Council, anyone
who can say that the abortive invasion of Guinea was
not prepared by Portugal?
96. I have already had occasion to say it: the friends
of Portugal must decide to throw Portugal out of their
organization,
NATO, in the same way that they were
prepared to do so with Greece, which, havingsensed
the trend, hastened to take the decision upon itself
to withdraw from the association.

103. Today the Council has irrefutable proof of Portuguese aggression against the Republic of Guinea.
Neither the embarrassed denials of the colonialist and
fascist Portuguese authorities nor the dilatory manoeuvres of certain countries can change the facts establishing the authenticity of that aggression.

9’7. What I fail to understand is that when there is
a question which affects Europens among themselves,
they do not hesitate to use every means to remedy
the situation; whereas when it is an event which concerns Africa, Europeans are content with using words
such as “warns”,
“deplores” or “condemns”.
This
is something which deserves to be pondered by all
of us.

104. In this regard, the Council should not content
itself with a condemnation or with sanctions provided
to that effect by the Charter. We believed that proper
reparations should be exacted for the damage-both
material and human-sustained
by the Republic of
11

/

Guinea as a result of that cowardly aggression. We
believe that the sanctions which the C’ouncil should
take would be a necessary warning addressed not only
to Portugal but to all those who turn aggression into
a system of international
relations. It would also be
a warning to those who support from the shadows Portugal’s criminal hand and that of its fellow travellers.

111. The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, in its statement of 23 November concerning
Portugal’s act of aggression against the Republic of
Guinea published in Pravda of 4 December 1970,
declared:
“The Soviet Government categorically condemns
the criminal acts of the interventionists
and their
protectors, which are a challenge to the African
States and to all peoples struggling for national
independence.”

105. The time has come to give an example to all
who defy the sovereignty of African and Asian States
and would reduce them to the status of docile clients,
to those who overtly and cynically threaten the freedom
and independence of the States of the Third World.
For our part, we say to them that the time has passed
when they could attack us with impunity. The unanimous solidarity with Guinea displayed by all the African
States-and I say by all-as well as by most countries
of the Third World, on the occasion of the aggression
of which it has been the victim, shows the futility of
the efforts of those who still try to keep us in a state
of servitude to which they believe we are doomed for
ever.

112. The Soviet Government demanded that the
imperialist aggression against the people of Guinea be
brought to an end forthwith and that the aggressors
withdraw immediately from the territory of that independent State.
113. Considering this event objectively, in the light
of the present international situation, one cannot fail
to agree with the main argument put forward by nearly
all speakers in the Security Council, the representatives
of the countries of Africa and other continents, to the
effect that the armed attack by Portugal-a
member
of the NATO military bloc-was an attack on the whole
of Africa. The representative of Algeria, Mr. Yazid,
said that the complaint by Guinea concerning the Portuguese act of aggression is a complaint by the whole
of Africa. It is also well known that in United Nations
circles the piratical attack evoked the following reaction: “Outraged
Africa ,clamorously
condemns
imperialism and colonialism”.

106. The victory won by the heroic people of Guinea
is a victory for all the peoples of the Third World
and is also a victory for all peoples that cherish peace
and justice. We would have wished to share this victory
with our Organization. Unfortunately,
it rejected this
honour by refusing to heed the moving appeal
addressed to it on 22 November 1970 by President
SCkou Tour&

114. The representative of Liberia justly likened the
aggressive policy of the Portuguese colonialists in
Africa to the action of a mad dog biting everyone it
meets [1559th meeting]. Portugal’s madness is the madness of imperialism and colonialism departing from the
historical scene under the staggering impact of the
national liberation revolutions in Africa, Asia andLatin
America.

107. My delegation
thinks it is time for our
Organization, and in particular for that organ which
has the heavy responsibility
of maintaining and preserving peace and security, to learn once and for all
from the tragic events just experienced by Guinea. For,
as I already emphasized in my last statement before
the Council, all the potential confidence that our small
States have placed in our Organization may be permanently undermined if it remains deaf to our appeals.

115. History teaches that the obsolete classes and
socio-political systems departing from the historical
scene under the impact of the popular revolutionary
struggle offer furious resistance, unscrupulously using
any sordid and odious means of fighting. They have
the desperation of the doomed.

108. The PRESIDENT
(tralzslatedfiorn
Russiarz): I
thank the representative of Mauritania for his kind
words about the Security Council and about me personally.
109. Speaking as the representative of the SOVIET
UNION, I should like to make the following statement
on behalf of my delegation.

116. By considering and condemning the acts cfaggression by the Portuguese colonialists, the Sect&
Council thereby performs an important
historical
action. It condemns the policy of imperialism
in its
entirety as a policy of aggression and war. Imperialism
and colonialism are in the dock, as a socio-political
system condemned by history and cursed by all mankind. Imperialism brings death and destruction, SOWS
fear and causes unbearable suffering to the peoples
of Africa and other regions of the world. The impunity
with which aggressive acts in various parts of the world
are perpetrated or supported by the imperialist forces
encourages the colonialists to perform similar acts
against newly independent States. The aggressive palicy of imperialism
casts a shadow over the entire
present-day international situation, gives rise to tension

110. The Security Council is considering a criminal
act of armed aggression by Portugal against an independent sovereign State, the Republic of Guinea. The facts
of the case are well known. On the night of 21 to 22
November, a naval landing force of regular Portuguese
armed forces, together with mercenaries, was dispatched from the territory of the Portuguese colony
of Guinea (Bissau) and, under cover of darkness, committed an act of unprovoked aggression condemned
by every rule of international
law and an underhand
attack against the city of Conakry, the capital of the
Republic of Guinea.
12

and acts of military provocation, hinders the return
to normal relations between States, and prevents
peoples from living in peace and friendship, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter, “as good
neighbours”.

121. At that time, however, certain members of the
Security Council, alleging doubts and thereby actually
showing disbelief in the report of the Portuguese ag
gression against Guinea contained in the appeals by
President SCkou Tom-6 to the United Nations, prevented the Council from firmly and categorically condemning that aggression and taking effective measures
against the aggressor. They also refused to let the
Security Council state clearly and definitely, in its
demand for the immediate withdrawal of all the aggressor’s troops from Guinean territory, that the troops
in question were Portuguese. Now, from the report
of the Security Council Special Mission it is perfectly
obvious to everyone that Portugal, the aggressor, was
caught in the act, exposed and completely unmasked
in the Commission of an international crime. Even The
New York Times, a leading organ of the United States ,
monopolies,
has now been obliged to admit this.
Today, 5 December 1970, in its editorial, the paper
states: “Portugal thus faces the most serious crisis it
has ever confronted in the long history of United
Nations deliberations on the problems arising from the
remnants of white minority rule in Africa-”

117. All these acts of imperialist aggression against
sovereign States and freedom-loving peoples have one
and the same aim-to
overthrow the progressive
popular Governments which, as the representative of
Guinea has stated, are leading the peoples of their
countries along the path of non-capitalist development,
and to place at the head of those nations corrupt puppet
regimes from the ranks of the imperialist lackeys, ready
to betray and to sell wholesale and retail the interests
and wealth of their countries and peoples and to be
loyal and true servants of international monopolistic
capital. This aim of the Portuguese aggression is also
confirmed in the official report of thesecurity Council
Special Mission.
The Belgian teacher Mr. Lange
informed the Mission in Conakry that the Portuguese
mercenaries who seized him during the attack on that
city told him that their aim was to carry out a coup
d’etat in Guinea and place at the head of that country
a Guinean.general
living in Europe.

122. in assessing the behaviour of the Portuguese colonialists, the newspaper confined itself to hinting to
Portugal that, in the act of aggression against Guinea,
it used methods which were clumsy and inappropriate
to modern times, With obvious knowledge of the subject, the paper advises Portugal on the methods it
should use to maintain and perpetuate its colonial domination over the African peoples. Thus, an organ of
United States monopolistic
capital has no intention
whatsoever of advising the Portuguese colonialists to
vacate the African continent immediately; on the‘contrary, it merely advises them to change tactics and
methods in order to justify and perpetuate their colonial
rule and racist-fascist tyranny over the African peoples.

118. What must be done? What measures must be
taken? The answer is to be found in the recent statement by the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mr.
L. I. Brezhnev, on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of Soviet Armenia, which was reported in Pravda
in 30 November
1970:
“Combined
action by the freedom-loving,
antiimperialist forces to ward off aggression is the best
means of sobering the adventurist hotheads in the
imperialist camp and preventing the outbreak of new
‘local’ wars and their escalation into a threat of war
to all mankind. Life has convincingly demonstrated
the truth of this.”

123. For the Soviet Union, for all the friends of
Africa, for all those interested in strengthening the
independence of the African States and for those who
realize that this is certainly not the first but simply,
another act of aggression by the Portuguese colonialists
119. It will be recalled that in its resolution 289 (1970)
against
Guinea, there was from the beginning no doubt
of23 November the Security Council clearly and firmly
at all that in this case another premeditated
act of
sided with the victim of the aggression. It demanded
imperialist
aggression
had
been
committed
by
the
Porthe immediate cessation of the armed attack against
tuguese
colonialists
against
the
independent
Republic
the Republic of Guinea and the immediate withdrawal
of Guinea. The absurdity of Portugal’s unsubstantiated
of all external armed forces and mercenaries together
denials of the charges brought against it by the Governwith the military equipment used in the armed attack
ment of the Republic of Guinea was obvious from the
against the territory of the Republic of Guinea.
very outset. Only a handful of members of the Council
found themselves able to cite these Portuguese state120. Thus, despite the clear opposition from a
ments and to question the statements by the Governnarrow-minded
group of delegations, the Security
ment of the Republic of Guinea. Those who attempted
Council proved equal to the situation by adopting a
earlier or who are now attempting to defend the Porresolution calling a halt to the imperialist aggression
tuguese aggressors are in a clearly difficult position.
against the Republic of Guinea. Nevertheless, as is
Even The New York Tilnes is now compelled to recogpatently obvious, this was only a preliminary, interim
nize this. In its edition of 4 December 1970, it made
resolution. The Soviet Union, together with the African
a very eloquent admission: “Several Western dipand Asian States which are members of the Security 1 lomats said privately that it might prove difficult for
Council, has insisted from the very outset that the
Portugal’s allies to defend her cause.”
Security Council should categorically condemn POrtugal for its aggression against the Republic of Guinea
124. Thus, the report of the Special Mission of the
and take appropriate effective measures.
Council on Portugal’s armed attack on the Republic .
13

generally acknowledge that the report of the Mission
is objective and unmasks the aggressor.

of Guinea fully and convincingly
substantiates the
charges brought against Portugal by the Government
of the Republic of Guinea. The fact is that a foreign
Power-Portugal-has
made yet another attempt flagrantly to interfere in the domestic affairs of a sovereign
African State Member of the United Nations. The fact
is that Portugal has prepared, plamied and carried out
armed aggression against the Republic of Guinea. The
fact is that the Portuguese colonialists have sought to
overthrow by force the progressive r6gime which is
in power in the Republic of Guinea and to which they
objected, to deny the Guinean ptople the opportunity
to build a new life, and once more to impose, on them
the yoke of alien imperialist
oppression and
domination.

128. The Security Council’s action in appointing the
Special Mission and dispatching it to Guinea has fully
jtistified itself. This action taken by the Council was
in complete accord with the United Nations Charter
and with the Council’s role as the organ of the United
Nations bearing primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. Events have
demonstrated the fallacy and the error of the position
adopted by those who questioned or tried to prevent
the establishment of such a Mission. The arguments
that the Mission would be unable to take quick action
or to submit an agreed report have proved to be groundless and unsound. This should convince everyone of
how effectively the Security Council can act, if it discharges its functions in strict accordance with the
Charter. This is further confirmation that strict observance of the Charter can significantly enhance the
effectiveness of the Security Council, and hence that
of the United Nations as a whole, in taking action
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
not only by the establishment of special missions of
the Council and their dispatch to the scene of the
aggression, but also by the formation and employment
of military contingents in conformity with the Charter.

125. It is quite obvious, however, that the aims of
the imperialist aggressors were even more far-reaching.
The statement on the aggression by the colonialists
against the Republic of Guinea which was adopted at
Berlin on 2 December 1’970 by the participants in the
Conference of the Political Consultative Committee of
the States Parties to the Warsaw Treaty contains the
following comment:
“The aggressors also counted on arresting the liberation struggle of the peoples of Guinea (Bissau),
Angola, Mozambique, South Africa, Zimbabwe and
Namibia which are striving to break loose from the
clutches of colonial and racist oppression and to
determine their own destiny themselves. The Portuguese colonialists, in committing an armed attack
on the Republic of Guinea, have acted as the shock
force and as the tool of the imperialist forces and
of all those who covet the wealth of the African
continent. Portugal would never liave ventured to
take such an impudent step without the knowledge
and support of the imperialist forces which are arming that country and directing its policy, including
its attempts to deal with the national liberation
movement.“”

129. The Sp’ecial Mission has submitted to the Council a full and comprehensive report. The Council should
express its appreciation for the considerable amount
of important and, one might add, historically significant
work done by the Special Mission, which consisted
of the representatives of five States members of the
Security Council-Colombia,
Finland, Nepal, Poland
and Zambia, representing all the geographical groups
in the United Nations.
130. The essence of the conclusions contained in the
Special Mission’s report is to be found in the following
cle<ar-cut statement:

This assessment fully coincides with the statements
made here by many representatives
of African
countries.

“The invasion of the territory of the Republic of
Guinea on 22 and 23 November was carried out by
naval and military units of the Portuguese armed
forces, acting in conjunction with Guinean dissident
elements from outside the Republic of Guinea.‘”
[SllOOO9, para. 41 .J

126. The report of the Special Mission and its
addendum contain numerous concrete facts and figures
testifying to the direct participation of Portuguese regular armed forces in the aggression against the Republic
of Guinea.

131. The unmasking by the Special Mission of Partugal’s aggression against Guinea has united the overwhelming majority of African countries in a noble
upsurge of fraternal solidarity. Thirty-seven of them
sent a joint special letter to the Security Council calling
for categorical condemnation of this aggression and
the adoption of forceful measures against the aggressor
[S/l0002 and Add.11. A number of African and Asian
delegations expressed a desire to participate-and
are
participating-in
the Security Council’s consideration
of this important question and in its condemnation of
the aggression.

127. The report and the facts contained in it completely discredit the Portuguese colonialists’ attempt
to obliterate the traces of their crime against the Republic of Guinea and to dissociate themselves from it. Portugal’s role in the new act of aggression ag&nst Guinea
has been fully exposed. Consequently, the experiment
of establishing this type of Security Council Special
Mission and of sending the Mission, rather than
individuals, to the scene of the aggression has yielded
positive results. The overwhelming majority of delegations, and above all those of the Afro-Asian countries,

132. In this connexion, it must also be noted that
Africa is justifiably expressing its disillusion and dissatisfaction with the ineffectiveness and the inability

a Subsequently circulated as document S/10032.
14

of the United Nations, and particularly the Security
Council, to provide speedy military assistance to the
victims of the aggression and to defend a weak State
Member of the United Nations against the threat of
Imperialist
aggression. Both the Security Council and
the United Nations as a whole must draw the appropriate serious conclusions from this and take immediate
measures to enhance their effectiveness in maintaining
international
peace and protecting the security of the
nations.
133. It is also appropriate in this connexion to draw
attention to the fact that in the First Committee, at
the commemorative
session of the General Assembly,
the drafting of a detailed document on the strengthening
of international security was very protracted. We must
accelerate the completion of this work and make those
who are engaging in delaying tactics stop hindering
the preparation and adoption by the General Assembly
of a decision on such an important issue as the
strengthening of international security, which concerns
all peace-loving States Members of the United Nations
and all States of the world.
134. The information in the Special Mission’s report
about the nature of the landing-craft available to the
Portuguese colonialists, as well as other facts in the
report, clearly confirm that the Portuguese armed
forces and Portuguese mercenaries that attacked the
sovereign State of Guinea also carried weapons from
the NATO arsenals. The Security Council must also
consider this aspect of Portugal’s aggression against
an African country, as pointed out by a number of
representatives
of African countries in their statements
before the Council.
135. The imperialist
aggression against Guinea
graphically
demonstrates the urgent need for the
speedy and complete liquidation of colonial and racist
regimes and for the elimination of the threat which
coionialism
represents to the peace and security of
the African peoples. It is becoming more obvious than
ever that, until there is no longer a single colonial
rkgime or colonial bridge-head on the African continent
and until all troops have been withdrawn and all colanial military bases dismantled, the peaceful and independent existence and the development of the African
States will be in danger.
136. In this connexion, I should like to quote the
following paragraph from the statement on the aggression by the colonialists against the Republic of Guinea
adopted by the participants in the Conference of the
Political Consultative Committee of the States Parties
to the Warsaw Treaty, which clearly sets forth the
position on this question of the countries in the socialist
community:
“The participants in the Conference decisively
condemn the aggression against the Republic of
Guinea and other criminal acts by the imperialists
and neo-colonialists.
They reaffirm their solidarity
with the just struggle of the Guinean people and all
African peoples for freedom and progress, and for
the full implementation
of the United Nations Decla-

ration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples. The peoples of Africa in the
struggle for their liberation can, as previously, count
on assistance from the socialist States.“4
This statement is signed by the leaders of the CzechoSlovak Socialist Republic, the German Democratic
Republic,
the Hungarian
People’s Republic,
the
People’s Republic of Bulgaria, the Polish People’s
Republic, the Socialist Republic of Romania and the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
137. The point at issue is beyond dispute, The fact
of Portugal’s criminal aggression against the Republic
of Guinea is confirmed by the official report of the
Special Mission which visited the Republic of Guinea.
The Security Council has already taken steps to halt
Portugal’s aggression against Guinea. It is now the
Council’s duty to adopt firm measures against the Portuguese aggressors.
138. In supporting the just demand of the Republic
of Guinea and of many other African and Asian States,
the Soviet delegation urges that the decision to be taken
by the Security Council should include clear and unambiguous provision categorically condemning the Portuguese Gdvernment’s
aggressive acts against the
Republic of Guinea.
139. The Soviet Union urges the Council, as an
immediate and urgent measure, to apply the sanctions
envisaged in Article 41 of the Charter to Portugal for
its aggression against the Republic of Guinea. We specifically have in mind measures such as the complete
interruption of economic relations and of rail, sea, air,
postal, telegraphic, radio and other means of communication, and the severance of diplomatic relations.
Such action by the Council would fully accord with
the Charter and with those provisions of the Charter
which are to be applied to an aggressor.
140. The Soviet Union considers that, if the measures
provided for in Article 41 of the Charter do not produce
the proper results and if Portugal persists in its acts
of aggression against African States, the urgent need
will arise for the adoption against Portugal of the
measures provided for in Article 42 of the Charter-namely,
demonstrations,
blockade and other
operations by air, sea or land forces of Members of
the United Nations.
141. The Soviet delegation also gives its firm support
to thejust demand of the African States that the Security Council should decide to make Portugal pay compensation to the Republic of Guinea for the material
damage suffered. By the adoption of such a measure
the Council, as the United Nations organ with primary
responsibility
for the maintenance of international
peace and security, will be fulfilling its duty in the
defence of the Republic of Guinea, a sovereign State
and Member of the United Nations. It will be taking
measures to punish an imperialist aggressor, administering a fitting rebuff to the colonialists and helping

and security

member of the Council or representative
invited to
participate in the discussion on this question wishes
to speak, we may now adjourn this meeting.

142. The Security Council’s duty is to take immediate
and effective measures to this end.

144. In accordance with the consultations held with
members of the Council, the next meeting on this question will be held at 10.30 a.m. on Monday, 7 December.

to strengthen the freedom, independence
of the African countries.

143. Speaking as PRESIDENT,
I should like to say
that the list of speakers has been exhausted. If no other

The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

16

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
lo: United
Nations,
Sales Section,

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

Les publications
des Notions
Unies
sent en vents
dons Ies librairier
et les agences
dipositaires
du mande entier.
Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libreirie
ou odressez-vous
6:
Notions
Unies, Section
des venles,
New York ou GenBve.
HAK

IlOnY’iHfb

MSAAHMH

OPrAHM3AuMH

OSbEflMHEHHblX

HAuMfi

~kl~~llllIl
~pJ'IUlR3ll~lIJJ
O6T~C~JIlIClllII;lX
Ihqlk
~IOHtIIO XyLIIlTh B I(1IIIiIiIIblX
MiUW1111IlX
II
IlPO1ITCTIl~X
110 UCOX pEdI01lZ~X NlIpIL. &LDOfiIITC
CIlpl&JJIiIi
06 ll3~~IlJIlIX
JI llIIIIIOJI liIlIIiIilIOJI
3IWX3lJIIC
JIlIH IlrlllIIITC
II0 a&pCCy
: OpralIJi3a~rrJJ
%M!AJJliClIIIbJx
Ih\lIil,
CCIiqIIR
lI0
lIllO)(lGKC
lJ3#M"I,
HLH).~~oI)x ~JIII%CJiCD8.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicaclones
de Ias Naciones
Unidas estdn
en todes porter
del mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
Ventas, Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations.

New York

UNIDAS

en ventcl en librerios
y cascts distribuidoror
o dirijase
a: Nociones
Unidos,
Scccidn

Price: $U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

de

82165--September

1973-2,050
