United Nations

S/PV.6630

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6630

th meeting
Wednesday, 12 October 2011, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashiru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mrs. Kaur
Mr. Salam
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Moving forward with security sector reform: prospects and challenges in
Africa
Letter dated 7 October 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/627)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-54194 (E)

*1154194*

S/PV.6630

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.

Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): It is with great
pleasure that I shall make the following observations
on behalf of the Secretary-General, who is currently
travelling.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

First, I should like to thank the Government of
Nigeria and you, Sir, its Minister for Foreign Affairs,
for having taken the initiative of convening this debate
on the maintenance of international peace and security,
moving forward with security sector reform, and
prospects and challenges in Africa.

Maintenance of international peace and security
Moving forward with security sector reform:
prospects and challenges in Africa
Letter dated 7 October 2011 from the
Permanent Representative of Nigeria
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2011/627)
The President: I wish to welcome the high-level
and other representatives present in the Security
Council Chamber. Their presence is an affirmation of
the importance of the subject matter to be addressed.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Australia, Canada, Egypt, Finland,
Italy, Luxembourg, Morocco, Pakistan, Slovakia,
Slovenia and the Sudan to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/627, containing a letter dated
7 October 2011 from the Permanent Representative of
Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.

2

A poorly managed and ineffective security sector
can be a source of significant challenge to stability,
poverty reduction, the achievement of sustainable
development and peacebuilding. In the broader
framework of upholding the rule of law, the United
Nations has undertaken to support countries facing
conflict in their efforts to build disciplined, effective
and economically viable security sectors.
A significant share of United Nations support to
the security sector targets African countries, some of
which — including Angola, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana,
Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania
and a number of others — are becoming important
providers of assistance in security sector reform (SSR)
to other African States. Many are also active
contributors of troops and police to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, as well as significant
stakeholders in the international security architecture.
Opportunities to share experiences in African
security sector reform have nevertheless been rare, and
that is why I welcome today’s debate.
(spoke in English)
The Security Council hosted its first open debate
on SSR in 2007 under the presidency of the Slovak
Republic (see S/PV.5632). That debate concluded that,
although the United Nations has been providing SSR
support for many years, our engagement was ad hoc
and inconsistent. The Security Council requested the
Secretary-General to produce a report on this issue.
The Secretary-General’s 2008 report on security
sector reform (S/2008/39) drew on decades of
experience of the Organization and its membership,
and defined a United Nations framework for security
sector management based on a number of core
principles. It recognizes national ownership not only as
a moral imperative but also as a pragmatic necessity
for legitimacy and sustainability. The report also paved

11-54194

S/PV.6630

the way for the creation of a dedicated Headquartersbased SSR unit, the modest expansion of relevant field
capacities, and the establishment of a special United
Nations inter-agency Security Sector Task Force,
currently co-chaired by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Development Programme. In May of the same year,
under the presidency of the United Kingdom, the
Security Council hosted another open debate on this
issue (see S/PV.5889).
I am pleased that today’s discussion will provide
us with an opportunity to take stock since the Council
last met on this issue. I am particularly encouraged that
its focus is on security sector reform in Africa — an
issue of paramount importance to the United Nations.
Over the past few years, the demand for security
sector support has increased exponentially. SSR is now
an integral part of the mandate of many new United
Nations missions and operations, several of which are
in Africa. Our mandates and national requests for
support in this vital area have become increasingly
complex, ranging from training and infrastructure
development in Burundi to capacity-building for
management and oversight of security institutions in
Liberia; from strategic advice for the articulation of
national priorities and the development of national
security policies, strategies and plans for Somalia and
Côte d’Ivoire to assistance coordinating international
partners in support of national priorities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Guinea Bissau.
These experiences have taught the United Nations
that there is no one-size-fits-all approach to security
sector development. The Organization and our partners
must be adaptable and capable of responding quickly.
We have also learned that many security threats can be
contained only through a regional approach, as
indicated, for instance, by the fact that a number of
African countries are working together to end the
scourge of the Lord’s Resistance Army.
Critically, the African Union, supported by a
number of its regional economic communities, is at the
forefront of developing a specific SSR framework. I
am pleased that the African Union Commission is
receiving active support from our SSR unit. Other
regions should be encouraged to draw on this rich
experience to develop SSR frameworks that aim to
build professional, well-governed security sectors,

11-54194

which could contribute to sustainable development,
peace and security.
As we refine our expertise and enter a new phase,
today’s debate provides a unique opportunity to reflect
on a number of strategic issues. Many Member States,
in Africa and elsewhere, have recognized that security
sector governance is necessary for early recovery from
conflict, economic development and sustainable
peacebuilding, as well as regional stability and
international peacekeeping. In addition, experience has
shown that SSR is a crucial preventive tool, as
previously underscored by the Security Council. In
Liberia, for instance, unresolved security sector
governance and management issues in the mid-1990s
contributed to the re-emergence of conflict and a
dramatic 80 per cent downturn in its economy.
At the same time, security sectors can also play a
vital transformative role. In South Africa, the
consultative, nationally driven and carefully sequenced
management of the security sector was essential to
building a new, post-apartheid country.
In Guinea, a key challenge has been the
establishment of an accountable security sector that
better reflects the aspirations of the population. In
Somalia, strengthening the capacities of the security
sector will be essential for good governance and the
extension of State authority.
Close to 20 per cent of the Peacebuilding Fund
has been allocated to security sector activities in a
range of countries. It is imperative that the entire
United Nations system work together as one so as to
ensure that international resources and energies
produce their desired results.
For that reason, I appreciate the joint efforts of
the United Nations inter-agency Security Sector
Reform Task Force, and the SSR Unit, which provides
its secretariat. Both the Unit and the Task Force have
become major providers of field support. They bring
together a broad range of expertise to provide diverse,
specialized and “One United Nations” support. They
have also established a roster of experts who are
available for deployment and have initiated systemwide training of specialists. The Task Force is also
producing a number of strategic guidance notes, among
other tools. I am also glad to report that the
Organization recently adopted a defence sector reform
policy.

3

S/PV.6630

I am therefore encouraged that in the presidential
statement to be issued today the Council is requesting a
report on how to further strengthen our existing
activities and the approach of the entire Organization
in the area of security sector development. I trust that
Member States will find this to be a good opportunity
to strengthen the Organization’s capacities to meet
increasing requests for support.
(spoke in French)
I am firmly convinced that the experience and the
diverse perspectives of African countries can
contribute to establishing better practices in order to
improve security sector reform in Africa and around
the world.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his
briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria.
I am delighted to be part of this important
discussion on moving forward with the challenges of
and opportunities for support by the United Nations for
security sector reform (SSR), particularly from an
African perspective.
Nigeria is a country whose history exemplifies
the challenges and benefits of transforming security
arrangements to reflect and respond to a country’s
post-conflict reality. Before the term SSR was coined,
the Nigerian civil war, which lasted from 1967 to 1970,
had made it imperative for my country to deal with the
aftermath of conflict, including the issues of
demobilization, reintegration and reforms. One of the
lessons learned from our experience is that reforming
the security sector is a lengthy process and must be
part of a broader national agenda. We also learned not
only that such a reform exercise is highly political, but
also that the security of citizens and the State are
intrinsically linked.
We have since learned that the governance,
reform and transformation of the security sector are
vital not only for societies emerging from war, but also
for those experiencing peace. In order to consolidate
the gains of our democracy and avoid recourse to
conflict, it is important that our security institutions
function effectively under the rule of law. I would
therefore emphasize the importance of SSR moving

4

beyond peacekeeping and extending to the entire
peacebuilding continuum.
In that regard, I congratulate the SecretaryGeneral and his team on the commendable
achievements made since this Council first debated the
issue in 2007, under the presidency of Slovakia (see
S/PV.5632). Nigeria notes with appreciation the
establishment of the United Nations inter-agency
Security Sector Reform Task Force, which has rapidly
emerged as a mechanism for promoting coherence in
United Nations support for SSR. It is encouraging that
a roster of SSR experts has been established and that
guidance is being developed. I acknowledge the
commitment of those Member States benefiting from
United Nations support for SSR and the generosity of
the broader international community, which has
worked hard to support those national reform
processes.
Nigeria supports the major principles of the
United Nations approach to SSR, as contained in the
2008 report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/39),
particularly its emphasis on national ownership. I
strongly encourage the Secretary-General to continue
to ensure that United Nations support for SSR is based
on national requests and Security Council mandates.
Without national ownership, deficits in legitimacy and
sustainability will persist.
We are concerned that, although Africa is the
main theatre of SSR, the voices and perspectives of
African States in defining and setting the SSR agenda
have typically been faint or, in some cases, mute. Thus,
“lessons learned” become “lessons lost”, and
opportunities to learn from the perspectives of those at
the receiving end of SSR support are missed.
Under the circumstances, the need to accentuate
African and recipient perspectives on SSR cannot be
overemphasized. In that regard, I would like to thank
the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the United
Nations for jointly organizing, with the Nigerian
Mission, the High-level Forum on African Perspectives
on Security Sector Reform, held in May 2010. We are
grateful to the Government of the Netherlands for
supporting that event. We encourage similar initiatives
that promote national ownership and sustainability.
The rapid emergence of African States as
providers of SSR support is one development that, thus
far, has remained outside the scope of the prevailing
SSR discourse. In that connection, there is growing

11-54194

S/PV.6630

recognition that African States are both recipients and
donors of SSR support. In line with the recent report on
civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict (see
S/2011/85), we encourage further initiatives to support
South-South exchanges in SSR.
While SSR is recognized as an essential element
of multidimensional peacekeeping, it must form part of
a broader national reform agenda to ensure national
peace and security. Thus, while SSR is often a core
element in a peacekeeping exit strategy, it can also
contribute to conflict prevention by helping to build
effective and accountable security institutions. SSR is
also part of the long-term process of regular
institutional renewal for all States, regardless of their
level of development.
The lesson we learn from the indivisibility of
security is that national efforts to ensure security can
fall short if not tied to regional and global threats to
security. Let me therefore emphasize the intrinsic
interconnection between national SSR reform
processes and various regional and global initiatives.
The national SSR processes of several Member States
and the global framework being propagated by the
United Nations are interrelated. Indeed, regional
security frameworks not only help to address
transborder security challenges but also represent the
bridge between national and global levels of security
sector governance.
It is encouraging to note the excellent
collaboration between the African Union and the
United Nations in the area of SSR. We are confident
that the African Union SSR policy framework being
drafted at the request of the African Union Heads of
State and Government will form a critical building
block of the United Nations global SSR framework.
Once the African Union SSR policy framework has
been formally endorsed, the African Union will
continue to require the assistance of the United Nations
in ensuring an effective implementation of the policy.
Beyond Africa, I wish to strongly encourage the
Secretary-General
to
further
explore
general
approaches and frameworks for supporting the reform
and governance of the security sector. Nigeria is
willing to collaborate with States Members of the
United Nations and will explore with stakeholders,
including the SSR Group of Friends, possible ways of
enriching that agenda. We will work within the African
Union to ensure that a continental SSR policy

11-54194

framework is expeditiously finalized with a plan of
action for its implementation.
In this regard, I am pleased to inform the Council
that the Nigerian Defence College will be collaborating
with an international foundation to organize an
international expert conference with the theme
“Promoting democratic security sector governance:
National experiences and best practices from
international actors”, to be held in Abuja from 2 to
3 November.
Let me conclude by calling on the SecretaryGeneral to consider reviewing the United Nations
current engagement in this area since the release of his
report in 2008. His views on the current challenges
encountered in delivering on this important area of
work will support the creation of an enabling
environment and the generation of the requisite
resources for the United Nations to support Member
States more effectively and coherently in this area.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to members of the Council.
Mrs. Kaur (India): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, and your delegation on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October and for chairing this debate. I would also like
to thank the Under-Secretary-General for his briefing.
Security sector reform (SSR) in post-conflict
countries is an important issue, and I thank the
Nigerian presidency for having organized today’s
debate and for its useful concept note on this subject
(S/2011/627). Successful security sector reform is vital
for establishing enduring peace and stability in
countries that are in conflict or in a post-conflict
peacebuilding phase. On the other hand, it is usually
failure in SSR that causes some countries to remain
mired in conflict for extended periods.
The Security Council’s presidential statement of
20 February 2007 (S/PRST/2007/3) and the SecretaryGeneral’s report on security sector reform (S/2008/39),
submitted in January 2008 pursuant to that statement,
have comprehensively dealt with the complexity of this
issue. They have also identified a number of concrete
action points for implementation of security sector
reforms in conflict and post-conflict situations.

5

S/PV.6630

If the implementation of security sector reform is
to be successful, it is imperative to clearly recognize at
the outset that it is an internal affair of a country. As
such, the process must be led and owned by the nation
State concerned. The process must be driven by
national requirements and not by donor priorities. The
capacity-driven approach that is being adopted needs to
become an exercise in understanding and providing
what the country concerned requires rather than an
exercise in collating what donors can give.
Normative principles of security sector reform
should remain within the framework of national
consent under Chapter VI of the United Nations
Charter and should not seek to obfuscate the difference
between the provisions of Chapters VI and VII. This
will ensure that the involvement of the Council and of
the United Nations system more widely in security
sector reform remains country-specific and forms part
of a comprehensive strategy for establishment of peace
and stability.
Security sector reform will fail to
consolidate the hard-earned gains of peacekeeping
unless it is based on organic growth and related to the
political, socio-economic and cultural realities of the
country concerned.
Operational issues concerning security sector
reform should take into account the fact that security is
a very broad term encompassing not just defence,
police and other law enforcement agencies but also
institutions responsible for border management,
customs, civil emergencies, the judiciary and others.
Given such a broad scope, it is necessary that the
United Nations operational plans for security sector
reform in every situation remain focused on the most
critical sectors instead of being frittered away in
peripherals.
The broad scope of this issue also calls for a
long-term strategy, integrated efforts and coordination
among different United Nations and other international
agencies involved. Country-specific configurations of
the Peacebuilding Commission should have an
important role to play in assisting the concerned
country in developing such a long-term strategy and
integrating and coordinating the international efforts.
The international community should clearly
demonstrate its staying power and its commitment to
making available required resources for the full
implementation of operational plans for security sector
reform. Operational plans should also comprehensively

6

take into account the political, socio-economic and
cultural moorings of the country concerned, based on
the interests of the national stakeholders.
In this connection, I must underline that we have
noticed a tendency in this Council in recent months to
authorize less than optimal manpower and other
resources while expanding mandates. There have also
been calls for reviews of a mission even before that
mission is established. This tendency to ask United
Nations missions to do more with less does not augur
well for the successful implementation of operational
plans to reform the security sector on an enduring basis
in conflict and post-conflict countries on the agenda of
the Council.
We also hear arguments in favour of shortening
the mandates of United Nations missions even when
host countries favour the continued presence of the
concerned United Nations missions. The premature
drawdown or withdrawal of United Nations missions
against the wishes of the host countries before
domestic institutions are fully capable of assuming
their role risks relapse into conflict, which would
require more resources in the future.
In conclusion, I would like to say that the role of
the United Nations in security sector reform must be
based on its biggest strengths: impartiality, equity and
non-interference. Following these principles, the
United Nations system and the missions authorized by
this Council will command the respect and confidence
of all stakeholders, who in turn will cooperate with the
United Nations, leading to successful and enduring
security sector reforms.
In this connection, it is also important to
recognize that there are countries that possess wide
experience in implementing security sector capacity
development in multi-ethnic, multireligious and
multilingual societies, giving primacy to human rights
and the rule of law. In addition to uniformed services,
the United Nations should also tap the Governments of
such countries for secondment of human resources in
all areas of SSR, since their experiences are very
similar and relevant to the challenges facing the
countries on the agenda of the Security Council.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me start
by thanking the Government of Nigeria for its
leadership in bringing us together today to discuss
security sector reform (SSR) in Africa. Let me also

11-54194

S/PV.6630

thank you personally, Minister Ashiru, for presiding
over our debate.
This Council discussion on SSR is long overdue.
A State’s ability to police its territory, protect its
citizens and uphold its laws is central to its ability to
exercise its sovereignty and promote regional peace
and stability. However, in all too many instances, local
security forces lack capacity, or worse, they threaten
the very citizens they are meant to serve. All too often,
we have had to rely on international peacekeepers to
fill temporarily a gap that a nation’s people would have
preferred to address permanently on their own.
From Liberia to Haiti to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the drawdown of international
peacekeepers is now linked to the build-up of
indigenous security institutions. At least 11 United
Nations peacekeeping operations, peacebuilding offices
and special political missions are now mandated to
conduct SSR activities, and 10 of them are in Africa.
The United Nations and many other actors are making
important contributions to SSR in those countries, and
that includes the United States.
Over the past several years, for instance, my
Government has invested more than $300 million to
support defence and police reform in South Sudan,
more than $280 million for defence, police and justice
sector reform in Liberia and some $110 million for
defence and police reform in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The United States also supports SSR
programmes in several other African countries
emerging from conflict.
Today’s Security Council debate on security
sector reform and the draft presidential statement we
will adopt should spur action, we hope, on four fronts.
First, we should take a more long-term,
comprehensive approach to SSR. As the SecretaryGeneral pointed out in his 2008 report on the subject
(S/2008/39), the security sector is not only uniformed
personnel — it involves the entire defence
establishment,
civilian
law
enforcement
and
corrections personnel, intelligence services, institutions
dealing with border management, customs agencies
and organizations that handle civil emergencies and
elements of the criminal justice sector. As the
Secretary-General also pointed out, reform of the
security sector is not just about providing basic
training and equipment for a battalion or formed police
unit. It is about establishing a legal and constitutional

11-54194

framework for the legitimate, accountable use of force,
via security personnel, in accordance with universally
accepted human rights norms and standards. True
security sector reform does not mean merely recruiting
more security personnel, it means thinking through
their overall numbers, determining what is fiscally
sustainable and creating mechanisms for their direction
and oversight.
Secondly, our approach to SSR has been too
narrow. We must broaden it to take into account what
host populations time and again demand, namely, a
clear recognition that human rights, good governance
and gender equality are inextricably linked with
security sector reform. Integrating a gender perspective
into the daily work of armed forces, defence ministries
and peace makers makes these institutions more
inclusive and democratic and improves the overall
effectiveness of security sector reform. A defence or
law enforcement agency that shuns corruption,
advances equality and protects the rights of all, rather
than trampling them, is far more likely to command the
support and confidence of its citizens. The SecretaryGeneral rightly highlighted these issues in his most
recent report on SSR. We hope that his next one will
suggest concrete benchmarks for measuring progress.
Thirdly, the United Nations needs to strengthen
its expertise and enhance the coordination among all
actors that play a role in SSR, especially human rights
defenders,
development
agencies,
international
financial institutions such as the World Bank and
regional and subregional organizations. The United
States appreciates the work now being undertaken by
the Security Sector Reform Unit of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the inter-agency Security
Sector Reform Task Force and other United Nations
entities such as the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. We look forward to having them do even
more to spread lessons learned and best practices on
SSR, inside the United Nations system and beyond.
Fourthly, we must all do more to help build up
expertise outside the United Nations system,
particularly by regional and subregional organizations
working to address the challenges around them. For
example, the Economic Community of West African
States has helped make important SSR gains
throughout West Africa. Regional bodies are
increasingly important players when it comes to SSR in
Africa, and we support their efforts.

7

S/PV.6630

We will also need to work at both the national
and regional levels to address a range of twenty-first
century challenges in the waters off Africa, including
piracy, armed robbery at sea, trafficking in persons,
illegal or unregulated fishing and environmental
degradation. As such, maritime security sector reform
will increasingly become critical to overall SSR.
The United States looks forward to working with
our fellow Council members to sustain and increase
our focus on SSR within the Chamber and beyond.
Especially in Africa and in other lands that have known
too much suffering, we seek an international approach
to SSR that heeds the voices of citizens calling out for
a better future and bolsters the capacity of host
Governments and regional organizations to help make
those hopes real.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China appreciates Nigeria’s initiative to hold this
debate on the maintenance of international peace and
security and security sector reform (SSR). I welcome
His Excellency Mr. Olugbenga Ashiru, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Nigeria, to our meeting today to lead
our debate. I also welcome the statement made by
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous.
SSR is a part of the United Nations peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts. Over the years, the United
Nations has made positive efforts to assist post-conflict
countries in SSR, in particular African countries,
producing good results. As United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations evolve,
how to assist the countries concerned in conducting
SSR more effectively and viably is an important topic
facing the international community. I would like to
focus on the following points.
First, SSR should be based on the leadership of
the countries concerned and fully take into account
their national circumstances and special needs. The
efforts of the international community should focus on
providing assistance and advice and helping those
countries enhance their capacity-building efforts. Such
efforts should also respect their will.
Secondly, SSR should serve the purpose of the
long-term stability and security of the countries
concerned and their sustainable development. It should
focus on restoring law and order through reforms and
ensuring stability and security for the people.
Moreover, SSR should enable armed forces and the
police and other sectors to participate in national

8

institution-building to maintain social order and to
promote economic development.
Thirdly, SSR should support a comprehensive
peacekeeping and peacebuilding strategy. SSR should
be well-coordinated with, and complement the efforts
to promote, reconciliation, rehabilitate the economy,
promote the rule of law and protect human rights.
Fourthly, SSR should benefit from the mediation
efforts of the international community. The United
Nations should draw on years of successful
peacekeeping and peacebuilding experience to
formulate a comprehensive strategy to help the
countries concerned in conducting SSR and act as a
good coordinator. The General Assembly, the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Secretariat should
pull together and build synergies. The United Nations
should also strengthen its coordination and
communications with the relevant regional and
subregional organizations.
China supports the draft presidential statement
submitted by Nigeria.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, let me join
others in thanking the Nigerian presidency for having
organized today’s debate. I warmly welcome your
presence and your leadership of this meeting, Sir, as
well as the presence of Her Excellency Mrs. Preneet
Kaur, Minister of State for External Affairs of India. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous for his stimulating briefing.
In recent years, the importance of security sector
reform (SSR) has been increasingly recognized. Such
reforms are not only a key requirement for peace, the
protection of human rights and sustainable
development; they also play a pivotal role in crisis
prevention.
I would like to emphasize three points today.
First, local leadership is crucial to successful security
sector reform, as is national ownership. Only national
actors can ensure that the process is completed and that
key issues are addressed. If the political will needed to
tackle those issues is lacking, all efforts by outside
actors are futile. Security sector reform remains a longterm, country-specific endeavour that very much
depends on the political commitment of national
authorities. United Nations involvement in national
security sector reform efforts should be based on a

11-54194

S/PV.6630

clearly defined strategy with priorities, timelines and
partnerships. Such a division of labour is also vital in
the context of defining exit strategies for peacekeeping
missions.
In many conflict and post-conflict situations on
our agenda, reform of the security sector is an essential
prerequisite for achieving sustainable peace. It is a
long-term transformation process that should aim at
creating security institutions that are efficient,
transparent and democratic. Any such transformation
of security sector structures must be based on respect
for human rights and the rule of law. This is of special
importance in the field of corrections. SSR also has a
crucial role to play when it comes to the prevention of
violence, including sexual violence. In this regard, it is
also indispensable to address impunity, inter alia,
through training national security forces and
strengthening the capacity of the rule of law and justice
institutions. SSR needs to be approached strategically
and holistically.
Secondly, the various elements of reform — the
establishment of civilian control over security forces
and the improvement of operational capabilities and
institutional structures — are interdependent. Only
coordinated security sector reform can be sustainable
and efficient. Delivering as one is key. We therefore
welcome the close coordination on security sector
reform between the Secretariat and its various units,
the United Nations Development Programme and other
United Nations actors. The Peacebuilding Commission
also has a critical role to play. SSR has become an
integral part of peacebuilding strategies for countries
on its agenda.
My third and last point refers to the efforts of the
various international actors who work in support of
security sector reform, especially the European Union
(EU). The United Nations is rarely the sole partner
supporting SSR. The European Security Strategy of
2003 identified security sector reform as an area for
joint EU efforts. European Union support for security
sector reform has been provided within the Common
Security and Defence Policy framework as well as by
the European Commission. In Africa in particular, there
are numerous examples of close cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations, such as
the African Union and the European Union. We
encourage such organizations to further broaden their
interaction and exchange of views.

11-54194

SSR is a complex process in which best practices
should be widely shared in order to enhance efficiency.
The specific needs of women, children, the
disadvantaged and victims of discrimination should
always be included in the design and delivery of
security.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome you today to the
Council, Sir.
The best guarantee of ensuring the successful
execution of reforms in the areas of security and the
rule of law in post-conflict countries is achieving solid
peace, a broad national consensus and sustainable
development. There can be no question that the
conduct of security sector reform (SSR) is the
sovereign right of national Governments. They have
primary responsibility for the results. In this regard,
Governments must define their priorities themselves,
and their executive bodies must be in charge of their
practical implementation.
In addition, the international community’s help
with security sector reform is clearly essential.
However, the countries receiving such assistance must
be in charge of defining the strategy and coordinating
action. There can be no ready-made solutions, which
often do not take into account the specifics and needs
of post-conflict States. Any assistance on the part of
the international community, whatever form it takes,
must be provided with the agreement of the national
Governments and with respect for the principles of
sovereignty and political independence.
The United Nations plays a central role in
providing SSR assistance to post-conflict countries.
Today, many preliminary tasks in the area of SSR, such
as peacebuilding efforts, fall to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. In accomplishing their main
tasks — establishing peace and creating the conditions
needed for general national dialogue and sustainable
post-crisis
development
—
United
Nations
peacekeepers play a critical role by establishing a
climate conducive to the provision of peacebuilding
assistance on a larger scale, and in particular by
contributing significantly to setting up law
enforcement and security institutions in countries
emerging from conflict.
We support the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission in making recommendations for the
provision of consistent international support for a

9

S/PV.6630

number of countries emerging from conflict. The
complexity of the tasks confronting States that have
come through the “hot” stages of a crisis demands the
formulation of a balanced strategy to resolve them,
based on the interrelated issues of security, social and
economic development and the protection of human
rights. This requires a comprehensive approach based
on unified objectives and predictable material,
technical and financial support.
In the area of security sector reform, regional
capacities have demonstrated great effectiveness.
Neighbouring countries and subregional organizations
have a better understanding of sore points and can
propose effective remedies. Africa, which is
represented at the head of today’s Council meeting, is a
clear example of such regional cooperation.
In this context, we support the activity of African
States in the area of SSR. We believe that, first and
foremost through the frameworks of the African Union
and their subregional organizations, they bear primary
responsibility for directing the settlement of conflicts
and post-conflict peacebuilding, and that the
international community should support these efforts,
which aim not only to resolve regional crises but also
to address problems related to social and economic
development and humanitarian issues. Russia is an
active participant in such efforts, including those
involving international financial institutions, United
Nations specialized agencies and other initiatives.
We are grateful to the Nigerian delegation for
coordinating the drafting of the presidential statement,
and we support its adoption.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
welcome your presence in the Chamber, Sir, as well as
that of Her Excellency Mrs. Preneet Kaur, Minister of
State for External Affairs of India. I would also like to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for his briefing.
Allow me to emphasize that security sector
reform is one of the essential elements of any
stabilization and reconstruction effort in a post-conflict
situation. Strengthening security sector reform and
security forces requires strong commitment and
cooperation among the Government and international
stakeholders. However, national ownership and
leadership in that process is essential.
The role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
and the Peacebuilding Fund in security sector reform is

10

important, and providing assistance to national
authorities to define a credible security reform strategy
contributes to the accountability of the security sector
and enhances the professionalism of national security
structures. Security sector reform must be included
within a broader nationally led peacebuilding
framework and strategy.
The lessons learned, the specificities of each
country and the conditions on the ground must be taken
into account. Cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations is necessary. It is also
important to emphasize sector-wide and context-driven
approaches in governance, economic policy and efforts
to enhance rule of law and strengthen the security
sector.
Security sector reform is also an integral part of
multidimensional peacekeeping operations and special
political missions. Very often, it is a crucial component
of the exit strategy of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
The regular reports of Council-mandated
missions must better reflect the assessments of
institution-building processes. That will contribute to
determining existing capacity gaps that require
streamlining of immediate or long-term support from
the United Nations and the international community as
a whole.
Rebuilding and strengthening State institutions in
the area of rule of law is a basic precondition for a
stable and secure environment, development and better
protection of human rights and individual freedoms.
Therefore, security sector reform must be carefully
implemented as part of a broader framework for
conflict prevention and development. A common
framework and a coherent system-wide approach are
necessary to reinforce the ability to provide consistent,
well-coordinated and relevant advice for security
sector reform in peacekeeping or peacebuilding.
The role of the United Nations is to assist
countries in building capacity to deliver enduring
security through effective and resilient institutions. The
countries concerned must determine the approach and
priorities for security sector reform. Factors that
greatly contribute to the success of that process are,
first and foremost, political will and consensus of
domestic stakeholders, as well as extensive
consultations, involvement of relevant domestic and
international stakeholders, proper and well-executed

11-54194

S/PV.6630

strategies, coherence, good timing and long-term,
predictable and sustained support.

Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
support of SSR in some of its member countries.

Moreover, the success of security sector reform
relies on national ownership, the quality of dialogue
with recipient countries, the adaptability of tools for
security sector reform, good coordination among
relevant national and international partners, sensitivity
to gender issues and involvement of civil society. None
of these factors can be neglected, because only a
combination of those elements can lead to the success
and sustainability of security sector reform.

As the number of actors providing international
assistance to SSR increases, we should guarantee that
there is effective coordination among them, mainly to
avoid duplication. Also in that respect, the PBC has
contributed to ensuring a degree of articulation and
identifying and promoting synergies among various
initiatives. It is also important that the United Nations
maintain a leading role in the coordination of
international efforts.

Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Let me
acknowledge your presence here today, Mr. President,
as you chair our meeting. I wish to congratulate
Nigeria for taking the initiative to promote a debate on
such an important element of post-conflict
peacebuilding. I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Hervé Ladsous for his presentation.

A third aspect that I wish to underline is that
security sector reform is a long-term process based on
national strategies and on the political will of the
authorities to sustain the new institutions over the long
run. But implementation of reform cannot be achieved
without the necessary resources. We should be very
clear about that point. In many situations, SSR
strategies will stall if they are not properly matched by
the active engagement of the international community.
In those situations, it will prove very hard for countries
to individually undertake what is necessarily a difficult
process. We could mention here the case of GuineaBissau, where the authorities have committed
themselves to an SSR strategy that requires the
commitment of international partners in the
implementation of key aspects of the strategy.

Allow me to make some comments on Portugal’s
perspective concerning security sector reform (SSR),
based on our own experience in cooperating in
peacebuilding efforts in several countries.
First, we see the reform of security institutions as
part of a broader process of reconstruction, and in the
framework of national dialogue. That broader scope
must also involve social and economic development,
protection of human rights and consolidation of
Government structures, aimed in the end at promoting
human security in a broad perspective and through
effective citizenship. Ignoring the interlinkage among
those various aspects usually undermines the
reconstruction efforts of national and international
actors and increases the risk of relapse into conflict. In
that respect, the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) in linking the different elements of
peacebuilding, including SSR, is a good practice that
should be recognized and encouraged.
Secondly, the number of international actors
involved in SSR support initiatives has grown
considerably in recent years. The involvement of
African regional and subregional organizations, as well
as of individual African countries, in initiatives aimed
at supporting SSR — for instance, the training of
police in Somalia by the African Union Mission in
Somalia — is a very positive example of such a trend.
Likewise, I would underline the role of the European
Union in providing support to security sector reform in
several African countries, as well as initiatives of the

11-54194

in

Fourthly, let me refer to the great importance of
the promotion of justice as a cornerstone of SSR.
While the military and the police are crucial for peace
consolidation, one should not overlook the decisive
importance of a functional and effective judicial
system as a central element for ensuring respect for
fundamental rights and freedoms, the fight against
impunity and the development of a functioning
economy.
Investment in SSR is also a fundamental measure
to tackle organized crime, in particular trafficking in
arms and drugs, which is a great challenge in some of
the countries emerging from conflict in Africa. As
Portugal has repeatedly stated, fighting organized
crime requires strong national security intuitions. But it
also requires enhanced regional cooperation, mainly to
ensure that success in one individual country does not
create additional risks for neighbouring States.
Finally, we should bear in mind that security
sector reform is usually part of a reconciliation process
in societies divided by recent conflict dynamics. Often

11

S/PV.6630

it involves searching for national consensus on the
foundations of the State, including on constitutional
reform. International support to SSR should, to the
extent possible, promote an inclusive approach to the
creation of new institutions by bringing to the fore
perspectives of the various groups and communities
that may contribute to the process, including women.
Such an effort will certainly enhance the legitimacy of
institutions as well as the resilience of post-conflict
societies.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): You honour us,
Mr. President, with your presence in the Council today.
I congratulate your delegation for convening this
debate and express our appreciation for the useful
concept note on security sector reform (SSR)
(S/2011/627, annex). I am grateful to Under-SecretaryGeneral Ladsous for his briefing.
I wish to acknowledge the presence among us
today of a high-level delegation of members of the
Brazilian Congress.
Brazil has supported security sector reform in
countries in many different regions, such as Haiti,
Guinea-Bissau and Timor-Leste, both bilaterally and
through organizations such as the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries. Those experiences
have made clear that for security sector reform to be
successful, it must be nationally owned and tailored to
the specific circumstances of each country. Focusing
on the technical aspects of security sector reform is not
enough. It requires nurturing political will for SSR in
the Government, in civil society and in the security
forces.
Ensuring that security sector reform is an integral
part of broader peacekeeping efforts is also crucial,
especially bearing in mind the importance of
reintegrating former combatants into civilian life.
Brazil believes that security sector reform must
be firmly integrated into the wider rule of law
framework. We must focus on improving the
coordination and integration of system-wide efforts on
rule of law, both on the ground and at Headquarters.
We welcome the steps taken to strengthen support for
SSR by United Nations field missions. With regard to
the roster of SSR experts, we reiterate the importance
of its adequately representing the capacities existent in
all regions.

12

Given the focus of today’s debate on SSR in
Africa, I would like to briefly discuss the case of
Guinea-Bissau, in which Brazil is involved as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, through the Community of Portuguesespeaking Countries (CPLP) and bilateral cooperation.
Security sector reform has received particular attention
from the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. It is one of the priority
areas of the strategic framework for peacebuilding in
Guinea-Bissau. Support to security sector reform in
Guinea-Bissau has galvanized a number of bilateral
and regional partners. Cape Verde and Guinea-Bissau,
for instance, supported by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and CPLP, held an
SSR roundtable in Praia in April 2009. More recently,
the ECOWAS/CPLP road map on SSR has provided a
platform to support governmental efforts within a
wider cooperation framework.
The
Government
of
Guinea-Bissau
has
consistently underlined that reforming the security
sector is one its highest priorities, given its potential
contribution to sustainable peace and development in
that country. It has demonstrated its concrete
commitment to SSR by depositing an initial
contribution to the pension fund for the armed forces
and security forces personnel to be demobilized and by
taking administrative measures to make the fund
operational.
The immediate implementation of the fund,
which now depends on the disbursement of resources
pledged by the international partners, could boost the
efforts to transform the security sector in GuineaBissau and turn it into a professional institution,
supportive of the consolidation of peace and long-term
stability of the country. Guinea-Bissau and the
international community must seize this opportunity.
Losing momentum could delay the entire SSR effort.
In Guinea-Bissau, we are working to ensure that
national ownership, international cooperation and
United Nations assistance can come together to support
security sector reform. Political will, adequate and
predictable funding, and the integration of security and
development efforts are indispensable to moving the
process forward. In Guinea-Bissau, as in many other
countries, we hope that these elements will allow for
the emergence of effective and accountable security
sectors dedicated to safeguarding peace, development
and human rights.

11-54194

S/PV.6630

Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this debate and I welcome this momentum, begun in
West Africa and beneficial to the entire continent.
Security issues are among the major challenges to
the building or rebuilding of a State if it is to be
sustainable and respect the rule of law. Security sector
reform (SSR) is therefore a useful tool both for
peacebuilding and for conflict prevention in Africa. It
promotes governance that respects democratic values
and human rights. It also makes possible an
environment conducive to reconstruction and
development.
SSR is particularly necessary for countries
emerging from crisis. It involves the guaranteed
payment of wages, return to barracks, setting up an
effective
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration (DDR) programme, and helping
demobilized combatants through reintegration or
retirement plans. It also entails establishing a judicial
system that holds security forces accountable for
violations of human rights or international
humanitarian law.
The Security Council has integrated SSR into
many of the mandates it has given to peacekeeping
operation in Africa. In Côte d’Ivoire, support for SSR
is one of the highest priorities of the mandate of the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire,
reconfigured by resolution 2000 (2011) in July. The
challenge is considerable there, because we must help
two armies to merge and to train and equip itself.
Success in that endeavour will be a critical factor for
long-term peace in Côte d’Ivoire.
To be successful, SSR absolutely requires
national ownership and strong political will. A political
reform by its very nature, SSR cannot be imposed from
the outside, but rather depends on strong national
commitment. It requires an inclusive national dialogue.
The international community can facilitate, encourage
and provide follow-up to the process, but it cannot
replace the partner State, national actors or civil
society.
The international community has been involved
in SSR in the Democratic Republic of the Congo since
the year 2000. It is crucial that the Congolese
Government prioritize its needs, adopt and formulate
texts that define reform, and then implement them.

11-54194

The United Nations has a role to play in
encouraging national ownership of SSR. The transfer
of security responsibilities from a peacekeeping
mission to national authorities is a complex process. As
Liberia prepares to solidify its democratic roots with
the presidential election of 11 October, we must make
sure that the Government actively engages in SSR,
especially in forming a police force, as the United
Nations Mission in Liberia progressively draws down.
The international community must continue its
support for SSR in Africa. We must place greater
emphasis on the intimate link between SSR and DDR
programmes. Too often, the failure of SSR is a result of
incomplete or poorly managed DDR programmes
undermining the implementation of SSR. Bitter social
divisions that result from the impunity of security
forces or the lack of reconciliation mechanisms are
also risk factors.
More broadly, SSR programmes must also
address the fundamental question of people’s will to
live together — an especially acute problem in
post-conflict situations. In Libya, the new authorities
have grasped this very well and have asked for United
Nations assistance with SSR. It is our collective
responsibility to support them in restoring order and
ensuring respect for the rule of law.
Lastly, SSR programmes require funding that is
lasting and diversified. Bilateral support, the
Peacebuilding Fund and international organizations
such as the World Bank must all be solicited for funds.
The European Union (EU), for its part, has been a
major presence in this sector in Africa for years. In
Somalia, in close cooperation with the African Union
Mission in Somalia, the European Union has been
training the security forces of the Transitional Federal
Government. It has also intervened in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo through its mission to provide
advice and assistance for security reform and its Police
Mission In Kinshasa, to promote military and police
reform in that country. The European Union is also
active throughout the continent through the
EURORECAMP programme, which helps the African
Union to train its standby forces.
In a national capacity, France supports SSR
training, mainly through the Geneva Centre for the
Democratic Control of Armed Forces. It has also
deployed many experts to various European operations
in Africa and on other continents. France calls for a

13

S/PV.6630

civic service to aid development that, with the support
of armed forces, would facilitate the reintegration of
young volunteers into civilian life with specific
professional training. Such a development assistance
service would be a concrete response to problems of
demobilization and reintegration in the aftermath of
conflicts.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): At the outset, we would
like to welcome you, Mr. President, and to express our
appreciation to your country for organizing this
important debate. We would also like to extend our
thanks to Under-Secretary-General Mr. Hervé Ladsous
for his important introductory remarks.
Lebanon aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
In many post-conflict countries, including the
majority of countries on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission, all of which are in Africa,
security sector reform is a foremost priority for
peacebuilding. Today, the international community
perceives security sector reform within the broader
framework of peace consolidation and institutionbuilding for countries emerging from conflict, as the
link between security sector reform and socioeconomic development is clearer than ever.
In that regard, security sector reform should be
considered within the broad framework of the rule of
law and as part of a political process that is linked to
other peacebuilding objectives and anchored in
national ownership. At the same time, international
assistance for security sector reform must be conceived
and implemented within a long-term and sustainable
effort. All those notions are at the heart of the draft
presidential statement that we will adopt today, which
Lebanon fully supports.
To that end, we see the need for more integrated
planning and implementation of United Nations
mandates across the entire peacebuilding continuum,
starting with mediation, passing through disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, and moving towards
rule of law assistance, the empowerment of youth and
women and socio-economic recovery. Security sector
reform is influenced by the progress in all such
processes over time. Its success will be largely
determined by the ability to respond to context-specific
demands and critical political hurdles and to address
resource gaps.

14

The role of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Peacebuilding Fund is critical, not least to
encourage a more coherent and coordinated approach
to those mutually reinforcing processes in the countries
concerned. Also, the role of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations is important in further
strengthening a comprehensive United Nations
approach to security sector reform.
We need to recognize that security sector reform
is a national process that is likely to see gradual
transformation in the capacity of the State and in the
perception of security institutions in the societies
concerned. Thus, the notion of national ownership is
not simply a slogan, but also a crucial element in
countries emerging from conflict.
Security sector reform assistance, whether
undertaken bilaterally or within United Nations
missions and regional frameworks, must be envisaged
in close coordination with the Government and the
widest possible segments of society, including women
and national civil society actors. In that context, the
specific needs of girls and women in all security sector
reform processes must be taken into account by
supporting gender-sensitive police, army and justice
reform and training, and by including women in those
processes.
The outcome of a capacity and needs assessment
of national actors should guide the planning and
implementation of security sector reform assistance,
with emphasis on capacity development. The ability of
the country concerned to own its own security sector
reform must become a priority for the Council’s
mandates.
In that regard, the Nigerian presidency rightly
emphasizes South-South cooperation and the evolving
capacity of the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States in support of
security sector reform in Africa (see S/2011/627,
annex).
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin this statement by congratulating
you, Mr. President, and your delegation on having
convened and on presiding over this important debate
on the prospects and challenges that security sector
reform faces in Africa.
I would also like to express my gratitude for the
briefing given by Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-Secretary-

11-54194

S/PV.6630

General for Peacekeeping Operations. I would like to
take this opportunity to welcome him and to wish him
every success in his duties.
Security sector reform is one of the crucial
aspects of peacebuilding and the stability of countries
emerging from a conflict. We are called on to analyse
the many dimensions determining the success of any
strategy to achieve an institutional framework that
provides security and guarantees the enjoyment of
citizens’ rights.
My delegation believes that we should begin by
recognizing a fundamental principle — that initiatives
to reform the security sector are part of broader
objectives, such as strengthening the rule of law,
respect and promotion of human rights, and the
establishment of conditions conducive to a country’s
economic development.
The scope of such tasks certainly requires longterm work and commitment, in which all relevant
actors assume their responsibilities and activities with
a view to gradually achieving viable and realistic
goals. The political leadership of the national
authorities and the sustained and predictable support of
the international community are also needed in order to
implement the reforms.
Security Council activities in security sector
reform are limited to the specific cases on its agenda.
Such experiences have taught us various lessons,
among which I wish to mention the following.
The first lesson is the important role played by
peacekeeping operations and special missions in
supporting the achievement of national objectives
leading to security sector reform. The second lesson is
the need to provide adequate tools and resources in
order to achieve the outcomes established in the
mandates. Thirdly, activities of the peacekeeping
operations must include sustainable and long-term
goals; and fourthly, dialogue, consultation and
coordination with the national authorities on the
development and implementation of the priorities set
by the national authorities must be improved in order
to achieve effective and appropriate security sector
reform.
Given that there are clear links between security
sector reform, conflict prevention, peacebuilding, the
rule of law and economic development, this debate
should aim to move forward the ongoing dialogue and

11-54194

coordinated work of the bodies and agencies of the
United Nations system connected with the topic, within
the context of their respective responsibilities and
mandates. The General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission are
bodies called on to play a central role in defining the
conceptual and legal frameworks, under which the
Organization can work comprehensively on all aspects
of security sector reform and in harnessing resources
and strengthening ongoing and constructive dialogue
with the national authorities in order to define common
proposals and objectives.
National ownership is certainly the linchpin and
guiding principle on which all activities that the
Organization, in general, and the Security Council in
particular, undertake on security sector reform must be
based. As the Council has said on many occasions,
security sector reform is a sovereign right and the
primary responsibility to determine the modality and
national priorities in that regard falls to the State
concerned. In implementing the principle of national
ownership, there must be a social dialogue, channelled
through the national legal and institutional machinery,
which provides the overall framework and sets the
priorities and objectives on which State authorities can
base the reforms that they believe relevant. It must be
underscored that democratic values, principles and
methods are part of the tools on which the legitimacy
and viability of any reform is built.
Likewise, for successful security sector reform
processes, it must be acknowledged that respect for the
law, monopoly of the use of force by the legitimate
authorities, and subordination of the security apparatus
to the civil authorities are decisive factors in States
achieving stability and a sustainable peace.
No formulas can be applied to every case. The
institutional and legal security arrangements must be in
line with the conditions and particularities of each
situation. That is one of the reasons that explains the
importance of the principle of national ownership,
given the fact that historical, cultural, social and
economic contexts determine the forms and the scope
of the institutions in charge of providing security in
States that are emerging from conflict. They also
justify national ownership of the process.
It is up to every national authority, as a legitimate
representative of its society, to determine the scope, the
means, the forms and the sectors upon which the

15

S/PV.6630

support of the international community will be
required. Furthermore, national efforts will fall short if
the international community does not have sufficient
tools to help in this effort through measures that
promote transparency in decision-making and
strengthening the fight against terrorism, transnational
organized crime and illicit arms trafficking.
In the final analysis, assistance must be provided
with a view to improving the capabilities of national
institutions in each of the stages of security sector
reform, helping to find the mechanisms and approaches
that are adapted to the special conditions of every
situation, without imposing areas or conditions that
would be counter-productive for the national leadership
of the process to establish and build peace in the long
term.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I welcome you
to the Security Council, Mr. President, and thank you
for convening this timely debate and giving it added
significance by presiding over in person.
The United Kingdom welcomes the opportunity
to discuss security sector reform (SSR) in Africa.
History has taught us that we cannot build stable and
prosperous societies without functioning security and
justice systems. Effective and accountable security
systems and access to justice make people feel safe in
their daily lives. When people feel safe, local
entrepreneurs will start businesses, children will go to
school and socio-economic development can take root.
I would like to focus my intervention on two
themes — first, on the need to ensure national
ownership and citizen engagement in SSR processes,
and secondly, on the importance of linking SSR to the
broader peacebuilding and rule of law agenda.
First, with regard to the importance of national
ownership, the international community has learned
that the most effective approach to SSR is to ensure
that national authorities lead, own and drive reform
efforts. International partners have a role to play in
supporting the process, providing advice and often
resources, but political leadership must come from the
recipient country. The political leadership must be
accompanied by the will to advance the necessary and
sometimes difficult reforms in the security sector. That
is particularly important when, as is often the case,
reforms are inextricably linked to wider political or
peace processes.

16

While Governments have the central role to play,
SSR activities must be extended to include the broader
population. An effective approach to SSR will ensure
that the needs of ordinary citizens, including women
and girls, are at the forefront.
In some countries, the army or the police are the
main face of the State for many citizens. Their
behaviour and responsiveness to citizens’ needs can
therefore have a disproportionate impact on
perceptions of State legitimacy. It is essential that
international partners support reform in ways that focus
on those aspects of security and justice that matter
most to ordinary people, and which promote, rather
than undermine, human rights. That is the only way to
ensure that legitimate and accountable security systems
are developed.
Secondly, SSR cannot be considered in isolation.
We must situate this debate on SSR in the context of
international efforts to help countries build peace and
strengthen the rule of law. Security, justice and
economic issues are all linked. SSR efforts must be
embedded in broader peacebuilding strategies that
include expertise from the military, political and
development communities.
Evidence shows that we have not yet gotten the
balance right. It is often difficult for countries to obtain
assistance to develop their police forces or their
judiciaries. When international support is provided for
police training, it is often not sufficiently linked to the
improvement of justice systems. We must all strive for
a more coherent and better coordinated international
response.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are a
part, but just one part, of a better coordinated
international response. We of course agree with Her
Excellency the Indian Minister of State that
peacekeeping operations should not be drawn down
prematurely in a way that jeopardizes stability, nor
should they be given tasks for which they are not
qualified or resourced. That principle includes not
allocating to peacekeeping operations tasks that are
more effectively and sustainably performed by others.
The United Nations has a critical role to play
alongside other multilateral partners, such as the
European Union and regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States.

11-54194

S/PV.6630

We know that coordinated action can undermine
both national ownership and holistic approaches. We
must continue to support the efforts of the United
Nations to respond in the immediate aftermath of
conflict, and in particular to ensure that SSR activities
are linked to justice, rule of law and broader
peacebuilding activities.
The United Nations has made some progress on
delivering a more joined-up approach to peacebuilding,
but more needs to be done to bring together the
political, humanitarian, development and security
systems of the United Nations to enable effective
support to national reform efforts.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to commend Nigeria for organizing this
important open debate. We align ourselves with the
statement to be delivered later today by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt, who will speak on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement. We are particularly
pleased, Mr. President, that this debate is being
presided over by your good self, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Nigeria, whom we welcome to the
Council.
Nigeria, together with South Africa, co-hosted the
High-level Forum on African Perspectives on Security
Sector Reform, held on 14 May 2010, the outcome of
which was submitted to the Secretary-General. We
thank the Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his
briefing to the Council and for apprising us on the
work being done by the Secretariat on security sector
reform (SSR).
Given our own history, South Africa attaches
great importance to SSR, as the reform and
transformation of our security sector was both a
constitutional and political objective. South Africa’s
approach to security sector reform is a holistic one
aimed at creating effective and accountable security
institutions, which are absolutely essential for the
building
of
sustainable
peace,
development,
reconciliation and the culture of human rights.
South Africa believes that building accountable
and democratic security institutions is important in
countering the potential destabilizing effect that
unregulated security forces might play in the political
life of any country. The role of the United Nations in
working with national Governments in strengthening
SSR is therefore crucial in the area of conflict
prevention. The legitimacy and global character of the

11-54194

United Nations gives it a particular responsibility to
facilitate a coordinated approach to SSR.
The assumptions and principles on the role of the
United Nations in SSR contained in the SecretaryGeneral’s 2008 report (S/2008/39) remain valid today.
We also recognize the important role United Nations
peacekeeping missions play in SSR where
peacekeeping missions have become increasingly
multidimensional. The importance of SSR has also
been recognized as an important element for
peacebuilding. We have seen the increasing
involvement of the Peacebuilding Commission in this
regard.
South Africa recognizes the importance of close
partnerships between the United Nations in particular
and regional, subregional organizations and other
intergovernmental
organizations,
including
the
international financial institutions, in the area of SSR.
The multiplicity of actors involved requires greater
coordination among donors to facilitate synergy and
avoid duplication.
At the regional level, the African Union (AU) is
in the process of developing a policy framework
document for SSR that refocuses emphasis from
military security to human security by defending and
protecting all citizens from all forms of violence and
insecurity, including gender-based violence. The
rationale and scope of this policy framework stresses
the importance of African ownership in the SSR
process. The many externally generated narratives on
SSR do not fully address African approaches, as it is
preferable to refer to African-originated references.
The policy framework has been adopted in principle
and will be presented to the AU Assembly during the
AU summit in 2012.
The experience of SSR on the African continent
indicates that SSR is not an event but a process that
requires continuous attention and political will.
Throughout our involvement in security sector reform
in Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Central African Republic, and in our own experiences
in South Africa, it has become clear that each country
faces its own unique challenges, and therefore,
whatever approach is adopted has to be contextspecific.
We have also learned from those experiences that
SSR can only be sustainable if the principle of local
ownership is upheld. There can therefore be no one-

17

S/PV.6630

size-fits-all solution to security sector reform. The
international community should therefore work in close
collaboration with countries emerging from conflict,
including in recognizing the important role that women
and vulnerable groups can play as agents of change.

sector reform efforts could help to restore confidence
among belligerent parties, rectify negative linkages
between armies and political actors and avert a security
vacuum that could expose people to violence and abuse
by remnants of armed groups.

In conclusion, as we have said, the legitimacy
and global character of the United Nations gives it a
particular responsibility to facilitate a coordinated
approach to SSR based on the principle of national
ownership. Fundamental in the assistance and expertise
that the United Nations can provide is the cooperation
and consent of the States involved. Additionally, the
strategic partnership developed between the United
Nations and the African Union on SSR is an illustration
of an important role that the United Nations can play in
advancing SSR on the African continent.

Security sector reform often raises the issue of
the role of peacekeeping operations. We are well aware
that such operations cannot go on indefinitely in a
country in crisis or emerging from one. However,
stability cannot be ensured following the end of a
peacekeeping operation unless the host country is able
to ensure the security of its people. We therefore think
that the issue of SSR should be addressed quite soon
after the deployment of a mission. Efforts at
establishing and strengthening peace could be
undermined if this matter is not well taken into account
from the beginning, and if SSR implementation is not
effectively supported.

We hope that the discussion here today will move
us a step closer towards further enhancing and
coordinating our approaches to SSR. South Africa
supports the draft presidential statement that will be
adopted later today.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Security sector reform (SSR) is crucial in many
African countries that are continuing to strengthen a
fragile peace. In welcoming its Minister for Foreign
Affairs, I would also like to thank the delegation of
Nigeria for having organized this debate. We also
commend Nigeria’s efforts in presiding over our
debate. And we would like to thank Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his briefing.
Given the convergence of views around the table,
Gabon would like in advance to welcome the draft
presidential statement to be adopted briefly.
Peacebuilding through security sector reform
should help countries emerging from conflict avoid a
relapse into conflict. In order to better address SSR
challenges, we believe there is a need both to adopt a
comprehensive approach and to better integrate the role
of host countries in such efforts. Such an approach
must of course be based on existing links between
conflict prevention, peacebuilding and peacekeeping,
and the socio-economic development of a country
emerging from conflict.
In order to ensure lasting peace and stability,
security sector reform must include strengthening the
capacities of a country’s security institutions. Security

18

The hasty withdrawal of the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad and
the ensuring security situation in Central Africa
corroborates that view. The Central African Republic is
today facing the resurgence of violence on the part of
armed groups, such as the Convention of Patriots for
Justice and Peace and the Lord’s Resistance Army.
Central African security forces have little capacity to
protect populations from the violence perpetrated by
such groups.
We welcome the establishment of the Security
Institutions Unit within the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic.
Our hope is that the Unit will focus on reforming the
country’s security institutions.
A coherent approach to SSR also means that the
various stakeholders active on security sector reform in
Africa should work in concert cooperatively. In that
regard, we commend the existing cooperation between
the United Nations, the African Union and the
subregional organizations on the continent. We of
course hope that the support provided to the African
Union to develop its approach to SSR will continue.
An effective approach also involves synergy with
other stakeholders, such as the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Support Fund and
major international donors. It will be difficult for
security sector reform efforts to achieve their goals if
programmes are not supported with sufficient financial
resources. The role played by the Peacebuilding

11-54194

S/PV.6630

Support Fund, whether with regard to countries on the
Commission’s agenda or those not yet under its
consideration, deserves to be commended.

The President: Following consultations among
Council members, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on their behalf:

The host country has a crucial role in security
sector reform, over which it should have ownership.
Against that backdrop, reform is above all a political
issue. It is through political agreement that a country
should set reform priorities and set out a new vision for
its security forces. Such a vision should be the outcome
of the broadest possible national political dialogue as
part of the peacebuilding process. The international
community should act solely in support of the efforts
of the host Government.

“The Security Council recalls the statements
by its President of 21 February 2007
(S/PRST/2007/3)
and
12
May
2008
(S/PRST/2008/14), and the report of the
Secretary-General entitled ‘Securing peace and
development: the role of the United Nations in
supporting security sector reform’, of 23 January
2008 (S/2008/39), and emphasizes that the
establishment of an effective, professional and
accountable security sector is the cornerstone of
peace and sustainable development. Equally,
security sector reform (SSR) underscores that
effectiveness,
accountability
and
good
governance are mutually reinforcing elements of
security.

In that regard, we would like to commend the
exemplary efforts of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo aimed at strengthening strategic coherence
in the security sector reform with the Congolese
Government and its international partners.
In order to be sustainable, SSR must also make it
possible to transform relations between political
stakeholders, security institutions, civil society and the
general population in a manner that a new security
culture replaces the one that prevailed during the crisis.
This is therefore a question of nurturing a new civilianmilitary relationship that can help to restore confidence
throughout the entire society. It is also important to
ensure the participation of all members of society,
including women. They should be better represented in
security institutions and their rights should be properly
respected.
In that connection, the efforts by the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau to integrate women into that country’s police
and military institutions should be continued and
supported. The same is the case with human rights and
gender training provided to military staff.
Lastly, it is important the we pay attention to
potential problems, especially the thorny issue of
impunity and meting out justice to security forces
responsible for violence and abuse against civilians.
In conclusion, Gabon continues to be convinced
that strengthening the effectiveness of security sector
reform is crucial to ensuring a lasting impact by the
international community with regard to peacebuilding
in a country emerging from conflict.

11-54194

“The Security Council notes that the bulk of
the international community’s assistance in the
area of security sector reform takes place in and
is directed to countries in Africa. At the same
time, a number of African countries are becoming
important providers of such assistance. The
Security Council welcomes this intra-African
collaboration and emphasizes that there is a need
to expand the consideration given to African
perspectives on security sector reform. This
includes enhancing cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, as well as sharing
knowledge and experience with women and
members of civil society. Focusing security sector
reform efforts on the needs and priorities of
populations in post-conflict countries will
considerably enhance the legitimacy, viability
and sustainability of such support.
“The Security Council recognizes that
security sector reform is a long-term process and
reiterates the sovereign right and primary
responsibility of the country concerned to
determine its national approach and priorities for
security sector reform. It should be a nationally
owned process that is rooted in the particular
needs and conditions of the country in question.
The successful coordination of security sector
reform efforts must be based on national
consensus and driven by political leadership and
political will to progress reform. In this regard,
the Security Council underlines the responsibility

19

S/PV.6630

of States to coordinate security sector reform
support, including, but not limited to, establishing
a strategic vision and the parameters for reform,
identifying gaps and needs, prioritizing areas for
technical support, and avoiding duplication of
donor efforts.
“The
Security
Council
encourages
reforming States, while taking into account their
capacity constraints, to strive to allocate national
resources to security sector reform efforts to
ensure the long-term sustainability and viability
of such reform. In this context, the Security
Council emphasizes the importance of improving
women’s participation in discussions pertinent to
prevention and resolution of conflict, the
maintenance of peace and security and
encourages women to participate in the national
armed and security forces in accordance with
relevant international law. In this regard, the
Security Council encourages the development of
a security sector that is accessible and responsive
to all, including women and other vulnerable
groups.
“The Security Council recognizes the
importance of regional frameworks as a
foundation for multilateral security sector reform
efforts. In this regard, the Security Council
welcomes the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union in developing a
continental security sector reform policy
framework for its implementation. The Security
Council encourages other regions to consider
establishing such partnerships in order to better
facilitate the exchange of lessons learned and best
practices, as well as develop regional frameworks
for security sector reform support, reflecting the
participation of regional and subregional
organizations. The Security Council also
recognizes the support provided by bilateral
actors, as well as regional actors, including the
European Union, to security sector reform efforts
in Africa and other initiatives in the area of
security sector reform in Africa carried out by
organizations such as the Economic Community
of West African States and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries.
“The Security Council recalls its previous
presidential statements concerning the need for
early and adequate support in priority areas of

20

peacebuilding, including reform of the security
sector, as well as the importance of security
sector
reform
programmes
for
conflict
prevention. In light of ongoing conflict in Africa,
the Security Council reiterates the link between
security sector reform and socio-economic
development, and underlines that such reform
efforts should be situated within the broader and
more comprehensive spectrum of peacebuilding.
In this regard, the Security Council emphasizes
the important role of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund in
supporting SSR, including in African countries.
The
Security
Council
encourages
the
Peacebuilding Commission to continue to
promote coordination among and between the
national and external actors involved in security
sector reform in the countries on its agenda.
“The Security Council underlines that
United Nations support to security sector reform
must take place within a broad framework of the
rule of law and should contribute to the overall
strengthening of the United Nations rule of law
activities as well as wider reconstruction and
development efforts. This will require continued
coordination with relevant United Nations actors
to ensure an increasingly coherent approach. In
this context, the Security Council stresses the
need for security sector reform efforts to be
cognizant of the issue of impunity.
“The
Security
Council
notes
that
peacekeeping has evolved significantly over the
past decades from primarily monitoring
ceasefires
to
complex
multidimensional
operations which seek to undertake peacebuilding
tasks and underlying causes of conflict. In this
regard, the Security Council notes that an
increasing number of peacekeeping and special
political missions are mandated to support
national security sector reform programmes,
including those in Africa, through strategic
assistance to develop security sector frameworks
and capacity-building of the security and law
enforcement institutions in key areas, including
training in human rights, child protection and
protection from sexual and gender-based
violence. The Security Council stresses the need
to continue to include, as appropriate, security

11-54194

S/PV.6630

sector reform aspects as an integral part of
planning of United Nations operations.

African Union (AU) to continue to collaborate with
him in his endeavours.

“The Security Council recognizes the
important role that the United Nations has played
in supporting national efforts to build sustainable
security institutions, and commends the efforts of
the United Nations, in particular the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, including the
Security Sector Reform Unit and the United
Nations inter-agency Security Sector Reform
Task Force, in further strengthening a
comprehensive United Nations approach to
security sector reform, through the development
of guidance and civilian capacities, coordination
mechanisms and collaboration with regional and
subregional organizations, in particular the
African Union.

Our participation in this timely and important
debate should first be viewed in the context of the
African Union’s evolving role in addressing the
challenges of peace and security on the continent,
consistent with the principles and objectives of the AU
Constitutive Act and the Protocol relating to the
Establishment of the AU Peace and Security Council.
Secondly, I wish to announce that — as you have
already mentioned, Sir — the African Union has
embarked on steps to institutionalize an African
continental policy framework on security sector reform
(SSR), which will be considered with a view to
adoption by the AU Assembly of Heads of State at the
next Summit, scheduled to be held in Addis Ababa in
January 2012. Obviously, the AU would be happy to
share the content of this framework once it is adopted
by the Assembly.

“The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to submit, by early 2013, an
assessment of the United Nations support for
SSR, including those efforts in Africa, and make
recommendations on how best to strengthen the
United Nations comprehensive approach to SSR,
taking into account the linkages between United
Nations assistance and conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, and also taking into consideration
the views of relevant United Nations organs and
actors.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the
Security
Council
under
the
symbol
S/PRST/2011/19.
I now give the floor to Mr. António.
Mr. António: We fully appreciate the
participation of Mrs. Preneet Kaur, Minister of State
for External Affairs of India. We also recognize the
presence within the Brazilian delegation of high-level
parliamentarians from Brazil.
Let me start by congratulating you, Sir, on your
country’s accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October. The history of your
country bears eloquent testimony to its sustained
support and commitment to the search for peace and
security on the African continent, in particular in
questions regarding peacekeeping operations.
I also thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous for his very
useful briefing, and reiterate the readiness of the

11-54194

The framework document is a major milestone in
implementation of the mandate given by the January
2008 decision of the AU Assembly for the development
of a continental policy framework on security sector
reform. The 2008 Assembly decision was informed by
the outcome of a United Nations international
workshop on security sector reform held in Cape Town,
South Africa, in November 2007 and sponsored by the
Government of South Africa, in collaboration with the
Government of Slovakia.
The adoption in 2006 of the AU post-conflict
reconstruction and development policy was a turning
point in the African Union’s involvement in security
sector reform. Among other things, the post-conflict
reconstruction and development policy calls for the
re-establishment and strengthening of the capacity of
African
security
institutions
to
pursue
the
transformation of the organs of State, especially those
relating to security and justice.
Another
important
breakthrough
in
the
development of the draft AU policy framework on
security sector reform was the convening of a
workshop in Addis Ababa from 23 to 25 March 2009,
co-hosted by the African Union and the United
Nations, which brought together SSR experts from the
AU, the United Nations, regional economic
communities, the African Security Sector Network
(ASSN) and representatives of partners, making it
possible for the draft AU policy framework on SSR to

21

S/PV.6630

be endorsed by experts from AU member States in May
2011.
Significant outcomes of the workshop held in
March 2009 were, inter alia, the development of a road
map for the AU SSR policy process and an agreement
on strategic partnership on security sector reform
entered into by the AU and the United Nations. This
partnership is essential to a coherent and coordinated
global approach, drawing inspiration from existing
AU-United Nations partnerships in the areas of conflict
prevention and peacebuilding.
I wish to mention at this juncture that the AU
SSR policy formulation process would not have
reached this stage without the strong support of AU
partners, particularly the role played by the United
Nations at the very inception through its Office of the
Rule of Law and Security Institutions, as well as the
SSR unit within the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. The range of assistance includes
fundraising for various SSR activities, for which we
remain grateful to the United Nations as we look
forward to its continued support, especially now that
the African Union is moving from policy formulation
to implementation of SSR activities by AU member
States, with a primary focus on the principle of
national ownership and leadership.
The African Union has also developed a strong
SSR working relationship with the African Security
Sector Network. Both the AU and the United Nations
continue to rely on the expertise of the African
Security Sector Network in the implementation of the
AU-United Nations strategic partnership on SSR — a
role which the ASSN has performed extremely well.
The African Union wishes to also express its
gratitude to the European Union for providing the
initial funding for the AU SSR activities and for the
anticipated broader funding. Our gratitude is equally
extended to the Government of Norway for SSR
training and the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg in
support of Member States meetings on SSR.
In closing, I wish to underscore that the AU
continues to consider peace and security to be
necessary preconditions for sustainable development
through regional integration. We therefore invite the
United Nations and all partners to ensure that a
regional perspective is brought to bear in strategic
partnerships on security sector reform with Africa’s
regional economic communities playing a key role, as

22

many speakers have already mentioned. We therefore
support the regional arrangements that are the focus of
the presidential statement adopted at this meeting
(S/PRST/2011/19), whose contents the African Union
welcomes with high appreciation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
choice of security sector reform as the topic of today’s
thematic debate and for your stress on prospects and
challenges in Africa. We trust that today’s discussion
will give us a better understanding of that complex
process and of the important support role played by the
United Nations in post-conflict countries.
I thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous for his very clear and
enlightening briefing, and wish him every success in
his difficult and lofty mission. I also endorse the
statement to be made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
When mandated by the Council, security sector
reform is a critical process in the transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding. The establishment of a
security sector that is professional, effective and
responsible is crucial to laying the foundations of
peace, sustainable development and economic
recovery. The key principle in security sector reform
that has been underscored by most if not all of those
who have spoken before me is national ownership.
Security sector reform is the primary
responsibility of the State. The role of the United
Nations is to provide support to national authorities in
its implementation. Every country should have
ownership of the security sector reform process. At the
request of the host country, the United Nations should
provide security sector reform assistance through a
peacekeeping mission. That assistance should be
adapted to the particular circumstances and needs of
each country.
Reforms cannot be effective without the
leadership of the authorities of the country hosting a
peacekeeping mission. That leadership role first comes
into play in evaluating the security situation to ensure
that the subsequent reform has a chance of success. It
is essential to involve security actors so as to identify
dysfunctions and take the corrective action needed for
security institutions to once again function normally.

11-54194

S/PV.6630

That leadership then involves national authorities
in the design and implementation of security sector
reform programmes. Very often, security sector
reforms unfortunately have been unsuccessful owing to
the lack of involvement by national authorities. It is
regrettable that attempts to set up security sector
reform at the national level very often has not come
from within a given country, but was instead
recommended by external actors. This has discouraged
national actors from taking part in the process.
Prior to security sector reform, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process plays a
crucial role in the development of inclusive security
bodies that are subject to effective control by political
institutions. In many situations, it has been clearly
shown that the success of any such reform is closely
linked to the ability to successfully complete the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process.
In that respect, it is worth noting that security
sector reform cannot succeed without taking into
account the gender perspective. By deploying female
military and police officials, peacekeeping missions
can indirectly encourage host countries to include
women in their security institutions. The deployment of
female formed police units to peacekeeping missions in
Africa has played an important role in guaranteeing
women greater access to decision-making in security
bodies. In Africa in particular, it has been shown that
women’s involvement has proven extremely useful,
and even crucial, in peacebuilding efforts.
Coherence among donors is one of the key factors
for the success of security sector reform. In the past,
donor activities in security sector reform led to
duplication owing to the lack of consultation and
coordination. We are pleased to note that the
experience of the country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission has made it possible to
improve coherence. That has been accomplished
mainly by establishing legal frameworks, such as
statements of mutual commitment, which enable
national authorities, donors and the United Nations to
better channel aid and avoid duplication.
Security sector reform must be part of a larger
effort to build the rule of law. It should help to bolster
United Nations actions aimed at ensuring the rule of
law in peacekeeping operations without duplicating
activities or structures.

11-54194

As an African country, Morocco has accumulated
numerous years of bilateral experience with many
nations, particularly in Africa, in the areas of technical
assistance and the training of security forces. We
continue to be willing to share our experiences and to
enhance them with best practices. One of the lessons
we have drawn from our own experience is not to
content oneself with enhancing the operational
effectiveness of security providers, but to also include
justice administration system reform and, beyond that,
to strengthen national capacity to handle the reform
process in a framework of democratic control and
monitoring in which human rights are respected. It is
only by stressing effectiveness, sound management and
open governance, as well as by ensuring that all of
these elements are mutually reinforcing, that we will
together be able to take up the challenge of security
sector reform.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchyski (Canada): Canada would like to
thank the Nigerian presidency of the Security Council
for providing this opportunity to discuss security sector
reform (SSR) in the context of the African continent.
For Canada, SSR is a process through which a country
seeks to establish effective, accountable and
representative security institutions that carry out their
legitimate functions in a manner consistent with
democratic norms and sound governance principles. A
number of countries on the African continent continue
to face forms of insecurity that damage the lives of
their people. SSR is an important lens through which
African States can develop strategies to transform their
security sectors. On this note, allow me to make a few
brief comments.
Canada actively contributes to initiatives within
the United Nations and has extensive experience in
assisting States in their efforts to reform their security
systems. Our assistance is a multifaceted, whole-ofgovernment effort. We have engaged in activities
through project financing, policy development and the
deployment of personnel, including experts and
advisers, working in such areas as governance, justice,
policing, border management, corrections and the
military. We currently contribute to related fields in
several of the United Nations African missions,
including
the
United
Nations
Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of

23

S/PV.6630

the Congo and the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan.
Additionally, Canada supports strengthening the
ability of the United Nations to coherently implement
SSR activities across different programmes and funds.
We support an in-house capacity-building initiative
through the United Nations SSR Inter-Agency Task
Force. That initiative is meant to assist members of the
Task Force in such areas as training and technical
support in the field and through the development of
technical guidance notes. As a donor, Canada supports
better whole-of-system coherence, in particular by
working through and coordinating with the United
Nations SSR Task Force.
(spoke in French)
Canada concurs that the Security Council should
emphasize ongoing inclusion, wherever appropriate, of
security sector reform in the future planning of United
Nations operations in Africa. For example, as a
member and Chair of a Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) configuration, Canada notes that security and
related justice reform is a priority in all six of the
countries on the Commission’s agenda. The PBC is
developing valuable experience on the ground that can
be drawn upon to help inform Security Council
mandate development and United Nations system
transition planning.
Canada therefore concurs that assistance from
international donors must be anchored by national
ownership and the commitment of all involved parties.
In particular, it is imperative that the political will of
the reforming State buttress those initiatives. A State’s
political environment must be considered when
planning SSR initiatives to ensure that the milieu is
conducive to reform and that efforts to support the
Government and civil society will have an opportunity
to succeed.
(spoke in English)
Finally, Canada welcomes the call for an
assessment of United Nations SSR support, including
the efforts being made in Africa. The assessment
should specifically examine opportunities to strengthen
United Nations inter-agency coordination, including
the donor coordination role of the various agencies. In
addition, we believe that it should examine ways to
increase United Nations SSR capacity, both at
Headquarters and in regional offices.

24

In conclusion, we strongly encourage ongoing
Security Council discussions concerning security
sector reform capabilities. Ultimately, we are
convinced that sounds SSR policies and practices will
assist in promoting regional and continental peace and
security for all Africa.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Koterec (Slovakia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for inviting my country to participate in
today’s debate. It creates another useful opportunity to
take stock of essential developments in the area of
security sector reform (SSR) within the United Nations
system and to discuss what more needs to be done in
addressing this issue in a comprehensive, coherent and
coordinated way, with special focus on African
experience and needs.
I would like to commend Nigeria for organizing
this debate and to welcome the presidential statement
adopted (S/PRST/2011/19), which we see as a highly
useful contribution to the ongoing security sector work
in the United Nations system.
Slovakia is proud that the Security Council’s
open debate organized under our presidency in
February 2007 (see S/PV.5632) set the tone for
advancing the security sector reform agenda, including
for the milestone report of the Secretary-General in
2008 (S/2008/39), and for the creation of the
institutional framework for security sector reform.
Capacity-building for security sector reform
within the United Nations system has come a long way
since 2007. Much has been done in raising awareness
about security sector reform, building the expertise and
knowledge of United Nations staff both at
Headquarters and in the field, advancing United
Nations conceptual work on SSR, promoting integrated
approaches, strengthening civilian capacities and, most
importantly, providing more systematic and bettertargeted assistance to national authorities in the whole
array of activities related to security sector reform.
Nevertheless, I would like to highlight the
challenges that Member States face in preparing their
personnel, whether police serving in United Nations
missions, military contingents or civilian personnel
who have a role to play, directly or indirectly, in
supporting the reform, restructuring or transformation
of justice and security institutions. There is both a

11-54194

S/PV.6630

guidance gap on how to transform SSR principles into
practice and a capacity gap in preparing personnel for
peacekeeping and peacebuilding deployments. This is a
challenge that police- and troop- contributing countries
need to tackle.
National ownership remains the key principle of
the United Nations approach to security sector reform.
It is not only a moral imperative but also a pragmatic
consideration,
because
if
the
design
and
implementation of security sector reform policies and
programmes are not led by national actors, they are
unlikely to be successful. That is acknowledged across
the board, including by concerned donors.
Right next to national ownership is the essential
role of regional and subregional actors, who, with their
legitimacy, expertise and capacities, can significantly
contribute to achieving sustainable progress in security
sector-related work on the ground. Many positive
results have been achieved recently in the work that the
United Nations system has done in conjunction with its
regional and subregional partners in areas such as
developing concepts, joint training, joint assessment
missions and other areas. The United Nations has
worked particularly closely in this regard with the
African Union and the European Union.
We strongly believe in the importance of regional
and subregional approaches in the related capacitybuilding and coordination mechanisms. We equally
believe in the need to promote bottom-up and demanddriven approaches. It is in this very context that
Slovakia, together with its close partner countries in
the regions and with the assistance of DCAF — the
Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed
Forces — organized three regional workshops with the
aim of galvanizing discussions and tangible efforts on
security sector reform in the most relevant regions,
facilitating partnerships and enhancing coordination
mechanisms.
The first such regional workshop, which we
organized together with South Africa in Cape Town in
2007, contributed a great deal to the process of
defining the African Union’s approaches to security
sector reform, as well as to enhancing the African
Union-United Nations cooperation in the area of SSR.
The two subsequent workshops were equally useful,
one for the Latin American and the Caribbean region in
Buenos Aires in 2009, and one for South East Asia in
Jakarta in 2010. In fact, we have recently approached

11-54194

another regional partner and are considering the
possibility of organizing the fourth regional workshop
in another important region.
Slovakia is keen to continue contributing as an
honest broker to building trust, further strengthening
United Nations capacities for security sector reform,
enhancing coherence and coordination within the
United Nations system as well as with regional and
subregional actors, and promoting positive synergies,
while at the same time trying to avoid duplicities.
That is exactly the context that led us to initiate
the creation of the United Nations Group of Friends of
SSR back in 2008. That Group has since served mainly
as an interface between the Member States and the
United Nations system, especially the co-chairs of the
inter-agency Task Force, and as such has proven to be
useful. As Chair of the Group of Friends, we would
like to take this opportunity to invite all interested
Member States, especially the recipients of assistance
in the area of security sector reform, to use this tool as
a platform for sharing their lessons learned,
articulating their needs and identifying the best ways to
address them in a timely and efficient manner. We are
ready to continue enabling such interactions and
promoting enhanced cooperation.
Last but not least, I would like to highlight the
fact that we have recently been witnessing increased
demand for assistance in the area of security sector
reform, both from countries emerging from conflict
and from countries undergoing democratic transitions.
This presents us with new challenges and requires
additional capacities. We believe it is our joint
obligation to address the challenges in a
comprehensive, coherent and coordinated way. I would
like to invite all Member States to approach the tasks at
hand in that spirit.
In the same spirit, and in the context of the
community of democracies, Slovakia, together with the
Netherlands, is now exploring how we can best assist
Tunisia to address the challenges that country has
identified in the area of security sector reform.
At the same time, as the current Chair of the
governing board of the Geneva-based International
Security Sector Advisory Team, we are committed to
enabling timely and efficient reinforcement of the
capacities for security sector reform of the United
Nations system, both in training and in advisory work
conducted in the field, especially in Africa.

25

S/PV.6630

In conclusion, I would like to assure you,
Mr. President, of our full cooperation with you and
with other Council members in the area of security
sector reform. It is a crucial component of the work of
the United Nations in promoting peace, stability,
development, the rule of law and justice in the
aftermath of conflict or in periods of transition.

It is clear that more must be done. The United
Nations recently conducted a review of international
civilian capacities in which the Senior Advisory Group
for the Review of International Civilian Capacities
identified several capacity gaps. Security sector reform
and justice sector reform ranked as the most critical
ones.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Finland.

Security sector support encompasses complex
technical challenges, in which specialized external
expertise may be required to complement national
capacities. Moreover, SSR goes beyond critical yet
narrow exercises such as right-sizing the security
services or training and equipping uniformed
personnel. SSR can also mean the development of
national security sector strategies and legislation or
enhancing the oversight and governance of security
institutions. These are inherently political processes,
where the main responsibility and ownership can only
lie with national Governments.

Mr. Viinanen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries, Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.
I would like to begin by thanking the Nigerian
presidency for organizing this debate. The last time the
Council held a debate on security sector reform was in
2008 (see S/PV.5889). Now it is due time to take stock
of the progress made.
In order to save everybody’s valuable time, I will
deliver an abbreviated version of our statement
circulated in the room.
We need a balanced and holistic approach to
security sector reform (SSR) for it to serve the broader
aim of achieving sustainable peace and development
and full respect for human rights and the rule of law.
There is a clear link between SSR, conflict prevention
and socio-economic development. This needs to be
fully understood and taken into account in international
support measures and actions.
The linkages between security, justice and
development were highlighted in the recent United
Nations and World Bank reports. Instability and
political
and
criminal
violence
reoccur
in
circumstances where governance is weak and the rule
of law and mechanisms to control corruption are
neglected. Violence leads to an increased risk of
conflict, not to mention its negative effects on
development.
All security sector reform efforts should be
carried out within the overarching framework of the
rule of law and good governance. We would like to
commend the efforts of the Security Sector Reform
Unit of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and of the inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task
Force. We encourage the Task Force to continue its
efforts to enhance coherence.

26

National Governments have the sovereign right
and primary responsibility to manage and coordinate
national reform efforts and international support. A
truly demand-driven approach on both sides would
solve many of the coordination problems. The Senior
Advisory Group for the Review of International
Civilian Capacities gave concrete recommendations
here too. National ownership can be fostered also
through areas such as procurement, policy framework
and mechanisms to manage partnerships. National
ownership should not be reduced to Government
ownership. Security and justice institutions are there to
serve people, including those who are marginalized.
Special attention should be paid to the
participation of women in planning, leading and
implementing security sector reforms. Women are
actors and stakeholders in upholding and promoting
security and the rule of law. In this regard, we would
like to recall the action plan of the Secretary-General
on women’s participation in peacebuilding. It offers
practical suggestions, which should now be taken
forward into concrete implementation in the United
Nations system and be supported by Member States,
regional organizations and international financial
institutions. We also encourage all actors to make full
use of the gender and security sector toolkit, which
offers practical guidance.
African countries are increasingly important
providers of security sector reform assistance. It would

11-54194

S/PV.6630

therefore be pertinent to consider a regional approach
not only to capacity-building, but also to assessments
and the design and implementation of reforms. African
perspectives on SSR can help in better adapting SSR
tools to a particular country context, and thus
contribute to the legitimacy, viability and sustainability
of SSR support.
The Nordic countries fully support the African
Peace and Security Architecture initiative, which is
aimed at enhancing the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts in Africa. We also warmly
welcome the ongoing efforts of the African Union to
develop a policy framework on SSR in consultation
with diverse stakeholders, including regional economic
communities and regional mechanisms, African and
international SSR experts and African civil society
organizations.
In conclusion, we believe that the report
requested by the Council today on the United Nations
approach to SSR will contribute to a more effective
and coherent United Nations response to SSR. For the
United Nations to continue to provide comprehensive
support in this vital area, we must all ensure it receives
adequate support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg congratulates the Nigerian presidency of
the Security Council for organizing this important
debate on security sector reform (SSR) and would like
to express its thanks for the invitation to participate in
it.
Focusing this debate on Africa is a timely step for
two reasons. It is on the African continent that the
Security Council formulates the majority of
peacekeeping
mandates,
and
these
mandates
increasingly include — and rightfully so — elements
of security sector reform.
SSR is an essential element on the peacekeeping
and peacebuilding agenda. An unreformed security and
defence sector or a badly managed reform can have a
profoundly destabilizing effect on a country emerging
from conflict. In my capacity as Chair of the
Peacebuilding
Commission’s
country-specific
configuration for Guinea, I can testify to the fact that
an in-depth reform of the security and defence sector is
necessary for sustainable peacebuilding and the

11-54194

strengthening of the rule of law. In Guinea as
elsewhere, certainly, SSR is intimately linked to the
other priority sectors for peacebuilding, in particular
national reconciliation. Undertaking an in-depth reform
of the security and defence sector requires political
will and unwavering support, including financial
support, by the international community. We will have
to respond to appeals from authorities in this respect.
Security sector reform is also intrinsically linked
to the reform of the judiciary. Citizens need to have the
appropriate means of recourse to have their rights
respected. We salute in this context the innovative
approach adopted in Liberia with regard to establishing
integrated security and justice hubs and to fully involve
women in the efforts undertaken.
The legitimacy of the State, whether it is
emerging from a conflict or not, hinges on the capacity
of its civilian authorities to control its military and
security authorities and on the capacity of the latter to
defend the human rights and dignity of the civilian
population. In this vein, in 2010 Luxembourg financed
a project implemented by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo aimed at professionalizing the
Congolese national police so that it can better
discharge its important task of protecting Congolese
citizens.
A country’s security forces and law enforcement
agencies must also be a bulwark against corruption and
bad governance. To avoid mishaps, it is therefore
indispensable to establish an early link between SSR
and the implementation of a transparent financial
system, as well as a solid auditing system for public
finances.
When it comes to security sector reform, as for
all reforms, there is no substitute for national
ownership. It is in this spirit that Luxembourg has had
the honour to support, together with the United Nations
Development Programme, the meeting that was
organized by the African Union Commission in May to
allow its member States’ experts to consider the draft
African Union policy framework on security sector
reform, which we hope will be adopted by heads of
State and Government at the next African Union
Summit, to be held in January 2012 in Addis Ababa.
It is in the same spirit that my country has
contributed for several years to the Office of Rule of
Law and Security Institutions in the Department of

27

S/PV.6630

Peacekeeping Operations in order to support its SSR
activities. In particular, we have supported the rapid
deployment of experts to advise countries engaged in
security sector reform, according to their needs and at
the request of their national authorities.
Many problems affecting the security sector are
by their very nature regional or international. My
country is convinced that in a spirit of effective
multilateralism, all must bear their share of
responsibility — the United Nations, the African
Union, African regional economic communities such as
the Economic Community of West African States, as
well as the European Union and bilateral partners. The
Treaty of Lisbon has further reinforced the European
Union’s comprehensive approach to SSR by putting the
relevant policy instruments under one roof, the
European External Action Service. In its national
capacity and as a member State of the European Union
and the United Nations, Luxembourg is resolved to
maintain its commitment to SSR, including through its
participation in the work of the Group of Friends in
New York.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I too wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate and
providing a very useful concept note (S/2011/627). I
would also like to express my deep appreciation to
Under-Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous for his
briefing, which gives us a broad picture of the
challenges we face in security sector reform (SSR).
This debate could not come at a better time, for
we need to take stock of the progress made by the
United Nations in its approach to security sector
reform, and to assess the international and regional
support available to countries, which have to uphold
the rule of law and the State institutions that protect
their citizens and borders.
In the past 20 years, our understanding of
security has evolved from a militaristic, State-centric
perspective to a broader view of the various critical
institutions and actors, State and non-State, that are
security providers when they function properly and a
possible source of instability when they are inefficient
or corrupt. Shifting away from an exclusive focus on
State security, the international community has
developed an approach that emphasizes human security
and the institutions that provide security and justice.

28

The current security sector reform concept took
shape four years ago during the 2007 debate (see
S/PV.5632). Today we continue to build on lessons
learned and on a new, consistent and comprehensive
approach to SSR that includes the improvement of
security institutions, the rule of law, good governance,
respect for human rights, and international cooperation.
We all agree that the key to the security sector reform
process is country ownership and donor support of
every aspect of reform activities in partner countries.
Today, we all realize that to foster and grow
national ownership, we have to work with
Governments and local security institutions from the
assessment phase to planning, and from joint
implementation of programmes to policy reviews and
assessment of lessons learned. No country should buy
into donor methods or ideas. It is the reality of people’s
immediate needs, and their capacity and commitment,
that should influence the pace and trajectory of change
and inject security institutions with equal doses of
accountability and effectiveness. The United Nations
and the Security Council have a leading role to play in
defining security sector reform policy. That policy’s
goal is nationally led coordination that includes all
stakeholders, ranging from regional organizations to
donors and local authorities.
NATO has traditionally been a prime mover in
defence and security sector reform in Europe and in
assisting partner countries. Since the Helsinki Final
Act, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe has accumulated extensive experience in
activities as varied as the democratic control of armed
forces, border security and management, counterterrorism, anti-trafficking, police training and reform,
anti-corruption, electoral legislation and judicial
reform. The European Union has an indisputable
security sector reform record, having provided
assistance to more than 70 countries in the past five
years. It has built on the experience of its member
States in lending unprecedented levels of support to
partner countries in Africa and elsewhere. Italian
women and men have long been involved in a broad
international programme supporting SSR processes in
south-eastern Europe, Asia and Africa in building and
restoring the rule of law and security institutions. In
the past two years, Italy has launched several
programmes aimed at assisting the federal and regional
Governments of Somalia.

11-54194

S/PV.6630

Security sector reform does indeed matter,
particularly in peacetime. Sometimes it is too late and
too expensive, politically and financially, to effectively
support the security sector in a country or territory
where violence has already erupted and a full-scale
crisis is under way. SSR is always preferable as a
preventive measure for helping to ensure full
ownership by the recipient country.
Many of the security challenges faced by African
countries are also the result of the intersection of
economic, social and political factors. This same
interconnection of needs in many regions of Africa is
clear in a number of fields: preventing and combating
terrorism
and
transnational
organized
crime;
anti-narcotics operations; combating illegal trafficking
in weapons and human beings; and preventing money
laundering and other illegal financial activities.
The common security challenges faced by all
African actors indicate the need for an innovative and
holistic approach based on international cooperation.
The first step is to strengthen regional cooperation,
including by involving regional and subregional
organizations, especially the African Union and
regional economic communities such as the Economic
Community of West African States, and enhancing
their ownership. We must also broaden our perspective
and fully involve the main international actors in
cooperating in a comprehensive way on the African
continent.
Both the United Nations and the Counterterrorism
Action Group of the Group of Eight are trying to
address these threats comprehensively and ensure
coordination with all the relevant actors. The time has
come to introduce cooperation mechanisms that will
help us identify and prioritize initiatives, while fully
respecting the principle of co-ownership. The starting
point is to identify clear-cut consultation methods,
which could be directed to gather input from countries
in the various regions, assess and match that input and
outline initiatives that would be eligible for funding by
relevant financial instruments. Areas for possible
action could include the fight against terrorism and
transnational organized crime; the fight against illegal
immigration, cross-border co-development initiatives;
training; the environment; civil protection; the
sustainable development of natural resources; and the
management of natural disasters.

11-54194

Many other potential areas of intervention require
broad-based strategies that take into account the shared
needs of countries from different regions in order to
better integrate such initiatives as the development of
border areas, both economically and socially; training
and investing in human resources; and protecting the
environment. These, we believe, are just a few
examples of areas in which a cross-regional approach
is inevitable.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Štiglic (Slovenia): I would like to thank
Nigeria for organizing this meeting and for the
opportunity to present Slovenia’s views on this subject,
which is of paramount importance to the United
Nations and its membership. This debate is both timely
and needed. Over the years, security sector reform
(SSR) has become an integral part of the efforts of the
international community to holistically address various
post-conflict situations around the world, especially in
Africa.
I will be short and concise, since previous
speakers have already outlined the main challenges that
SSR faces in the near future. These challenges must be
understood as an opportunity to enhance our common
efforts, not just for a better understanding of the reform
processes but also to agree on a set of tools and
mechanisms that will enable us to deal better with postconflict situations.
Security sector reform does not happen in a void.
It always involves other issues, problems and questions
that, more often than not, are linked closely together.
That is my first point. Security sector reform can be
successful only when it is properly integrated into the
environment and linked to all the other efforts already
taking place in the recipient State. In the light of that, I
would like to stress the importance of the link between
SSR and development activities.
The SSR process involves many issues that can
be dealt with efficiently only by development
instruments, including employment for youth and
securing livelihoods for high-risk populations.
Recognition of that link must be properly implemented
by ensuring timely and constructive coordination
between the two activities.
Slovenia understands SSR as a long-term conflict
prevention tool. Successful reform of the security

29

S/PV.6630

sector of any country is a prerequisite for irreversible
stability and sustainable development. In that regard,
SSR must not be confined within the specific
timeframe of the conflict aftermath, but must be
carefully place within the entire framework of
peacebuilding and conflict prevention efforts in the
recipient State. SSR can be efficient only when all of
the actors in the process actively, transparently and in a
coordinated manner strive to achieve the same goal.
While international actors have made important
strides in ensuring coordination and transparency
among themselves, there is still room for improvement,
especially on cooperation among State actors and civil
society or non-governmental organizations. Slovenia
has openly advocated the early involvement of the
recipient State in preparations for the SSR process,
since that is the only way to ensure a locally owned,
locally supported and locally tailored process, which is
quintessential to any SSR project. We would also like
to point out that a better level of coordination must be
achieved with respect to local civil society, which has
knowledge and understanding of the local environment
and its needs and issues.
SSR has become an essential part of almost any
peacekeeping operation or crisis management mission
of the United Nations. This means that the missions are
becoming more complex and more demanding. We
should ensure that the training curriculum for staff of
the various missions includes SSR-related subjects. It
is also important to ensure the continuity of the
mission’s know-how in the recruitment processes and
institutional memory of peacekeeping operations in the
field.
The promotion of gender perspectives in SSR is
of essential importance to Slovenia. Peacekeeping
operations can also play a positive role in promoting
gender-sensitive SSR and developing security services
that better respond to women’s needs, both through
examples of deployed female peacekeepers and police
to encourage more women to serve in the reformed
security sector of the host Government, and through
the provision of gender expertise in support of SSR
processes.
The reintegration of child soldiers into society is
another issue where Slovenia has played an active role
over the years. Disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and security sector reform offer
complementary approaches that can link the

30

reintegration of ex-combatants to enhanced community
security. Child-specific reintegration in that regard
must enable a child’s access to education, a livelihood,
life skills and a meaningful role in society. Last but not
least, justice should be served in order to remedy past
atrocities. There is no long-lasting peace and reform
without justice.
Finally, let me reiterate once again that Slovenia
will remain fully committed to supporting a profound
dialogue among all stakeholders in developing
effective SSR guidelines.
The President: I now invite the representative of
the Sudan to take the floor.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, on convening this important
meeting to address the issue of security sector reform
(SSR). The historic reference point of that subject has
been linked to Africa since the very beginning. The
earliest United Nations security SSR were
implemented in African countries during the
post-independence era, when a number of ad hoc
programmes were implemented in order to reform
police, prisons and security sectors, among others, in
many African and Asian countries.
At that time, SSR enjoyed broad and generous
support, including among specialized United Nations
funds, international financial institutions and bilateral
donors, as a result of full commitment to the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations that
underline national ownership and respect for the
sovereignty and independence of States.
My delegation emphasizes adherence to the
presidential statement issued by this Council in its first
deliberations on SSR in 2007 (S/PV.5632), in which
the Council underlined
“that it is the sovereign right and the primary
responsibility of the country concerned to
determine the national approach and priorities of
security sector reform”. (S/PRST/2007/3, p. 1)
We therefore endorse the objectives of United
Nations initiatives aimed at building SSR capacities,
especially in post-conflict countries, by providing
various forms of technical, information, training and
support to bolster security and stability following the
withdrawal of peacekeeping missions from the
concerned country or after its transition from conflict
to peacebuilding.

11-54194

S/PV.6630

However, we draw attention to the need for
caution to avoid the use of that term to define paths
that run counter to the national sovereignty of a
concerned State, in particular in the context of
interference in legislative and executive activities and
with respect to the police, security, penal and military
sectors of those States. The laws concerning such
institutions are part and parcel of the legal system of
the State concerned and of its Constitution.
We note the international workshop held in Cape
Town, South Africa, in 2007 on coordinating United
Nations SSR support in African countries. The
workshop offered a good opportunity to shed light on
the African experience in that respect, particularly the
effective role of regional partners, in particular the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the Southern African Development
Community.
Regional and subregional organizations, given
their direct links to the political, social and cultural
situations in African countries, are best able to
understand all of the dimensions of SSR in their
regions. They are thus most capable of appropriately
defining the needs or programmes to be implemented
by the United Nations in the concerned State, pursuant
to that country’s request and within the framework of
understanding and coordination between that country
and the United Nations, based on the principle of
national
ownership
as
an
inalienable
and
non-negotiable right and the fact that the police,
security and judicial sectors are sovereign departments.
We also wish to draw attention to the importance
of providing specific guidelines as a starting point
when formulating and setting up United Nations SSR
initiatives. We pay tribute to the Secretary-General for
his initiatives and efforts to invigorate the role of the
United Nations and the Security Council in SSR in
post-conflict countries. In this respect, we wish to
commend him for his comprehensive report
(S/2008/39), presented to the Council in February
2008.
We stress the importance of the integrated
security and development axes of sustainable peace.
The United Nations Millennium Declaration, adopted
at the Millennium Summit (General Assembly
resolution 55/2), underscored that concept as the main
guarantee of success in achieving the MDGs and in

11-54194

preventing relapsing from peace back into war in postconflict countries.
In closing, we hope that our deliberations today
on this topic will lead to an integrated approach that
meets the goals of SSR, while respecting the
sovereignty of States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
Allow me to start by expressing the Movement’s
appreciation to the Nigerian presidency for organizing
this important debate, and to you, Mr. Minister, for
chairing the meeting personally, to focus on the issue
of security sector reform (SSR), which is of major
importance to all countries emerging from conflicts,
particularly in Africa. The Movement believes that
today’s debate comes at a very timely moment, as it
provides a valuable addition to our debate in the
General Assembly yesterday on the causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa (see A/66/PVs.32 and 33). The
Movement also expresses its appreciation to Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his briefing today.
Today’s debate constitutes an integral part of a
broader discussion about the interlinkages among
peace, security and development as mutually
reinforcing factors, as well as the complementarity
between conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities, and their respective roles at
the different stages of conflict resolution in helping to
build institutional capacities in States emerging from
conflict as well as those in transition.
Overall, the members of the Non-Aligned
Movement contribute more than 80 per cent of the
personnel working in United Nations peacekeeping
operations — the majority of which currently contain
SSR mandates. Members are proponents of every effort
by the United Nations that can contribute to enhancing
peace and security in the flashpoints across the globe,
including activities related to security sector reform
and promotion of the rule of law.
The leaders of the Non-Aligned Movement
underlined in the outcome document of their summit in
Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt, the importance of security

31

S/PV.6630

sector reform in the context of United Nations
peacekeeping and in post-conflict situations. They
stressed that security sector reform should be
integrated into the broad framework of United Nations
rule of law activities in order to ensure that SSR
activities and structures are not duplicating the work
carried out in the rule of law area.
As for the development of a United Nations
approach to SSR, the Non-Aligned Movement believes
that such development must take place in the General
Assembly to ensure that the formulation of strategies
for SSR, including its scope and mandate, is carried out
through the intergovernmental process, taking into
account the primary responsibility and the sovereign
right of the country concerned in determining its
national priorities in this regard.
The Non-Aligned Movement concurs with the
Secretary-General that national ownership should be
the cornerstone of the United Nations SSR approach.
National ownership and adaptability of SSR tools in
particular country contexts must be the key principles
that guide the role of the United Nations in supporting
security sector reform.
From a national perspective, Egypt believes that
security sector reform is not a goal to be pursued in
isolation from addressing other societal challenges to
peace and security in countries emerging from
conflicts. These include youth unemployment,
organized crime, extreme poverty and the lack of
adequate education and health services.
According to the World Development Report of
the World Bank, no low-income, fragile or conflictaffected country has achieved a single Millennium
Development Goal. Therefore, Egypt underlines that
international support to security sector reform must be
anchored in broader capacity-building efforts, aiming
to contribute to addressing the social and economic
causes of conflicts and the complex security
environment in countries emerging from conflict and to
respond to their particular needs and conditions.
Accordingly, we believe that the formulation of a
United Nations approach to security sector reform
requires thorough discussion in the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council, in order to allow
for full participation of the United Nations membership
at large in such an important debate. We also believe
that the Peacebuilding Commission is in a better
position to coordinate the activities of the different

32

organs and agencies of the United Nations in this
regard, particularly in light of the experience that the
Commission has gained through its engagement with
the countries on its agenda.
Furthermore, in order to ensure leadership and
ownership on the part of the recipient country of the
reform process, the recipient country must be fully in
charge of formulating the reform strategy, identifying
gaps, needs and areas of priority as well as
coordinating the international support to avoid
duplication of efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Mr. President, the
Pakistan delegation warmly felicitates the delegation of
Nigeria, for ably steering the work of the Security
Council this month and for convening this important
debate. We are happy to see the Foreign Minister of
Nigeria presiding today. Your participation, Sir, in
today’s debate is propitious for realigning our
collective focus on this important subject. The
presidential statement adopted today (S/PRST/2011/19)
has flagged relevant issues.
Before proceeding, I would like to align Pakistan
with the statement made on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement by the representative of Egypt.
Security sector reform (SSR) is critical in laying
the foundation for durable peace and preventing
relapse into conflict. As a leading troop contributor,
Pakistan is cognizant of the criticality of establishing
an effective security sector for the successful and
timely withdrawal of all peacekeeping missions. A
viable security sector, enjoying the confidence of the
local population, is key to a sustainable transition from
peacekeeping to long-term peacebuilding, economic
recovery and development.
In this brief intervention, we will highlight four
points pertinent to further streamlining our collective
approach to SSR.
First, we acknowledge the important work done
in the United Nations since the Secretary-General’s
report on the subject (S/2008/39) to evolve a rich
discourse on SSR and to build the requisite support
structures in Headquarters as well as in the field. In
this context, the United Nations Inter-Agency SSR
Support Unit, established in 2009, and the Secretary-

11-54194

S/PV.6630

General’s inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task
Force have made positive contributions.
The role of SSR practitioners in Headquarters,
however, needs to be recalibrated to increase their
responsiveness to the field missions. For this, capacitybuilding in the SSR Unit is as essential as utilizing
other structures in the United Nations and regional
organizations, with a view to building cohesion and
avoiding duplication.
Secondly, United Nations peacekeeping missions
are essential for implementing SSR, which forms part
of many current mandates.
Pakistani contingents in various United Nations
peacekeeping missions have supported activities
relating to security sector reform with distinction. An
ongoing example is our contingent in the United
Nations Mission in Liberia. Our troops will continue to
support security sector reform programmes. However,
it is important to underscore that security sector reform
cannot be left to military and police components alone.
Diverse fields, such as judicial reform, border
management, Customs and civil emergencies, warrant a
steady civilian contribution to security sector reform.
Those are areas where the Peacebuilding Commission,
and its various configurations, can play a role through
the financial resources catalysed by the Peacebuilding
Fund.
Most important, a regional organization plays a
central role in articulating a framework for multilateral
security sector reform efforts. I will take this
opportunity to highlight the very commendable role
played by the African Union in developing a security
sector reform policy framework for implementation.
The African Union’s engagement with security sector
reform augurs well for the maintenance of peace and
security on the continent. For that, the efforts
undertaken by the African leadership must be
supported wholeheartedly by the United Nations. For
our part, Pakistan supports Africa in that very
important initiative.
Finally, our collective approach to security sector
reform must resonate with established international
principles, consistent with the United Nations Charter.
Security sector reform can be neither imposed nor seen
to be imposed on a reluctant host Government.
Successful and sustainable security sector reform rests
on the principle of national ownership. The inclusive
participation of the host authorities and capacity-

11-54194

building on professional grounds are vital ingredients
for national ownership. The engagement of civil
society and key stakeholders, however nascent those
may be in a post-conflict zone, will help consolidate
the gains made in security sector reform programmes.
I will conclude by referring to the latest report of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
(A/65/19). I remind the Secretariat to continue its
briefings to Member States on developments relating to
security sector reform, particularly regarding the
support provided to field missions. We can all stand to
benefit from such briefings.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
Nigeria for having convened this debate. Your own
personal presence as President today, Sir, emphasizes
how important this debate is. I am acutely conscious of
the pressures of being the last speaker so I will
abbreviate my written statement to save time.
The primary focus of today’s debate, of course, is
Africa. However, Australia has learned a number of
lessons from our own cooperation on security sector
reform with the countries of our region, Asia-Pacific,
that may be useful to share. I will briefly mention three
of those.
First is the importance of national ownership and
leadership. Member States are the central providers of
security, of course, in their own countries. That is both
their sovereign right and, naturally, their responsibility.
National ownership is critical to ensuring legitimacy
and sustainability. The role of the international
community is to enhance the ability of States to fulfil
that responsibility. With regard to national leadership,
effective security sector reform requires national
authorities to generate and drive forward a strategic
vision for their security sectors. That requires political
commitment and a strong buy-in from all those
involved, including civil society. The participation of
women is of course central.
Security sector reform cannot be a short-term
project. Long-term horizons are required to foster a
culture of transparency and accountability and to build
confidence and the necessary constituency for change.
The Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon
Islands (RAMSI), which is an Australia-led regional
peacekeeping, or peacebuilding, mission, has taught us

33

S/PV.6630

lessons about national ownership. Mechanisms for such
ownership have evolved over time. Today, cooperation
between RAMSI and Solomon Islands is governed by a
partnership arrangement that very carefully sets out
mutually agreed milestones and time frames. By way
of example, the police component of RAMSI has
progressively stepped back from front-line policing to
its current focus on capacity-building, such as
leadership development and review of the policing and
security legislative framework.
The second lesson is the importance of taking a
comprehensive and integrated approach. As we know,
many security sector reform initiatives fail because of
their narrow technical focus and inadequate
understanding of the social and political contexts.
Security sector reform requires a comprehensive
approach, beyond the simple train-and-equip
programmes. Security sector reform should ideally take
place as part of a wider public sector reform and focus
not only on the military, but also civil society, the
police and the justice sector. The most effective reform
is matched and complemented by the development of
strong democratic institutions, including parliamentary
oversight of security forces.
Again, RAMSI provides a strong model for an
integrated approach. From the outset, it has worked to
support reform in all aspects of the security sector,
from the police, Customs, border control, prisons and
the judicial system to public financial management
institutions.
The third lesson is the key role that can be played
by regional organizations and South-South and
triangular cooperation. Regional and subregional
organizations can have a unique legitimacy and a very
important role in fostering regional cooperation. As we
know, regional organizations and neighbouring States
can have very distinct comparative advantages, not
least in terms of cultural awareness and language
skills.

Again, RAMSI, which operates under the
auspices of the Pacific Islands Forum, provides a
strong example. Over the past eight years, thousands of
police, military and civilian personnel from across the
Pacific region have served with the Mission, bringing
important experience, cultural perspectives and
language skills to RAMSI’s work.
In Africa, we note the impressive work that the
African Union (AU) is taking forward, particularly the
development of the continental security sector reform
policy framework. Australia remains ready to assist in
that work, particularly in the area of the protection of
civilians.
My final comments are on the role of the United
Nations but, to save time, I will leave those to be read
in my circulated statement. I would emphasize only
that United Nations actors must be integrated. The
inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task Force, the
Department of Political Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations have an essential role.
Secondly, close collaboration with the World Bank and
other development partners is essential. Thirdly, the
United Nations needs to support the security sector
reform work of regional organizations. The United
Nations-AU cooperation is an excellent example.
Fourthly, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund do important work, particularly on
lessons learned, which must be highlighted.
To conclude, I thank you again, Mr. President, for
having convened this debate. In its essence, security
sector reform is about reshaping the institutions that
serve and protect a country’s citizens. Obviously, there
are very few subjects more important to the Council’s
work.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

34

11-54194
