S/PV.8341

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8341st meeting

Wednesday, 5 September 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cohen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Almunayekh
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2018/780)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-27652 (E)
*1827652*

S/PV.8341

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2018/780)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Salamé is joining the meeting via video
tele-conference from Tripoli.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/780, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Salamé and Ambassador Olof Skoog,
Permanent Representative of Sweden, in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
I give the floor to Mr. Salamé.
Mr. Salamé: I would like to congratulate the United
States of America on its presidency of the Security
Council this month and thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to update the Council.
In each and every briefing I have given to the
Council, I have stated that the status quo in Libya is
untenable. The violence that consumed the capital
beginning on 26 August shattered the façade of calm
that had prevailed in Tripoli since May 2017. Tanks
and heavy artillery were deployed into residential
neighbourhoods. Sixty-one Libyans were killed and
159 injured. Many of those who died were civilians,
including children. Families were forced to flee their
homes. Looting and crime became commonplace as
2/21

05/09/2018

gangs took to the streets. Hundreds of criminals broke
out of prison. Migrants were either trapped in detention
centres or turned onto the street. The city stood on the
brink of all-out war.
On 4 September, the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) brokered a ceasefire between the
major parties to the conflict. That has effectively halted
the fighting and started the restoration of some order
to the city. The Mission is now working to protect that
fragile peace and enable it to take root. As a first step,
we are offering technical assistance and good offices
in support of the ceasefire. Groups that violate the
ceasefire must be held to account. The United Nations
and the international community are watching each and
every one of them. The time for impunity is behind us.
We will not allow a repeat of 2014.
This outbreak of violence is but the latest in a
series of crises that have engulfed Libya. The events
surrounding the oil crescent region in June and July
effectively threatened to split the country. In the past
few weeks, the nation has lurched from one emergency
to another.
On 10 August, armed groups forcibly evicted
displaced Tawerghan families from the Tariq
Al-Matar camp for internally displaced persons. Some
Tawerghans were killed and injured. Homes were
demolished and those Libyans were forced to flee,
leaving them homeless for a second time in seven years.
Despite the welcome return of several more families to
Tawergha — totalling approximately 100 families by
the end of August — basic infrastructure and services
are still lacking, making a dignified return very
difficult. We have warned all armed groups against
any repetition of that totally unlawful behaviour. The
forced displacement of people is unacceptable, and
of those already displaced, doubly so. That was made
clear to all those tempted by it.
After the horrendous attack on the High National
Electoral Commission of 2 May, on 23 August the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) claimed
responsibility for an attack near Zliten, which claimed
the lives of four police officers. ISIL presence and
operations in Libya are only spreading. I alert the
Council of the possibility that Libya may become a
shelter for terrorist groups of all persuasions and ask
the Council to help address with that looming threat.
In recent weeks, the Chadian Government and
Chadian opposition forces have been fighting one
18-27652

05/09/2018

The situation in Libya

another, operating from southern Libya. Over 1,000
fighters have been involved in the hostilities, risking the
south becoming a regional battleground and safe haven
for foreign armed groups. The recent agreement signed
between Chad, the Sudan, the Niger and Libya needs to
be implemented so that Libya does not also become an
alternative battleground for others. The signatories have
asked for support from the international community
for the implementation of those agreements, and I
hope that Council members will positively consider
their requests.
In the eastern city of Derna, sporadic clashes and
air raids continue. The United Nations is facilitating
humanitarian assistance to affected families in the city.
I reiterate my call upon all parties to exercise restraint
and protect the lives of innocent civilians.
Abuse and exploitation abound within prisons and
detention centres, which we continue to have great
difficulty accessing, both in the east and in the west.
Refugees and asylum seekers in detention centres have
resorted to hunger strikes as a means to resolve their
bleak living circumstances. That situation should,
however, not be used as an excuse for any armed group
to open the gates to terrorists and criminals interned or
to displace them to other locations.
All the while, the citizens of the country suffer
deteriorating standards of living, as they have
for the past years. Now, for many, every day is a
personal emergency.
We must not return to the status quo ante. In
crisis lies the opportunity to tackle the underlying
causes. To restore stability to Libya, there is an urgent
need to establish strong and unified civilian and
military institutions that work for the benefit of all
citizens. The Mission is now focusing its work in two
intertwined areas.
First, and in order to underpin the ceasefire, we are
working to revise the security arrangements in Tripoli
in order to reduce the influence of groups that use arms
to achieve their parochial goals. In the coming days,
UNSMIL will continue to hold broad consultations to
strengthen the ceasefire and assist in the establishment
of a monitoring mechanism. At the same time, we
will continue to work with our Libyan counterparts to
identify concrete steps towards reshaping security in the
capital and developing more sustainable arrangements.
UNSMIL will endeavour to facilitate that effort in an
inclusive and pragmatic fashion, laying the foundations

S/PV. 8341

for longer-term efforts to stabilize the country through
the reunification of the security sector institutions.
The previous security configuration empowered
groups that acted in a predatory manner against
the residents of the capital, against the State and
against sovereign institutions. Indeed, members of
some armed groups, nominally acting under the
Ministry of the Interior, have kidnapped, tortured
and murdered employees of sovereign institutions,
including the National Oil Corporation and the Libyan
Investment Authority.
Our public criticism of the predatory behaviour of
armed groups in the capital was warmly welcomed by
Libyans, who are fed up with living on the poverty line
while their national resources are looted by gunmen
turned millionaires. Our stand has produced a salutary
impact in many cases. The State capture must end — not
to the benefit of other armed groups, but with the full
control of the legitimate authorities. The Council’s
support on that is crucial.
The Mission’s second priority is to address the
economic issues that underpin the crisis and erode
the daily lives of citizens across the country. I would
like to state plainly that if an end is not put to the
plundering, there is little chance that we can move
either the economic reforms or the political process.
We urge action on the agreed upon economic reforms,
which are essential and overdue. I call upon the Central
Bank of Libya and the Government of National Accord
to immediately move forward on currency exchange
rate and subsidy reforms. We are also committed to
advocating for a more equitable distribution of wealth
in Libya, focused not on appeasing groups based on
their military strength, but on providing for citizens
based on their need.
UNSMIL believes that the request of Prime
Minister Faiez Serraj for international support for
a financial review is a valuable opportunity to bring
transparency and accountability to how the country’s
wealth is managed. In response to the Security
Council’s request of 19 July to the Mission to provide
suggestions on the modalities of such a review, I have
been engaged with Libyan and international partners.
I convened the Governor of the internationally
recognized Central Bank of Libya in Tripoli and the
head of the parallel Central Bank in the east for a
meeting at the UNSMIL office to agree on the broad
parameters of the review. On 24 August, the Secretary-

18-276523/21

S/PV.8341

The situation in Libya

General submitted to the Council my proposals for how
to proceed. That preliminary process has created hope,
with many Libyans welcoming the meeting of the two
officials — something that has not happened in the past
four years. That was a first step towards unifying the
Central Bank, which is a crucial step towards unifying
the country.
When the political process grinds to a halt, some
will believe that there is opportunity to force change
through the barrel of a gun. The Libyan public has
made a clear decision on how this change should come
to pass — peacefully and democratically through
elections. That was widely reflected during the national
conference consultations, a report on which is currently
being prepared.
It should come as no surprise that the Libyans want
change in their political leadership. The members of
the House of Representatives were elected over four
years ago by around 15 per cent of the population. The
members of the High Council of State, which represents
a fraction of the members of the General National
Congress, were elected six years ago. The members of
the Government of National Accord assumed their roles
not through elections but by appointment, and many of
them have been inactive for a long while.
If national elections are to take place, a number of
conditions must be met. They will require great effort to
achieve, but they are achievable. The United Nations is
working hard to put those conditions in place and thanks
the international community for its support. Time and
time again, the House of Representatives has promised
to produce referendum and election legislation. After
three sessions dedicated to the referendum law and
numerous delays, the House of Representatives has
failed to deliver that legislation. Those who have an
interest in maintaining the status quo have spared no
efforts to resist the needed change.
I will not mince words. Many members of the House
of Representatives are failing to do their job. They seek
to subvert the political process to their own ends, behind
the guise of procedure. It is clear that they simply have
no intention of relinquishing their positions. They have
put in place legal provisions to maintain their authority
in perpetuity. For the personal ambitions of a few, all
Libya’s citizens have paid a steep price. I welcome any
rapprochement between the two Houses and take note
of their recent meetings in Tripoli, but that activity must
4/21

05/09/2018

be directed towards advancing the political process, not
towards ensuring their longevity.
In line with instructions from the SecretaryGeneral, I have been exhausting the traditional avenues
to move the legislative process forward. So far, they
have either been blocked or designed to lead nowhere.
If legislation is not produced soon, we will close the
chapter on that approach. There are other ways to
achieve peaceful political change, and we will embrace
them with no hesitation but, indeed, with enthusiasm.
I am fully aware that the members of the Council are
not mere spectators to the Libyan’s crisis; members want
it over as soon as possible. Their unified, determined
and vocal position is what the Libyans need to hear if
the citizens of that country are to enjoy the peace and
tranquility that they are desperately looking for.
The President: I thank Mr. Salamé for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Skoog.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): In accordance with paragraph
24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011) of 26 February 2011, I
have the honour to report to the Security Council on
the work of the Committee established by the same
resolution. The report covers the period from 17 July
to 5 September, during which time the Committee met
once in informal consultations and conducted additional
work via the written silence procedure.
During the informal consultations held on
23 August, the Committee heard a presentation by the
Panel of Experts on its final report under resolution 2376
(2017) and discussed the recommendations contained
therein. I will not summarize the report, as it will be
published shortly. As per practice, Libya was invited to
read the report, after discussion in the Committee and
prior to publication, in the offices of the Secretariat.
Committee members expressed their support and
appreciation for the work of the Panel of Experts. The
main issues raised during the discussion included
violations of the arms embargo; violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law, including in
the context of human trafficking and migrant smuggling;
illicit exports of crude oil and refined petroleum
products from Libya; and the implementation of the
assets freeze. Of the 14 recommendations contained
in the report, seven are addressed to the Security
Council and seven to the Committee. Of the seven
recommendations addressed to the Committee, the
Committee agreed to take follow-up action on two. The
18-27652

05/09/2018

The situation in Libya

Committee requested additional written justification
from the Panel regarding three recommendations. The
remaining two recommendations require no Committee
action at this stage.
With respect to the arms embargo, the Committee
received a request for exemption, invoking paragraph 9 (c)
of resolution 1970 (2011), from Malta. Consideration of
that request is ongoing.
Concerning the measures aimed at preventing illicit
exports of petroleum, including crude oil and refined
petroleum products, the Committee received a vessel
designation request. The Committee referred the matter
back to the requesting State seeking some clarification
and recalling the procedures contained in resolution
2146 (2014), as modified and extended by resolution
2362 (2017). The Committee also sent a letter to Libya
seeking any information it may possess in relation to
the matter.
With respect to the asset freeze, the Committee
received a notification, invoking paragraph 19 (a)
of resolution 1970 (2011), from the United Kingdom,
regarding the legal expenses of a listed entity, the
Libyan Investment Authority.
In connection with the travel ban, the Committee
approved an extension to the exemption request
submitted on behalf of Mr. Sayyid Mohammed Qadhaf
Al-Dam, who had been authorized to travel from
Libya to Egypt on the grounds of humanitarian needs.
The Committee also approved an extension request
submitted by Ms. Safia Farkash Al-Barassi, who had
been authorized to travel from Egypt to Oman, on the
same grounds.
During the period under review, the Committee
received communications from the Focal Point for
De-listing, established pursuant to resolution 1730
(2006), in connection with the de-listing requests, from
the travel ban measures only, of Ms. Fakash Al-Barassi
and Ms. Aisha Al-Qadhafi. The process of consideration
of both de-listing requests is ongoing.
Lastly, I received a letter from the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005) concerning the Sudan, proposing the convening
of a joint meeting with that Committee, as well as the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan, to discuss the activities
and presence of Darfuri rebels in Libya and South Sudan.
A specific date for that joint meeting, which would be

S/PV. 8341

the second such meeting, is yet to be determined. The
Committee also received an implementation report
from a Member State.
The President: I thank Ambassador Skoog for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General not only for
his very sobering briefing, but also for all his work on
Libya. Through him, we would pass on our thanks to
his team.
The first point I would like to make is to strongly
condemn the escalation of violence in and around
Tripoli that has caused many casualties and endangered
the lives of innocent civilians. That does not help the
Libyan people, and it also does not help the cause of
Libya’s stability. While the results of the mediation
efforts reached yesterday in Tripoli by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) are very
welcome, we hope that they will help us to de-escalate
the violence and ensure the protection of civilians.
However, I think from what the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General said, it is very clear that
there is a lot more to be done and that there are a lot of
underlying factors that really need to be tackled.
I want to set out our very strong support for the
Special Representative. We need a durable cessation
of hostilities in Tripoli. That is a critical step to
advancing the political process, in accordance with
the United Nations action plan. We call on all parties
to cease hostilities and immediately abide by the
ceasefire agreement brokered by the United Nations.
We reiterate our support for the Presidency Council
and the Government of National Accord as they work
with the United Nations to promote reconciliation and
a Libyan-led political process. That is underscored
even more by the events in Tripoli. A more inclusive
political statement would help bring greater stability to
Libya. That is a truism, but the whole point of truisms
is that they are correct. The Secretary-General’s
report (S/2018/780) of 24 August on UNSMIL rightly
highlights the need for progress on the implementation
of the United Nations action plan.
I also want to express the United Kingdom’s support
for elections this year. Elections are an important part
of Libya’s transition, but it will be necessary to ensure

18-276525/21

S/PV.8341

The situation in Libya

that sufficient political security and that technical
preparations be made, so that they have the effect of
uniting Libya. It will be important to ensure that a
robust legal framework is in place and that there is
sufficient political consensus to avoid exacerbating
existing divisions in Libya.
The counter-terrorism threat is, of course, a very
important issue, but I just wanted to register our concern
at the humanitarian situation in Derna, to emphasize
the need to allow humanitarian access for the civilian
population, and to say that those responsible for human
rights abuses will need to be held to account. Based on
that, we have a number of action points that we would
like to call for today.
The first call is on all Libyan parties to refrain from
actions that undermine the ceasefire announcement,
jeopardize the security of civilians or set back Libyan
efforts to advance the political process. The second
is to call on the House of Representatives to deliver
progress on a constitutional basis for the elections.
What we heard from the Special Representative about
the problem was frankly dismaying. Failure to sort that
out will cause further stagnation and the only people
who will lose are the Libyan people. We call on Libya’s
leaders to work together to address the suffering of the
Libyan people while the election preparations are under
way. They urgently need to agree economic reforms and
unify Libya’s economic institutions to ensure a more
equitable distribution of wealth across the country. We
also encourage progress on the Prime Minister’s request
to enhance transparency in the Central Bank of Libya.
Finally, I should like to say a word about oil. We
welcome the resolution of recent events in the oil
crescent, and we welcome the fact that Libya’s National
Oil Corporation is continuing its vital work on behalf of
all Libyans. The priority now is to repair infrastructure,
honour contractual obligations and, having lifted the
state of emergency in eastern Libya, to restore oil
exports and production.
It is very important that the Council remain in very
close touch with the Special Representative, given the
situation on the ground. We are very happy to do that
if Council members would find it helpful. We are also
ready to circulate a draft press statement.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, for
his very clear and powerful briefing on the latest
6/21

05/09/2018

developments in Libya. I also want to thank the Swedish
Ambassador for his briefing on the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
First, I echo the sentiments of previous speakers
in voicing France’s alarm in the light of recent
developments in Tripoli. For 10 days, the security
situation in the Libyan capital has deteriorated sharply,
with grave humanitarian consequences that risk
jeopardizing the political process. The clashes are
unacceptable. France has expressed its condemnation of
the violence, both in its national capacity and alongside
its partners, and called for the actors to put an end to
them. We commend the efforts and commitment of the
Secretary-General and of his Special Representative,
which made it possible to reach a ceasefire yesterday.
We are resolutely committed at their side and within
the Council in order to ensure that the return to calm is
both effective and lasting.
Secondly, countering all elements that jeopardize
the fragile political balance and take advantage of the
situation to ransack Libya’s economic resources must
remain our priority. The Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/780) is crystal clear in that regard. The Special
Representative has underscored that point on several
occasions before the Council. Economic predation
endangers the political, security and social balance in
Libya. Moreover, the latest clashes in Tripoli seem to
have been partially financially motivated.
The humanitarian situation is also a matter of
concern, particularly the plight of migrants and
refugees, who are victims of human rights violations.
France therefore calls upon the Libyan authorities to
do their utmost, in partnership with the international
community, to ensure that migrants and refugees are
treated with dignity. This is a priority for the protection
of human rights and the fight against organized crime,
which will be more successful once a political settlement
in Libya can strengthen Libya’s national institutions. It
is important that the international community reiterate
that anyone who threatens Lybia’s peace, security and
stability will be subject to international sanctions, in
line with the resolutions of the Council.
Thirdly, it is more important than ever to make
headway in the democratic transition in Libya. At this
sensitive time, it is all the more critical to unanimously
reaffirm our support for Mr. Salamé’s road map, as we
did on 16 July (see S/PV.8312). The Libyan stakeholders
18-27652

05/09/2018

The situation in Libya

must work with the Special Representative to advance
the political process without pushing back the deadlines
on the pretext that situation does not allow for it.
Let us not deceive ourselves. The enemy of Libya
and of Libyans is the status quo, for the status quo
means an economy of predation and a playground
for traffickers and organized crime, which are like a
disease seeking to destroy our joint efforts in Libya. We
cannot allow that, which is why it is essential to move
forward along the clear path outlined by Mr. Salamé.
In order to do so, it is critical to organize elections
according to the timetable agreed on 29 May in Paris
by the four key players on the Libyan political stage,
who pledged before the international community to
adopt a constitutional basis for the country and to hold
presidential and legislative elections on 10 December.
Upholding those commitments is crucial if we
are to escape the current stagnation, which only fuels
instability. Libyans need progress and want elections.
The enthusiasm for being included on the voter registry,
as indicated in regular polls, is unambiguous. That is
also the Secretary-General’s first observation in the
report under consideration today. Since the mandate of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
is soon to be renewed, France remains fully committed
to supporting the implementation of the Special
Representative’s road map, particularly with regard to
the preparation for elections. France will therefore back
a one-year renewal of the UNSMIL mandate in order
to build upon the current political momentum and to
breathe new life into it. On behalf of France, I reiterate
our full confidence in Mr. Salamé and pledge our full
support to him. We also underscore the need for the
Security Council to remain firmly united in backing
his efforts and the efforts of the United Nations.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
expresses its thanks for the briefing presented by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL), Mr. Ghassan Salamé. We take this
opportunity to convey our unconditional support
for the tireless discharge of his duties to bring about
a unified, peaceful and prosperous Libya. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his 24 August
report (S/2018/780), and express our gratitude to His
Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Permanent Representative
of Sweden, for his briefing in his capacity as Chair of

S/PV. 8341

the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
We wish to begin our statement by condemning the
escalation of violence we have seen starting last week
in Tripoli due to clashes among various armed groups.
We are pleased that, thanks to the great efforts of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
under Mr. Salamé and the meetings held with the parties
concerned, a cessation of hostilities agreement has been
reached to put an end to the clashes, which have claimed
dozens of lives, injured many, caused significant
material damage and exacerbated the humanitarian
situation. Consequently, we call on all parties to respect
the agreement reached yesterday, 4 September, and to
find lasting, peaceful solutions to ensure the security
of the people of Libya and its institutions. Health and
humanitarian aid personnel must be granted access
in order to help the victims without risking their own
lives. We therefore urge Libyan authorities to cooperate
to that end.
We would be remiss if we did not express our
condolences and respect to the people of Libya for the
innocent lives lost during the clashes. We also wish
to stress that the perpetrators of such acts must be
inexorably brought to justice. Those events show the
critical importance of carrying out the comprehensive
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement and
the United Nations action plan for the country with a
view to definitively bringing the long transition period
to an end. Those instruments can hardly be implemented
if the country continues to be fragmented into different
factions, with various power centres, especially given
the significant role of armed groups acting with total
impunity and the influence of such groups in political
and socioeconomic sectors, as well as the uncontrolled,
illegal flow of weapons, despite the measures imposed
by the Council. The parties to the conflict must refrain
from taking actions that could exacerbate the already
complex situation.
All of that leads us to what has been repeated on
various occasions: Lybia’s stability primarily requires
reconciliation through direct, frank and inclusive
dialogue among the parties. In that regard, we once
again commend the work of UNSMIL in particular, as
well as the African Union and the European Union, in
the fervent hope that the presidential and parliamentary
elections can be held later this year as planned and that
Libya can re-emerge and restore normality with a view
to securing a prosperous future. In order to achieve that,

18-276527/21

S/PV.8341

The situation in Libya

the efforts to combat armed groups, smugglers, human
traffickers and terrorist organizations must be ramped
up, and the Government of National Accord given
even greater support so that it can regain full control
and the capacity it needs to govern in total autonomy
and sovereignty, and enabling the Army to be unified,
among many other measures.
In conclusion, we would once again like to highlight
and condemn another worrying issue, which is the
human rights violations that migrants and refugees
are enduring on a daily basis in detention centres in
Libya and at the hands of human-trafficking networks.
Since it is such a lucrative source of income for these
networks, the traffic in human beings bound to continue
until the situation is brought to an end. We therefore
call on the Council to act with urgency, proportionality
and energy to solve the problem, which continues of be
one of enormous concern for Equatorial Guinea. In the
face of these problems, we believe it is vital to rethink
the situation and take appropriate steps. We therefore
want to say that Equatorial Guinea will support all
well-founded, impartial and suitable proposals that can
help to end all acts that constitute violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law and are an
obstacle to the restoration of peace in Libya.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate
the convening of this meeting and the important
briefings by Special Representative Ghassan Salamé
and Ambassador Skoog of Sweden, in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
Peru deplores the outbreaks of violence in Tripoli in
the past few days, especially where they have led to the
death of civilians, including children. We urge all the
parties concerned to respect the ceasefire and protect
civilians. We support the efforts and good offices of
the Special Representative in that regard. We have been
closely following the progress of the implementation of
the United Nations action plan for Libya, as well as the
efforts of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) to facilitate a political solution, led by the
Libyans themselves, that will produce institutions
capable of exercising authority over the entire territory.
In line with the presidential statement of 6 June
(S/PRST/2018/11), we consider the Libyan Political
Agreement to be the only viable framework for
overcoming the current political stalemate among
the main stakeholders, and in order to do that we
8/21

05/09/2018

want to emphasize the importance of improving the
participation of civil society, especially women and
young people. In that regard, we would like to highlight
the role of the National Conference, promoted by the
Special Representative, which has enabled the direct
participation of more than 7,000 citizens in more
than 40 cities, and has channelled their concerns and
expectations in an open and inclusive dialogue. We
look forward to his final report on that.
However, we have to express our concern about
the lack of progress in realizing the changes proposed
by the Political Agreement, owing to the stagnation in
the negotiations between the House of Representatives
and the High Council of State. It is essential that the
parties make a good-faith commitment to reversing the
situation. It will also be essential to continue working to
ensure that the parliamentary and presidential elections
scheduled for December take place as agreed on at the
Paris conference. It is urgent that the relevant rules
be adopted and the necessary security and financing
guaranteed. We also want to emphasize the importance
of mass participation by the country’s citizens,
particularly women and young people, as well as the
various political forces’ commitment to accepting the
election results within the current legal framework and
avoiding any deterioration of security in Libya. We also
underscore how important it is that the international
community and regional organizations maintain their
support throughout the process.
On another topic, we note with concern the
deterioration of the Libyan economy and its potential
impact on the country’s stability. If the conflict is
to be overcome, a commitment on the control and
the transparent and efficient management of the
hydrocarbons that represent the country’s main
resources is essential. In that regard, we eagerly await the
proposals that the Secretary-General has requested for
improving Libya’s financial institutions’ transparency,
unity and operation, based on some essential reforms
that can ensure that the country’s public resources are
managed appropriately, transparently and efficiently.
We believe that the Mission can use its good offices to
promote those efforts, which should include independent
audits and actions aimed at facilitating the legitimate
Libyan authorities’ financial control over the entire
territory and its resources. It will be important to ensure
that there is no repetition of the incidents regarding
the control of oil terminals and increase security at
production facilities. The international community
18-27652

05/09/2018

The situation in Libya

must also be firm and united in recognizing the
legitimate representatives of the Libyan Government.
In that regard, we would like to highlight the decisions
agreed on at the economic dialogue in June, and we join
the Secretary-General’s call to the Libyan authorities to
comply with the economic reforms agreed there.
Lastly, we must express our concern about the
continuing reports of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law in Libya. It will be
crucial to address the vulnerable situation of the
country’s thousands of migrants, particularly women
and children, and the unscrupulous activities of
organized crime and its links to terrorist groups. In
that regard, we want to support the Secretary-General’s
call for the closure of the detention centres and to
salute the valuable work of UNICEF, the International
Organization for Migration and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in their
efforts to protect unaccompanied migrant children.
I would like to conclude by thanking Mr. Salamé
for his work and reaffirming our support to his team
and to UNSMIL as a whole in this historic context of
defining the future of Libya.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Representative Salamé and Ambassador Skoog for their
comprehensive updates on the situation in Libya and on
the activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
Despite some positive steps undertaken by the
Libyans, the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) and the international community, the
violence and confrontations between the rival armed
groups continue to grow. We are very concerned about
the recent escalation in violence in and around Tripoli,
which has resulted in many casualties among civilians,
including children. In that regard, we would like to
commend the successful mediation efforts of Special
Representative Salamé and UNSMIL in facilitating a
ceasefire agreement between the armed groups.
Such actions not only threaten the lives of hundreds
of civilians, they also undermine the progress that has
been made so far in implementing the United Nations
action plan. The latest escalation of the situation once
again proved how vital it is to immediately focus on the
country’s largely unaddressed structural political issues
and on the multiplicity of armed actors on the ground
with conflicting agendas, the most alarming of which
is Libya’s conversion into a centre for the activities of

S/PV. 8341

the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, as the Special
Representative said today. Every effort must therefore
be made to build and strengthen State structures, the
armed forces and the security sector, which in turn can
enhance political stability. There is an urgent need to
implement measures to improve the socioeconomic
conditions that can have a positive impact on the
political process and stability in the country.
My delegation fully supports the SecretaryGeneral’s observation in his latest report (S/2018/780)
that while elections must be held in order to renew the
mandates of Libyan institutions and establish a new
executive authority, it is equally important that the
proper conditions be in place. Establishing a secure
atmosphere conducive to the successful holding of
elections and enacting appropriate electoral legislation
will ensure that the right conditions are created.
We call on all Libyan parties and stakeholders to
maintain a strong commitment to the common goal
of seeking a political settlement to the crisis. It will
be vital to ensure that the authorities in Tripoli and
Tobruk continue their engagement in order to resolve
their differences through an inclusive dialogue and
political means.
Lastly, the international efforts to advance political
reconciliation in Libya should be consolidated under the
umbrella of United Nations leadership. In that regard,
Kazakhstan commends the Special Representative’s
efforts and encourages him to continue his engagement
with a wide range of actors with a view to broadening
their support and commitment to the political process.
We in the Security Council should remain united and
support his efforts to achieve a sustainable solution on
the ground.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his very informative briefing
on recent developments in Libya. I also want to thank
Ambassador Olof Skoog, Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya, for his presentation.
Let me begin by expressing my deepest condolences
to those who have lost loved ones, as well as my
wishes for a speedy recovery to those injured in recent
clashes in Libya. We condemn the recent escalation of
violence in and around Tripoli in the strongest terms,
particularly the indiscriminate shelling by armed
groups that resulted in killing and injuring civilians,

18-276529/21

S/PV.8341

The situation in Libya

including children. We therefore call on all parties to
the conflict to fully respect international humanitarian
law, including by taking every possible precaution to
protect civilians and ensure that the wounded and sick
are cared for, including through medical evacuations.
We remain concerned about the human rights violations
and abuses that have been committed in the context of
detention, as well as the prolonged arbitrary detention
of thousands of men, women and children without
due process. We therefore call for the closure of the
detention centres and respect for the human rights of
detainees. A zero-tolerance policy on torture, summary
executions and killings in custody is a prerequisite for
building a country based on the rule of law.
We call on all Libyan parties to cease hostilities
immediately and abide by the ceasefire agreement
brokered by the United Nations and the reconciliation
committees. In that regard, we welcome yesterday’s
result of the mediation by the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya designed to de-escalate the violence
in and around Tripoli and ensure the protection of
civilians. With regard to the political process, we
welcome the strong engagement of Libyan women in
political, peacebuilding, recovery and reconciliation
efforts, commend the dedicated work that has been done
to ensure their participation in the National Conference
process and underline how vital it is to ensure their
inclusion in the political process.
In conclusion, I would like to express my gratitude
to Special Representative Salamé and the staff of the
United Nations presence in Libya for their dedication
and support to achieving a peaceful end to the transition
in Libya.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Salamé for his objective
briefing and support his efforts to implement the United
Nations action plan approved by the Security Council
and aimed at helping Libyans to unify their country
and ensure its socioeconomic recovery. We realize that
the differences among Libyans run too deep to expect
rapid progress. We believe that the main prerequisite
for the success of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya will be the ability to unite international efforts
to achieve a settlement, which means refraining from
competing political initiatives. And if agreements are
reached, it will be essential to make every possible
effort to implement them.
10/21

05/09/2018

We are extremely concerned about the unfortunate
developments in Tripoli over the past few weeks.
The escalating situation was halted only thanks to
the courageous efforts of Mr. Salamé and his team.
The ongoing clashes have shown the pointlessness of
the attempts to portray the situation in the capital as
being stabilized. Owing to the force of these objective
circumstances, the authorities in Tripoli continue to
have extremely limited capabilities and have to rely
on the dominant armed groups. Most unfortunately,
unification of the security forces has still not begun,
although it should be a priority. Even the widely
proclaimed project to establish a so-called presidential
guard has still not been realized.
We welcome Mr. Salamé’s efforts to help the parties
to the conflict reach a lasting agreement on a cessation
of hostilities. We call on Libyans to stop the escalating
violence and unite to restore and rebuild their country
and combat terrorism. We call on external sponsors
to work to unify Libya, encourage efforts aimed at
centralization and to remember that Libya, with its rich
history, culture and natural resources, belongs to its
people alone. Outside actors should contribute to national
reconciliation in Libya and the key coordinating role of
the United Nations could be improved. We believe that
every useful initiative deserves attention and support,
but isolated political acts without a clear strategy are
very unlikely to raise intra-Libyan reconciliation to a
qualitatively higher level. Every step should be aimed
at unifying the country on every possible level. Russia
maintains contacts with all parties, encouraging them
to seek compromises for the sake of peace and stability
in Libya and the Mediterranean region. We support
establishing a consolidated mechanism for external
assistance in the settlement process, under the auspices
and with the help of the United Nations.
We support the efforts to steer the political process
towards the holding of general elections by the end of
the year. Needless to say, we should bear in mind that
favourable conditions are essential for that. Libyan
society must be ready to enter the electoral phase,
because if not, elections will only reopen old wounds
and lead to a new cycle of confrontation rather than
the desired reunification, inevitably complicating the
political efforts of the United Nations.
We have been closely following developments
in the vitally important oil sector, on which the wellbeing of Libya’s citizens depends. Natural resources
should be used for the benefit of every single citizen
18-27652

05/09/2018

The situation in Libya

of the country, not as pocket change in the geopolitical
arrangements of other States. Issues pertaining to the
control of oil infrastructure, export operations and
the functioning of banking and financial institutions
should be resolved by Libyans themselves through
dialogue under the auspices of the United Nations. The
participation of international financial organizations in
these processes should be carefully considered and the
position of the Libyan authorities taken into account.
The Secretary-General underscores in his report
(S/2018/780) that support for the dignified and safe
return of internally displaced persons is a key priority
for the international community’s humanitarian
assistance to Libya, and we are in complete agreement
with his position. There should be a similar approach in
Syria, free of politicized attitudes.
We thank the Ambassador of Sweden, in his
capacity as Chair, and his team for their professionalism
in coordinating the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
International restrictions are not an end in themselves
but should rather contribute to the political process,
which is why from now on we will take an extremely
careful approach to sanctions measures that do not
have obvious added value. We are concerned about
the situation of migrants and refugees in Libya and the
abuses of their rights, but a long-term solution to that
problem is certainly not to be found through sanctions.
For that, effective criminal prosecution has to be
launched at the national level. International cooperation
is very important, including within the framework of
the relevant entities. No attention has been given to
criminality in countries of destination for migrants.
Lastly, we have not seen any serious attempts to deal
with the root causes of these mass migrations, which
originate first and foremost in dire socioeconomic
situations and conflicts, including some provoked from
outside. We must work on improving the situation in
these regions, after which people will return to their
homes of their own volition.
Libyans have been complaining for a long time
about the significant losses they have sustained where
their assets in foreign credit institutions have been
frozen in accordance with Security Council decisions.
The situation should be impartially evaluated in order
to make the best possible decision without going
beyond the existing sanction frameworks. Another
ongoing pressing problem involves the illegal flow of
weapons into Libya, which affects both its own security

S/PV. 8341

and that of the surrounding region. In the absence of
a centralized State authority and a united army, talk
about easing the arms embargo would be premature.
Furthermore, the strictest possible control is required
when delivering products for military use in Libya
within the framework of existing exemptions, in order
to ensure that they are not lost or misappropriated. Who
wins when weapons or military technology fall into the
hands of armed groups, foreign mercenaries or even
terrorists, who are still present in Libya to this day?
Russia and Libya are linked in a historically
friendly and mutually respectful relationship in many
areas. We want to advance and deepen our cooperation
with Libya, but if we are to stabilize it we must unite
international and regional efforts as quickly as possible.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Ghassan Salamé,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL), for his valuable briefing. I would
also like to thank the Permanent Representative of
the Kingdom of Sweden, in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for his briefing on
the Committee’s work. My statement will focus on
two main issues — developments on the security and
political fronts, and economic developments.
First, with regard to security and politically related
developments, the unfortunate recent escalation of
the security situation in the capital has had negative
repercussions for the regional and international efforts
aimed at establishing norms governing security
and stability in Libya. We are concerned about the
escalation of military operations, including shelling
and indiscriminate firing in populated areas, which
have led to dozens of deaths, including of women and
children, as well as many injuries. We call on all Libyan
parties to halt the fighting immediately, commit to the
ceasefire agreement mediated by UNSMIL, engage
seriously and constructively in a dialogue to stop
the escalating violence in Tripoli and its suburbs and
thereby prevent further human losses. That will give
the United Nations and other regional and international
actors a sufficient opportunity to reach a lasting and
comprehensive political agreement to the benefit of our
brother people of Libya.
The Libyan situation on the ground is suffering
from instability and a lack of security, and it is therefore

18-2765211/21

S/PV.8341

The situation in Libya

incumbent on the international community and the
Security Council to step up efforts to permanently end
the proliferation of armed groups, which can be done
by supporting the establishment of unified, legitimate
security institutions under the control and supervision
of the State. That will help to promote the transitional
and political processes based on the United Nations
action plan and ensure that terrorist hotspots — such
as those connected to Da’esh, which is exploiting the
political and security vacuum to carry out its destructive
schemes — are not increasing.
Turning to the United Nations action plan in
Libya, we commend the role played by UNSMIL in
organizing the National Conference, which brought
together approximately 7,000 Libyan men and women
from various parts of the country. They reached a
consensus on the need to end the transitional period
and unify various Government institutions by holding
elections. We look forward to seeing the House of
Representatives and the High Council of State conclude
their discussions on the necessary amendments to
the Libyan Political Agreement so as to address the
concerns and aspirations of the Libyan people in their
efforts to rebuild their State.
Secondly, with regard to economic issues, it is
clear that the security problems in Libya in the second
half of this year have been detrimental to the country’s
economic situation, with oil production declineing
from 1 million to 315,000 barrels a day, owing to the
armed confrontations in the oil crescent region. That in
turn has affected the State’s budget for 2018, adopted
after an agreement between the Presidency Council and
the Central Bank of Libya.
It is important to make every effort to bring
about economic stability and development in Libya
through the commitment of all the Libyan authorities
to instituting fair economic reforms that can bring
long-term gains, in line with the agreements reached
by the Libyan parties participating in the eighth round
of economic dialogues, held in Tunisia in June, which
would empower the country’s economic institutions
to provide general services to the Libyan people. In
that regard, we stress the importance of ensuring
accountability on the part of Libya’s financial and
economic institutions in order to preserve the people’s
wealth. We commend Mr. Salamé’s rapid response to
the Security Council’s request on the need to submit
proposals aimed at unifying financial institutions in
Libya in line with the United Nations action plan. That
12/21

05/09/2018

comes in the light of the letter to the Security Council
from the Head of the Presidency Council, Mr. Faiez
Serraj, on reviewing the state of the internationally
recognized Central Bank of Libya in Tripoli and the
Central Bank in eastern Libya.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support to
Mr. Salamé’s efforts to facilitate a comprehensive
Libyan political process pursuant to the United Nations
action plan. We urge all Libyan parties to work for a
peaceful settlement through serious and constructive
engagement at the technical, legislative, political
and security levels needed to ensure the holding of
transparent, comprehensive and peaceful elections,
with a view to building a unified and stable Libya.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks Special Representative
Salamé
and
Ambassador
Skoog,
Permanent
Representative of Sweden, in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, for their briefings.
The security situation in Libya remains fragile.
Terrorist forces are running rampant and the problems
concerning refugees and migrants are acute. However,
with the support of the United Nations, regional
organizations and neighbouring States, Libya has
made difficult but steady progress with its political
transition. China has been closely following the latest
developments in the situation in the country. We
welcome the ceasefire agreement signed by the armed
groups involved in the recent hostilities in Tripoli.
We call on the relevant parties to immediately put
an end the conflict, resolve their differences through
dialogue and negotiations and continue to advance the
political settlement process with a view to achieving
reconciliation and stability as soon as possible. The
international community should continue to step up
its support to help Libya restore stability and effective
governance as soon as possible.
First, we must stay committed to a path of political
settlement for the Libyan question. The international
community should respect Libya’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, and firmly
advance the Libyan-owned and Libyan-led political
process. All parties in Libya should commit to an
inclusive dialogue with stakeholders from both national
and local levels so as to build consensus, narrow
differences and find solutions that are acceptable to all.
18-27652

05/09/2018

The situation in Libya

Secondly, we must build a better security
environment in favour of the political process.
Countries and organizations that have influence should
play a dual role in engaging with the Libyan parties
so that they will not resort to the use of force at the
slightest provocation. It is through confidence-building
measures that reconciliation can be achieved. A unified
national security agency should be established at
an early date to create favourable conditions for the
implementation of the United Nations action plan.
The Libyan parties should make greater efforts at
dialogue, settle their differences, continue to foster
mutual trust and cooperate in combating terrorism and
organized crime.
Thirdly, we must strengthen the United Nations
role and capacity to offer its good offices. China
supports the Special Representative in leading the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya to move
forward the implementation of the relevant United
Nations action plan. We support Libya in advancing
the formulation of a constitution and amendment of
the Libyan Political Agreement in order to prepare and
organize presidential and parliamentary elections. We
hope that Libya’s neighbours, the African Union, the
League of Arab States, the European Union and other
parties will increase their efforts to promote peace and
work together towards the implementation of the United
Nations action plan.
China has always held the view that sanctions are
not an end in themselves, rather they are a means that
should always serve the political solution of relevant
problems. While sanctions on Libya remain enforced,
attention must be paid so that such sanctions will not
negatively impact Libyan civilians in third countries.
The sanctions should not harm the overall interests of
Libya or the everyday lives and humanitarian needs of
the Libyan population. The continued loss of Libya’s
frozen assets is an issue that deserves close scrutiny.
We hope that the sanctions Committee will speedily
look into that issue and respond appropriately to Libya’s
legitimate concerns in that regard.
We support any efforts that will help stabilize the
situation in Libya, facilitate a political solution of the
issue and promote unity among various parties in joining
hands to fight terrorism. We stand ready to continue to
do our part in contributing to the early restoration of
security and stability and the achievement of prosperity
and development in Libya.

S/PV. 8341

Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), for his informative briefing on the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/780) on the
developments in Libya and the challenges ahead for
the restoration of peace and stability in the country.
We also thank Ambassador Olof Skoog for the quality
of his briefing on the thirty-first report of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
At the previous briefing on the situation in
Libya (see S/PV.8312), my delegation, like other
members of the Council, welcomed the handover
by the Libyan National Army of the management
of the two oil terminals in the east of the country to
the National Oil Corporation, which has a monopoly
on hydrocarbon exports as provided for in resolution
2259 (2015). We also noted with satisfaction Prime
Minister Faiez Serraj’s initiatives to ensure a fair and
transparent distribution of oil revenues by auditing the
transactions of the Libyan Central Bank in Tripoli and
Al Bayda. Those measures, which are the result of the
transparent and inclusive management of hydrocarbon
resources — the subject of tensions among the warring
parties — have helped to improve the security situation
in the oil crescent region.
However, the resumption of fighting in Tripoli
among armed groups that had nevertheless committed
themselves to join the process initiated by the
Government of National Accord for ending the crisis
dramatically reminds us of the precariousness of the
overall security situation in Libya. The actions of those
armed factions is likely to undermine the efforts of
the international community to promote reconciliation
among Libyans. Côte d’Ivoire therefore calls on rival
armed factions in Derna to put an end to the clashes
and allow unimpeded and safe access for humanitarian
assistance to thousands of suffering Libyans in the city.
We call on all the parties concerned to strictly respect
the ceasefire and curfew decreed in Tripoli, in order
to preserve the gains of the overall post-crisis process.
Côte d’Ivoire notes with deep concern the
persistence of the smuggling of migrants and the gross
violations of human rights in detention centres. We
echo the Secretary-General’s call for the closure of
those centres and for respect for the rights of detainees.
We deplore the deliberate administrative burdens that

18-2765213/21

S/PV.8341

The situation in Libya

prevent UNSMIL and humanitarian personnel from
accessing the centres. Those obstacles do little to ensure
respect for the rights of detainees or to improve their
conditions of detention. My country also welcomes the
Council’s unity of action, which led to the imposition
of sanctions on 7 June on six individuals involved in
human trafficking in Libya.
Côte d’Ivoire would like to reaffirm its conviction
that there will be no lasting peace and stability in
Libya without accountability. We therefore urges
the international community to assist the Libyan
authorities in identifying and bringing to justice before
the competent international courts those found guilty
of trafficking in human beings and of serious human
rights violations.
Côte d’Ivoire notes with regret that little progress
has been made in implementing the commitments made
by the Libyan parties at the conference held in Paris on
29 May to hold legislative and presidential elections on
10 December. The draft electoral laws for a referendum
on a draft constitution, prepared by the Constituent
Assembly, have not yet been adopted by the House of
Representatives, although the Libyan parties committed
themselves to organizing the referendum at the meeting
of the African Union High-Level Committee on Libya
that took place in Dakar from 11 to 13 May.
In that regard, my delegation would like to
commend the efforts of French diplomacy, which
organized a meeting on 23 July among the four Libyan
representatives who endorsed the Paris agreement,
during which they renewed their support for the holding
of the elections on 10 December and the reunification
of the country’s institutions. Côte d’Ivoire also
commends the work of the High National Electoral
Commission and encourages all efforts to respect the
electoral calendar. We urge the Libyan parties and
the international community to work to improve the
security situation, which is essential for the holding
of democratic, credible and peaceful elections, as
mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report.
In conclusion, I would like to extend my delegation’s
congratulations to Mr. Salamé and all UNSMIL staff
for the quality of their work in an extremely challenging
environment. To Ms. Stephanie Williams, the new
Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs in
Libya, we wish every success in her new position.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would also like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
14/21

05/09/2018

Salamé for his sobering, but always clear, assessment of
the volatile situation in Libya and, more important, for
his successful efforts to halt the most recent escalation
of violence.
I will focus my statement on the security situation
in Tripoli, its connection to the political process and the
humanitarian situation for the civilian population.
First, we are deeply concerned about the escalation
of violence in Tripoli last week, which resulted in many
civilian causalities, including children among the dead
and injured. We join the Secretary-General and others
in condemning all violence and indiscriminate shelling
by armed groups. Those acts constitute violations of
international humanitarian law and violations or abuses
of international human rights law.
The ceasefire brokered by the United Nations
must now be actively supported. We urge all parties to
respect and implement the agreement, including to end
all hostilities, protect civilians and re-open the Mitiga
airport. Safe and unhindered humanitarian access must
also be ensured, and those civilians who wish to leave
must be allowed to do so.
Countries with influence over the parties must
ensure that they deliver on their commitments, and
those groups that did not attend the mediation meeting
yesterday should be urged to join the ceasefire agreement
immediately. We remind those who threaten peace and
stability in Libya that they will be held accountable.
We remain open to exploring the use of the sanctions
instrument in that regard.
The continued flow of illegal arms risks fuelling
the escalation of violence and increases the suffering
of the civilian population. As Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya, I therefore call on all
Member States to honour their obligations under the
relevant resolutions and fully implement the sanctions,
including the arms embargo.
Secondly, recent developments demonstrate the
lack of commitment and progress by some towards a
political solution, as well as the dangers of the continued
security vacuum. Actors that benefit from instability
and the status quo are actively hindering the political
process. That cannot be accepted and must be countered.
We now hope that the ceasefire agreement can be built
upon to further the broader political process.
18-27652

05/09/2018

The situation in Libya

Efforts to provide the conditions needed for free,
fair, inclusive and credible elections, which are crucial
for the democratic process in the country, must be
stepped up. In that regard, we call on the House of
Representatives, as others have done, to honour its
commitment to help ensure a legal basis for elections. We
encourage the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to push ahead and exhaust all legal avenues
and options to move the political process forward.
Efforts to promote transparency, accountability and
unity of the financial institutions are also an important
part of that. The Special Representative set that out
extensively and clearly again today. The Council must
stand fully behind the Special Representative in those
important endeavours.
A sustainable political process in Libya requires
the full and equal participation of women. To that
end, we encourage the work of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) with networks
of politically active Libyan women, with the aim to
promote the nomination of women for the elections.
Another meeting of the Council’s Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security will be
convened on Libya this fall to follow up on how the
Council can best support those efforts.
Thirdly, we welcome UNSMIL’s reporting on
international humanitarian law and human rights. The
dire situation in Libya’s detention facilities, mentioned
by many today, including its migrant detention centres
and prisons, continues to be of deep concern. The reports
on arbitrary detention, torture and sexual and genderbased violence — for instance, in Mitiga, Zuwarah,
Abu Salim and eastern Libya — are unacceptable. Such
violations and abuses must immediately come to an end.
Humanitarian access must be ensured and violations
must be investigated, including of alleged summary
executions, and those responsible for such crimes must
be held to account. The Libyan authorities must also
fully implement the human rights due diligence policy
and ensure proper vetting processes.
Now is a decisive moment for Libya. The Security
Council and the broader international community must
rally behind the Special Representative, support the
urgent implementation of the United Nations action
plan and respect the leading role of the United Nations
in the mediation efforts. It is crucial that we continue
to stand united in our support. We therefore support
the issuance of a press statement, as suggested by the

S/PV. 8341

representative of the United Kingdom today, to refelct
the unity of the Security Council and its support for the
efforts of the Special Representative.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I
join others in thanking the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Salamé, and Ambassador
Skoog for their informative briefings.
Seven years ago, the Libyan people initiated change.
There was hope — hope for a prosperous, safe and
democratic future for Libya. However, the past years
have shown the fragility of the situation and the many
impediments to real progress towards that aspired future
for Libya. That was confirmed once more today by
Special Representative Salamé in his sobering briefing.
Because of the many challenges, and despite spoilers
who prevent smooth progress, we need to remain united
in supporting United Nations-led efforts in Libya. We
need to do that for the Libyan people, because they have
had enough of the political crisis and the uncertain and
unsafe conditions of daily life.
In that regard, the current situation in Tripoli, where
militias have been fighting at the cost of civilians, is
especially concerning. We urge all sides to continue to
cooperate with the United Nations and fully adhere to the
ceasefire brokered by the United Nations. Differences
need to be settled through peaceful dialogue, and the
security situation has to improve, as a prerequisite for
progress on other tracks as well.
I will focus on three elements in more detail: ending
the political crisis; the economic situation and the need
for transparency and coordinating international efforts;
and the humanitarian and human rights situation.
On the need for progress on the political process,
the Kingdom of the Netherlands recognizes Libya’s
extremely complex political and security situation. That
serves to highlight the need for an inclusive Libyanowned and Libyan-led political process. Therefore, we
confirm our full support for the efforts of Mr. Salamé
and his team to that end. That important works needs
to continue, including the full implementation of the
United Nations action plan.
Libya needs a democratic political transition
that fosters peace and stability. New elections should
be held, if the right conditions are met. Technical,
legislative, political and security conditions have to
be in place for elections to be credible, peaceful and
inclusive. Moreover, the meaningful participation

18-2765215/21

S/PV.8341

The situation in Libya

of women as voters and as candidates is crucial. The
elected institutions of Libya should work constructively
on a new constitutional framework and inclusive
Government, and political spoilers should be held
accountable for their actions.
Secondly, on the economic situation and the need
for increased transparency, the present state of the
economy contributes negatively to the complexity of
the political situation. There are parties benefiting
from maintaining the status quo, while the population
and country as a whole struggle. Businesses, services
and households cannot function normally with only
a few hours of electricity a day. The economic crisis,
including the depreciation of the national currency,
price hikes and a liquidity crisis, has a devastating
effect on the livelihoods of Libyan citizens. Therefore,
more efforts are needed to improve Libya’s economy.
The financial management of the country needs
urgent repair. That includes establishing transparency
in Libya’s economic and financial institutions and the
unification of the Central Bank. We therefore thank the
Special Representative and the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) for their timely response
to the Security Council’s request for financial review
and audit options. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
continues to support efforts to broaden transparency on
a multilateral and bilateral basis. We value the role of
UNSMIL in that regard.
My third, and final, point is on the humanitarian and
human rights situation. We remain deeply concerned
by ongoing serious human rights violations across
Libya, as documented in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/780). A few examples are: the high number
of civilian casualties due to fighting and violence;
migrants and refugees who remain vulnerable to the
risk of arbitrary detention, torture, sexual violence,
abduction for ransom and unlawful killings; and the
forced eviction of displaced Tawerghan families from
the Tariq al-Matar Camp. That serves to underline
that we need to establish the rule of law in Libya, and
we call on all Libyan parties to respect applicable
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Moreover, strengthening donor coordination in the
areas of humanitarian aid, security and human rights
remains vital.
In June, the Council took the courageous step of
targeting human traffickers and smugglers through
sanctions. Implementing the sanctions measures
16/21

05/09/2018

diligently should remain our priority. Pending criminal
investigations into such crimes, the Council should
stand ready to consider additional listings, in order
to dismantle destabilizing criminal networks that
profit from the climate of impunity in Libya and its
bordering region.
In conclusion, the human rights situation is not
some additional aspect of the crisis in Libya; rather,
it is the yardstick for progress and how the human
rights of all Libyans can be guaranteed. In that light,
we welcome the progress made towards the finalization
of the United Nations strategic framework for the
period 2019-2020 and the launch of the human rights
working group, co-chaired by the Ministry of Justice
and UNSMIL, under the coordination framework for
international assistance.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, for his briefing and Ambassador Skoog for
his report, in his capacity as the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya. We strongly support
the Special Representative’s continued diplomatic
endeavours to facilitate an end to the Libyan crisis. In
particular, we highly appreciate his efforts to mediate
between the various Libyan actors, which produced
a ceasefire agreement signed yesterday to end all
hostilities and to protect civilians and civilian facilities.
While we welcome the agreement reached
under the auspices of the Special Representative, we
condemn the recent violence in Tripoli, particularly the
indiscriminate shelling — as noted by the SecretaryGeneral in his 2 September statement — by armed
groups in neighbourhood areas, which caused civilian
deaths and injuries. We express our condolences and
solidarity to the people of Libya, particularly to those
who lost their loved ones.
While the people of Libya, who have suffered a
lot, have been raising their united voices in favour of
of an end to the protracted transition through political
means, the violence in the capital has no justification.
It only poses a serious threat to the country’s stability,
undermining efforts to fully implement the United
Nations action plan. The violence has also jeopardized
the safety of all vulnerable groups, including internally
displaced persons, migrants and refugees. We join
others in calling on all parties to fully implement
the ceasefire agreement by immediately ceasing
18-27652

05/09/2018

The situation in Libya

S/PV. 8341

hostilities and engaging constructively with the
Special Representative.

services by protecting national wealth and improving
the distribution of resources remains critical.

While expressing our support for the legitimate
authorities of Libya, we underscore that political
objectives should be pursued only through dialogue,
not violence. All parties should also cooperate with
United Nations humanitarian workers to provide aid for
all in need, particularly those trapped in the fighting.
It is also important to ensure safe, unhindered and
sustained humanitarian access to affected areas.

At this critical juncture, restoring stability to the
capital and implementing the United Nations action plan
will require the strong commitment and cooperation
of all Libyan actors. In that regard, all Libyan actors
should engage meaningfully and constructively with
the Special Representative to support his continuous
and tireless efforts to fully operationalize the United
Nations action plan. Neighbouring countries and
relevant regional organizations should also continue to
coordinate their work in support of the efforts of the
United Nations.

The use of violence by armed groups to control State
institutions and the widespread violations of human
rights with a sense of impunity are major impediments
to resolving the multifaceted crisis in Libya. For now, it
is obvious that halting the violence and restoring calm
to Tripoli should be the priority. At the same time, we
underline that the full and timely implementation of
the United Nations action plan remains the only way
to find a long-term and comprehensive solution to the
violence in Libya.
We reiterate that only a comprehensive, Libyan-led
and -owned political process facilitated by the United
Nations can return Libya to the path of peace and
stability. While it is critical to hold elections according
to the United Nations action plan, we concur with the
Secretary-General who stresses in his latest report
(S/2018/780) on the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) that it is equally important that
the proper conditions be in place for credible and
successful elections. Therefore, all Libyan political
actors should honour their commitments to holding
peaceful and legitimate elections that are acceptable to
all Libyans. Furthermore, all required security, legal
and administrative conditions should be fulfilled.
Bringing a peaceful end to the transition in Libya
will also require unifying armed and police institutions.
As the report of the Secretary-General underlines, “[t]
here is a clear need to build professional, accountable
and unified security institutions throughout the
country” (S/2018/780; para. 79), both to ensure the
State’s monopoly on the legitimate use of force, as well
as to find a sustainable solution to the issue of armed
groups. In addition, promoting national reconciliation,
as has been repeatedly stated by the African Union,
is essential to restoring trust and social bonds among
communities. Besides, as the people of Libya have been
affirming through the national conference process,
addressing economic difficulties and delivering public

The Security Council should continue to speak
with one voice and extend strong support to Special
Representative Salamé. The Council should also provide
backing to UNSMIL, which has been continuously
and gradually increasing its presence in Tripoli and
elsewhere in Libya. While UNSMIL should continue to
intensify its engagement as security conditions allow,
we appreciate its efforts thus far under the leadership of
the Special Representative in support of the country’s
endeavours to end its transition.
As Libya continues to face multiple challenges,
including stabilizing the capital city, we hope that the
Council will have a constructive and positive dialogue
that will renew the UNSMIL mandate and enable it to
continue to play a key role in realizing the legitimate
aspirations of all Libyans.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the briefing of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salamé. We
reiterate our full support for his ongoing efforts. We
also welcome Ambassador Olof Skoog’s briefing on
the activities carried out by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
Bolivia expresses its deep concern at the continued
escalation of violence during the reporting period
throughout Libyan territory, particularly in the city of
Tripoli, which saw the indiscriminate use of rockets,
mortars and explosive ordnance by armed groups in
civilian areas. According to reports of various United
Nations agencies, such attacks significantly damaged
schools, mosques and private residences, as well as
hospitals and medical centres, and in recent weeks alone
have been responsible for at least 69 deaths, including
women and children.

18-2765217/21

S/PV.8341

The situation in Libya

We remind all concerned parties and actors that, in
the framework of international humanitarian law, they
are obligated to ensure the security and physical integrity
of civilians and civilian areas and infrastructure.
They are also responsible for applying the principles
of distinction and proportionality. Otherwise, these
deliberate attacks could be construed as war crimes,
which would then fall under the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court for their investigation and
judgment. We therefore ask them to join and respect
the de-escalation and ceasefire efforts promoted by the
Special Representative.
Moreover, we are alarmed by reports of widespread
violations of the human rights of the 8,000 refugees
and migrants confined to detention centres operated by
the Government and those under the control of armed
groups. The Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/780)
attests to the violation of the rights of these people,
who are detained indefinitely in inadequate conditions
and subjected to degrading treatment, torture, forced
labour, sexual violence and the denial of medical aid.
This terrible situation is compounded by the crisis
in the Mediterranean Sea, where in July and August
255 immigrants perished. That figure increases this
year’s fatalities to more than 1,500 people. That reality
highlights the urgent necessity of addressing the
situation in a cross-cutting and permanent manner.
We therefore call on the parties to prevent such abuses
of the rights of migrants and refugees, and we remind
them to fulfil their obligations under international law.
We urgently call upon Libyan authorities to launch
the necessary investigations to prevent impunity for
such atrocities.
The acts of violence and the increase in clashes
during the reporting period undoubtedly threaten the
political process and the safety of the population. As
such, my delegation reiterates the importance of the full
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement in
order to definitively put an end to the transition period.
In this regard, and bearing in mind the commitment
undertaken by the parties to hold parliamentary
and presidential elections by the end of this year, it
is imperative to move forward with the necessary
consultations on the new Constitution and to develop the
necessary legislation establishing in a clear and concrete
way the elements and requirements for proceeding with
this process. We therefore call on the parties and on local
actors to refrain from confrontational rhetoric that may
weaken or undermine these efforts and, on the contrary,
18/21

05/09/2018

to commit unconditionally to engaging in dialogue and
implementing the Libyan Political Agreement.
At the same time, with regard to efforts to support
and assist the strengthening of the Libyan political
process and the action plan supported by the Special
Representative, we underscore the efforts of the
African Union and of countries such as Egypt, Algeria
, Tunisia and Senegal, among others. We would also
like to highlight the activities of the United Nations
Mine Action Service to assist and support the Libyan
authorities in their efforts to monitor the flow of
arms, munitions and explosives, as well as technical
assistance to identify and eliminate explosive remnants
of war — including, for example, the destruction of
200 tonnes of explosives in the city of Misrata — to
guarantee the security of humanitarian assistance and
the dignified return of internally displaced individuals.
My delegation reiterates that there can be no
military solution to this conflict, which is why we call
on all parties to abide by all of the resolutions adopted
by the Security Council, in particular resolution 2259
(2015) and presidential statement S/PRST/2017/26 of
14 December 2017, and to join efforts under way to
pursue ongoing dialogue to pave the way for a peaceful,
orderly and inclusive political transition that will meet
the interests of the Libyan people and enable them
freely and consensually to define their future.
In conclusion, it is important to reiterate and keep in
mind that the impact of the Libyan conflict on security
in the region is a direct consequence of interventionist
practice and regime-change policies that have had a
collateral impact in the Sahel, unleashing an upsurge
in chaos, terrorism and militarization, whose tragic
results reverberate to this very day.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
We would like to thank Special Representative
Salamé for his sobering briefing today. The key
conclusion from today’s meeting is that he has the full
support of the Security Council for his work. We are
united behind him.
The recent escalating violence in Tripoli continues to
undermine an already fragile Libya. The Libyan people
deserve peace and security. We welcome yesterday’s
announcement by the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) that a cessation of hostilities had
been reached. The United States stands fully with
18-27652

05/09/2018

The situation in Libya

Libya as UNSMIL continues its mediation efforts, and
we call on all Libyan parties to refrain from any action
that could undermine the ceasefire and setback Libyan
efforts to advance the political process. Any attempt to
weaken Libyan authorities and hamper the course of the
United Nations-facilitated political process is totally
unacceptable, as we reiterated with our partners from
France, Italy and the United Kingdom yesterday and
this past weekend.
Since the revolution, seven years ago, the Libyan
people have been asking for things that any of us
would want. They want an end to the fighting. They
want to see basic services, like electricity and water,
switched back on. They want to see Libya’s oil wealth
invested for the benefit of the people. They want the
dignity of living in a State that respects their rights
after decades of tyranny. The sad truth is that a small
number of political spoilers, in some cases backed by
militias, block this vision. Looking out for their own
narrow interests, they undermine the United Nations’
hard work to get dialogue under way. This has to end.
There should be no military path to power in
Libya. If the violence gets worse, the only winners will
be terrorists and criminals. More fighting plays into
the hands of human traffickers, who are committing
unspeakable abuses as they funnel desperate people
onto dangerous journeys towards Europe.
A different path for Libya is possible. A handful of
political spoilers should not be permitted to hold this
process hostage. All of us, especially our European
partners, Libya’s neighbours and countries of the region,
need to say “enough is enough”. We need to push Libya’s
different factions to enter into actual negotiations.
As the recent instability in Tripoli clearly
demonstrated, we need a realistic road map for Libya to
move towards secure, credible and inclusive elections
as soon as possible, rooted in an inclusive constitutional
process. It is obvious from today’s discussions that we
are all impatient to see progress but imposing false
deadlines will backfire and could lead to even worse
divisions inside Libya. We look to UNSMIL to guide
the international community towards an understanding
of what that realistic road map entails.
The Government of National Accord is a steadfast
partner of the United States and we commend its efforts
throughout this challenging period. The Government
of National Accord shares our goal of a more secure
and stable Libya that will be a partner in international

S/PV. 8341

efforts to fight terrorism. We fully endorse UNSMIL’s
central role in support of the Government of National
Accord’s economic reform agenda to help address fiscal
transparency and equitable distribution of resources
across Libya for all Libyans.
We were pleased that the Security Council was
able to designate six migrant-smugglers earlier this
year for their abuses in Libya. This was the first time
that we have ever used sanctions to respond to migrant
trafficking. We remain deeply concerned about the
welfare of these migrants and will also keep up our
efforts to ensure that criminal gangs involved in such
activity cannot operate with impunity.
Despite all of these challenges, one thing has not
changed in Libya — that is the potential of the Libyan
people and their keen desire to create a better country
for themselves. I would like to share the story of Fatima
Nasser, a 21-year old living in the southern city of
Seba. Fatima is an entrepreneur who realized that her
hometown had an amazing untapped resource — not
oil, but food. Women across the city were at home
preparing superb dishes in their kitchens. The food was
so good Fatima thought that people would be willing
to pay for it. She created an app that links customers
with these at-home chefs. Women are now starting to
earn income from their homes and the Libyan public is
enjoying purchases of home-cooked meals. The app is
taking off. Fatima is launching her service and Libya’s
largest cities very soon. Silicon Valley should have an
eye on people like Fatima.
The point is that Libyans are ready to build a
brighter future. Our responsibility is to help them
get there.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate your country,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month. I also express my appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his report on the work of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
contained in document S/2018/780.
I also thank Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya,
for his briefing on the latest political, economic and
security developments in my country. I also thank His

18-2765219/21

S/PV.8341

The situation in Libya

Excellency Ambassador Olof Skoog for his briefing
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
The latest bloody events in the suburbs of the
capital Tripoli, which have been condemned by my
Government and the international community, illustrate
the scale of the security problems in Libya. They have
undoubtedly demonstrated that local and international
parties harbour ill intentions. They seek to maintain
the status quo in Libya and to undermine any efforts to
achieve peace.
Whenever Libyans have felt that they are close to
finding a solution to their protracted crisis, they are
faced with contrived conflicts and problems leading to
armed violence that subjects civilian lives and property
to the most terrible dangers and damages. In that regard,
I would like to recall that the first Security Council
resolution pertaining to the Libyan issue, adopted in
2011 — resolution 1970 (2011) — was on the protection
of civilians, who unfortunately are still suffering from
the senseless and irresponsible use of all kinds of
weapons in densely populated areas by parties that seek
to obstruct the establishment of State institutions that
protect the nation and the citizens. In an environment
where the language of arms prevails, it is hard for any
Government in the world to undertake its tasks. Hence,
it is almost impossible for State institutions to function.
That is why the process of disarmament in my country
must be at the top of the priority list.
My Government stresses that the United Nations,
especially the Security Council, must implement
serious, swift and robust programmes to disarm
lawless armed groups. Each case must be dealt with
separately through programmes and plans prepared
by specialized United Nations entities. Those entities
have made great achievements in many countries
experiencing through situations similar to the one in
my country. We ask the Council to call upon all the
Libyan parties to understand that any military action
to rule the country is unacceptable to Libyans and the
international community. They should be urged to step
up their efforts to overcome this crisis.
It is also important to complete the constitutional
process paving the way to holding free and fair general
elections that lead to the establishment of elected
constitutional institutions, while achieving stability,
development and prosperity for the Libyan people.
In that regard, my country’s delegation would like to
20/21

05/09/2018

thank UNSMIL for the efforts undertaken to tackle the
security problem that the city of Tripoli is suffering from
these days. Its efforts were successful, and a ceasefire
agreement was signed on Tuesday, 4 September. We
hope that all parties will observe it.
The dire economic situation in Libya is also a result
of the deteriorating security situation and the abhorrent
interference by some influential actors, corrupt people
and weapon users in the work of the State’s economic
institutions, especially the banking sector. That
of course had a severe adverse effect on the living
conditions of the Libyan people. It was the reason for
low liquidity and lack of services.
The parties to the Libyan Political Agreement,
signed in Skhirat on 17 December 2015, have also
not fulfilled their commitments. They have continued
to use grotesque practices to avoid meeting those
commitments. That has also contributed considerably
to the deterioration of the economic situation. My
Government is trying to find solutions through clear
economic plans. However, we need legislation for
that. The Parliament must address the issue in order to
alleviate the hardship for the Libyan people.
Various United Nations reports and the Public
Prosecutor’s office in Libya confirm that Libyans and
foreigners are subjected to human rights violations.
That is outrageous and unacceptable to all Libyans. We
highlight that, while many violations have taken place,
they will not stop and their perpetrators will continue to
enjoy impunity as long as the security situation does not
improve. Legislative bodies should be helped through
serious work and full international cooperation with my
country. Supporters in other countries of armed groups
in Libya must refrain from spreading their venom in
my country. International action is needed to achieve
stability. That is an absolute necessity for Libya and the
international community.
We would like to recall that a year has passed since
the adoption of the United Nation action plan on Libya
in the Security Council, on 20 September 2017. The
action plan has not yet been implemented, while various
parties are using different excuses and completely
disregarding the suffering of the Libyan people.
My country’s delegation underscores that the
Security Council must be united, bear its responsibilities,
call upon all parties to end the political crisis within a
set time frame, implement the United Nations action
plan and initiate the constitutional arrangements needed
18-27652

05/09/2018

The situation in Libya

for the holding of democratic elections — undertaken
and decided upon by Libyan voters.
In conclusion, my country’s delegation would like
to note that statements and declarations issued here and
there will not silence the guns, stop the destruction of
public and private property, save the lives of teenagers
who are forced to fight or stop human rights violations.

S/PV. 8341

The Security Council needs to take decisive action and
a serious stance to hold accountable all those who stand
in the way of restoring peace, security and tranquillity.
The Council must end the plight that has been going on
in my country for too long. It is high time to end it and
impose severe sanctions on the perpetrators.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

18-2765221/21
