IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Comnúttee

oping coun,tries, would significantly contribute to universal economic co-operation among ali States on a
basis of equality and to the elimination of discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to the wellbeing of all peoples,
Having regard for the need to ,take into account the
different social and -legal ,systems in harmonizing the
rules of international trade law,
Noting with appreciation that the United Nations
Commission on lnternational Trade Law has completed,
or soon will complete, work on many of the priority
items included in its programme of work,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of
the United Nations Comrnission on International Trade
Law on the work of .its tenth session;
2. Commends the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law for the progress made in its
work and for its efforts to enhance the efficiency of its
working methods;
3. Notes with satisfaction that the United Nations
Commission on lnternational Trade Law has completed
work on a draft Convention on the International Sale
of Goods 2º and that the Commission intends to place
before the General Assembly, at its thirty-third session,
draft provisions on the formation and validity of contracts for the international sale of goods, together with
appropriate recommendations on the action to be taken
with respect to those draft provisions;
4. Notes with regret that the second international
symposium on international trade law cou1d not be held
owing to the insufficiency of voluntary contributions
from Governments and other sources;
5. Recommends that the United Nations Commission on Interna.tional Trade Law should:
(a) Continue its work on the tapies included in its
programme of work;
( b) Contmue its work on training and assistance
in the field of international trade law, taking into account the special interests of the developing countries;
(e) Maintain close collaboration with the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
continue to coUaborate with international organizations
active in the field of international trade law;
(d) Continue to maintain liaison with ,the Comrnission on Transnational Corporations with regard to the
consideration of legal problems that would be susceptible of action by the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law;
(e) Continue to give special consideration to the
interests of developing countries and to bear in miind
the special problems of land-locked countries;
(f) Keep its programme of work and working
methods under review with the aim of further inoreasing the effectiveness of its work;
6. Calls upon. the United Nations Commission on
1ntemational Trade Law to continue to take account
of the relevant provisions of the resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly at its sixth and seventh special
sessions that laid down the foundations of the new international economic order, bearing in mind the need for
United Nations organs to participate in the implementation of those resolutions;
20 /bid.,

chap. 11, sect. C.

211

7. Welcomes the decision of the United Nations
Commiss,ion on International Trade Law to review, in
the near future, its long-term programme of work 21 and,
in this connexion, requests Governments to submit their
views and suggestions on such a programme;
8. Expresses the view that both the draft Convention on the International Sale of Goods and the draft
provisions on the formation and validity of contracts for
the international sale of goods, referred to in paragraph 3 above, should be considered by a conference
of plenipotentiaries at an appropriate time;
9. Decides to defer until its thirty-thi-rd session,
when it shall have received from the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law the recommendations relating to the draft provisions on the formation and validity of contracts for the international
sale of goods, a decision as to the appropriate time for
convening the conference of plenipotentiaries mentioned
in paragraph 8 above and as to the terms of reference
of such a conference;
1O. Appeals to aH Governments and to organizations, ins~itutions and individuals to consider making
financia! and other contributions that would make possible the holding of symposia on international trade law
as envisaged by the United Nations Commission on
lnternational Trade Law;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to study the
problem of how adequate financia! resources can be provided for the symposia on intemational trade law which
are organized biennially by the United Nations Commission on lnternational Trade Law, taking into account the availability of voluntary contributions and thc
relevant recommendation of the Commission adopted
at its 185th meeting on 17 June 1977, 22 and to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law the records of the discussions at the thirty-second
session of the General Assembly on the Commission's
report on the work of its tenth session.
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977
32/146.

United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of lnternational Law

The General Assembly,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of lntemational
Law 23 and the recommendations made to the SecretaryGeneral by the Advisory Committee on the United
Nations füogramme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dis,semination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, which are contained in that report,
Considering that intemational law should occupy
an appropriate place in the teaching of legal disciplines
at all universities,
2 1 Jbid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/31/17),
chap. VIII, sect. A.
22 /bid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/32/
17), chap. VI.
23 A/32/326.

212

General Assembly-Thirty-second Setision

Noting with appreciation the efforts made by States
at the bilateral level ,to provide assistance in the teaching and study of intemational law,
Convinced, nevertheless, that States, intemational organizations and institutions ,should be encouraged to
give fur.ther support to the Programme and to increase
their activities to promote the teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciation of internationa1 law,
in particular those activities which are of specia1 benefit
to persons from developing countries,
Recalling that, in ,the conduct of the Programme, it
is desirable to use as far as possible the resources and
facilities made available by Member States, intemationa1
organizati.ons and others,
l. Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out
in 1978 and 1979 the activities specified in his report,
inc1uding .the provision of:
(a) A mínimum of fifteen fellowships m 1978 and
1979, at the request of Govemments of developing
countries,
( b) Assistance in the form of a travel grant for one
participant from each developing country who will be
invited ,to the regional courses to be organized in 1978
and 1979,
to be financed from provisions in the regular budget
and also voluntary financial contributions which would
be ,received as a result of the requests set out in paragraphs 7 and 8 below;
2. Expresses its appreciation ,to the Secretary-General for bis con.structive efforts to promote training and
assistance in international law within the framework of
the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the
Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of lntemationa1 Law in 1976 and 1977;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for
its participation in the Programme, in particular for
,the effor:ts made to support the teaching of international
law;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research for its participation
in the Programme, particularly in the organization of
regional meetings and in the conduot of the fellowship
programme in international law sponsored jointly by
the United Nations and the Institute;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the Govemments
of the Bahamas, Bangladesh and Qatar for providing
host facilities for the regional training and refresher
courses held in 1976 and 1977;
6. Urges all Governments to encourage the inclusion of courses on internationa1 law in the programmes
of legal studies offered at institutions of higher learning;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
publicize the Programme and to invite periodicaHy
Member States, universities, philanthropic foundations
and other interested national and internationa1 institutions and organizations, as well as individuals, to make
voluntary contr.ibutions towards the financing of the
Programme or otherwise assisting in its implementation
and possible expansion;
8. Reiterates its request to Member States and to
interested organizations and individuals to make voluntary contributions towards the fina•ncing of the Pro-

gramme and expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have made voluntary contributions for
this purpose;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session on the
implementation of the Programme during 1978 and
1979 and, following consultations with the Advisory
Committee on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and
Wider Appreciation of International Law, ,to submit
recommendations regarding the execution of the Programme in subsequent years;
1O. Decides to include in ,the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session ,the item entitled "United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of Intemational
Law".
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977
32/147.

Measures to prevent international terrorism which endangers or takes innocent human lives or jeopardizes fundamental freedoms, and study of the
underlying causes of those forme oí
terrorism and acts of violence which
lie in misery, frustration, grievance and
despair and which cause sorne people to
sacrifice human lives, including their
own, in an attempt to effect radical
changes

The General Assembly,
Deeply perturbed over acts of international terrorism
which are occurring with increasing frequency and
which take a toll of innocent human lives,
Recognizing the importance of intemational cooperation in devising measures effectively to prevent
their occurrence and of studying their underlying causes
with a view to finding just and peaceful solutions as
quickly as possible,
Recalling the Declaration on Principles of Intemationa1 Law conceming Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, 24
Taking note of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee
on International Terrorism, 2 ~
Deeply convinced of the impor.tance to mankind of
the continuation of the work of the Ad Hoc Committee,
1. Expresses deep concern over increasing acts of
international terrorism which endanger or take innocent
human Hves or jeopardize fundamental freedoms;
2. Urges States to continue to seek just and peaceful solutions to the undcrlying causes which give rise
to such acts of violence;
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right to self-determination and indepcndence of all peoples under colonial
and racist régimes and other forms of alien domination,
and upholds the legitimacy of their struggle, in particular ,the stmggle of national liberation movements,
24 Resolution

2625 (XXV), annex.
Records o/ the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supp/ement No. 37 (A/32/37).
25 O/ficial
