General Assembly-Seventh Seesion

26

2. Requests the Secretary-General to assist to the
fullest possible extent in the rapid dissemination of all
.;uch resolutions of principal organs of the United Nations, particular attention being given to resolutions
communicated to governments at the special request
of the organ adopting those resolutions;
3. Appeals to information media to co-operate in
disseminating information concerning such resolutions
of organs of the United Nations, drawing on the appropriate services of the United Nations for the presentation of those resolutions.
403rd plenary meeting,
16 December 1952.

637 (VII). The right of peoples and nations to
self-determination

A
Whereas the right of peoples and nations to selfdetermination is a prerequisite to the full enjoyment of
all fundamental human rights,
Whereas the Charter of the United Nations, under
Articles 1 and SS, aims to develop friendly relations
among nations based on respect fqr the equal rights
and self-determination of peoples in order to strengthen
universal peace,
Whereas the Charter of the United Nations recognizes that certain Members of the United Nations are
responsible for the administration of Territories whose
peoples have not yet attained a full measure of selfgovernment, and affirms the principles which should
guide them,
Whereas every Member of the United Nations, in
conformity with the Charter, should respect the maintenance of the right of self-determination in other
States,
The General Assembly recommends that:
1. The States Members of the United Nations shall
uphold the erinciple of self-determination of all peoples and nations ;
2. The States Members of the United Nations shall
recognize and promote the realization of the right of
self-determination of the peoples of Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories who are under their administration and shall facilitate the exercise of this right
by the peoples of such Territories according to the
principles and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations in regard to each Territory and to the freely
expressed wishes of the peoples concerned, the wishei.
of the people being ascertained through plebiscites or
other recognized democratic means, preferably under
the auspices of the United Nations;
3. The States Members of the United Nations responsible for the administration of Non-Self-Governing .and Trust Territories shall take practical steps,
pending the realization of the right of self-determina-

tion and in preparation thereof, to ensure the direct
participation of the indigenous populations in the legislative and executive organs of government of those
· Territories, and to prepare them for complete selfgovernment or independence.
403rd plenary meeting,
16 December 1952.

B
The General Assembly,
Considering that one of the conditions necessary to
facilitate United Nations action to promote respect for
the right of self-determination of peoples and nations,
in particular with regard to the peoples of Non-SelfGoverning Territories, is that the competent organs of
the United Nations should be in possession of official
information on the government of these Territories,
Recalling its resolution 144 (II) of 3 November
1947 in which it declared that the voluntary transmission of such information was entirely in conformity
with the spirit of Article 73 of the Charter, and should
therefore be encouraged,
Recalling its resolution 327 (IV) of 2 December
1949 in which it expressed the hope that such of the
Members of the United Nations as had not done so
might voluntarily include details on the government of
Non-Self-Governing Territories in the information
transmitted by them under Article 73 e of the Charter,
Considering that at the present time such information has not yet been furnished in respect of a large
number of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
1. Recommends States Members of the United Nations responsible for the administration of Non-SelfGoverning Territories voluntarily to include in the information transmitted by them under Article 73 e of
the Charter details regarding the extent to which the
right of peoples and nations to self-determination is
exercised by the peoples of those Territories, and in
particular regarding their political progress and the
measures taken to develop their capacity for selfadministration, to satisfy their political aspirations and
to promote the progressive development of their free
political institutions ;
2. Decides to place the present resolution on the
agenda of the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Governing Territories for its next session in 1953.
403rd plenary meeting,
16 December 1952.

C
The General Assembly,

Consid,ring that it is necessary to continue the
study of ways and means of ensuring international
respec'. fer the right of peoples to self-determination,

Reaolutiom adopted on reports of the Third Committee
Con.sidering that the recommendations it has adopted
at its seventh session do not represe--it the only steps
that can be taken to promote respect for such right,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
ask the Commission on Human Rights to continue preparing recommendations concerning international respect for the right of peoples to self-determination,
and particularly recommendations relating to the steps
which might be taken, within the limits of their resources and competence, by the various organs of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies to develop
international respect for the right of peoples to selfdetermination ;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
submit through the Economic and Social Council its
recommendations to the General Assembly.
403rd plenary meeting,
16 December 1952.

638 (VD). Integration of refugees
The GeneraJ Assembly,
Taking note of the observations and information

contained in the report• of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on the problem of assimilation of refugees in the countries of their residence,
Considering that the voluntary repatriation or the
resettlement in countries of immigration of refugees
under the mandate• of the High Commissioner, while
constituting valuable elements for the solution of the
refugee problem, are not sufficient in themselves under
the present conditions to offer within a reasonable time
a permanent solution of that problem,
Noting with satisfaction the efforts made by the governments of the countries of present residence oi
refugees towards their as~imilation, as well as the
studies and plans of the High Commissioner directed
towards the same objective,
Considering that, in view of the heavy financial burdens involved in the execution of int~ration pro~ e s , international funds may play a useful role
1n the successful execution of long-term projects for
.the assimilation of refugees,
lflflit,s the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, in consultation with the International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development, to examine the
situation with a view to exploring, with the governments directly concerned, what sources of funds might
be available and the most effective means by which
such funds might be utilized.
408th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.

27

639 (VII). Report of the United Natiom High
Commissioner for Refugees
The GeneraJ Assembly,
Concerned with the persistence of a serious refugee
problem which is the direct responsibility of the United
Nations,
1. Noles with appreciation the second annual report 10 of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees;
2. Takes note of the fact that contributions thus
far received by the High Commissioner for assistance
to refugees under the authority given to him by General Assembly resolution 538 B (VI) of 2 February
1952 will not be sufficient to provide in 1953 for
emergency aid to the most needy groups of refugees
under his mandate in Europe, the Near East and the
Far East, particularly in Shanghai ;
3. Notes with appreciation the contributions al~ea?~ made by governments, organizations and private
md1v1duals to the fund for emergency aid to refugees;
4. Expresses the hope that furtlter contributions
will be forthcoming to that fund so as to enable the
High Commissioner to carry out his plans of assistance
to the most needy groups of refugees;
. 5: Reiterat!s its appeal to all governments, spec1al1zed agencies and other inter-governmental and
non-governmental organizations interested in migration
to give to ~fugees under the mandate of the. High
Commissi?ner every possible opportunity in and benefit
from projects to promote migration, including such
measures as will facilitate the transit, resettlement and
employment of refugees in occupations suitable to their
training and skills.
408th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.

640 (VII). Convention on the Political Rights of
Women
The GeneraJ Assembly,
Considering that the peoples of the United Nations
are determined to. promote equality of ri~hts of men
and women, in conformity with the principles embodied in the Charter,
Believing that an international convention on the
political rights of w?men will ~onstitute an important
step towards the universal attamment of equal rights
of men and women,
R,.ffirming its resolution S6 {I) of 11 December

1946,
Decides to open tne attached Convention for signature and ratification at the end of the present session.

409th plnary m•mng,
20 D,cnnb,r 195~.
• See Official Rttortl.r of IM Gmtf"ol Ass,mbl;y,· Srventli Sission, S11pplfflllnt No. l6.
• See resolution 428 (V).

10 See Official Rttortl.r of IM Gntn'ol Ass1tnbl;y, Sn.•intlt
Session, S11,Pllfnfflt No. l6.
