United Nations

S/PV.9258

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9258th meeting
Monday, 13 February 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Frazier. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malta)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Kuzmin
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Ms. Shaheen
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Prevention
Letter dated 2 February 2023 from the Permanent Representative of Malta to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/80)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-04248 (E)
*2304248*

S/PV.9258

Children and armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Children and armed conflict
Prevention
Letter dated 2 February 2023 from the
Permanent Representative of Malta to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2023/80)
The President: In accordance with rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the following briefers to participate in this
meeting: Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict; Ms. Najat Maalla M’jid, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence
against Children; and Ms. Divina.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/80, which contains the text of
a letter dated 2 February 2023 from the Permanent
Representative of Malta to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Gamba de Potgieter.
Ms. Gamba de Potgieter: I thank the Security
Council for organizing this timely briefing on preventing
violations against children in armed conflict. With
25 situations currently monitored through the United
Nations children and armed conflict agenda, including
one region, the prevention of conflict and sustaining
peace, as envisaged in resolution 2427 (2018), has never
been more pertinent or urgent. I commend Malta for
providing a platform in which its implementation can
be discussed.
In his address to the General Assembly last week,
the Secretary-General expressed the need for a holistic
view of the peace continuum that identifies the root
causes of conflict and, in his words:
“invests in prevention to avoid conflicts in the first
place, focuses on mediation, advances peacebuilding
and includes much broader participation of women
and young people”. (A/77/PV.58)
2/22

13/02/2023

Each year in this Chamber, I present his annual
report on children and armed conflict, with data
collected through the monitoring and reporting
mechanism denoting trends in violations, which remain
at a shockingly high level. In 2021, the previous reporting
year, the United Nations verified nearly 24,000 grave
violations committed against children. The violations
with the highest verified numbers involved the killing,
maiming, recruitment and use of children, followed by
denials of humanitarian access and abductions. As we
are preparing our forthcoming report for 2022, the data
already gathered show that those trends continue.
The documentation and verification of violations
and abuses represent the first critical step to understanding the situation of children in armed conflict on
the ground. However, in the face of continued cycles
of violence and conflict that are only becoming more
intense, frequent and complex, we are increasingly
aware that understanding and identifying the pre-existing risks for children, and their vulnerabilities, will be
critical to protecting them and preventing violations of
their rights once a conflict occurs. Our partners’ years
of experience in delivering reintegration programming,
and our own research, show that the children who are
the most vulnerable to grave violations once a conflict
or emergency emerges are those who lack education or
livelihood opportunities, who are in situations of poverty and displacement or who have disabilities, among
other risk factors. Such children are therefore more exposed to recruitment or re-recruitment by armed groups
as well as to other risks, such as gender-based violence
in time of war.
Similarly, as we document children being taken
across borders and trafficked from or through conflict
situations, we would be remiss in our account of such
situations if we failed to track and respond to the
particular risks those children face. The assessment of
risks and vulnerabilities should include, for example,
systematically applying an intersectional gender lens in
analysing the data in order to establish a more complete
and context-specific understanding of the factors that
contribute to the risks and vulnerabilities facing boys as
well as girls in terms of conflict-related sexual violence,
including gender stereotyping and sociocultural
norms. It should also include the consideration of other
circumstances, such as age, disability and displacement,
as factors that can put children at a higher risk of
becoming targets of grave violations by the parties to
a conflict. Every person under 18 years of age must be
23-04248

13/02/2023

Children and armed conflict

recognized as a child, as children are entitled to special
protection under international human rights law,
particularly under the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. Sustainably addressing the situation of children
already facing other forms of violence and abuses,
as well as adequately addressing the main drivers of
recruitment, helps us break the cycle of the occurrence
and recurrence of conflicts. That requires investment
in a response that is long-term and tackles the root
causes of conflict.
What can we do, going forward? The United
Nations agenda for children and armed conflict
possesses a multitude of robust tools and initiatives
developed at various levels for protecting children from
grave violations in situations monitored through that
agenda. Its strength has been in ensuring dialogue with
the parties to conflicts, with hundreds of commitments,
including 41 action plans, put in place by warring
parties to better protect children since the mandate’s
inception. Recently, the mandate has also sought to
foster prevention, reinforced by the Security Council’s
adoption of resolution 2427 (2018), and has developed
joint prevention plans with Governments in situations on
our agenda, in addition to action plans and other concrete,
time-bound agreements. Today the Security Council is
giving us an opportunity to focus on resolution 2427
(2018) and the importance of providing support and
capacity for its further and urgent implementation
and operationalization. Prevention plans have been
developed in the Philippines, and we are engaging
with the Central African Republic, Colombia, Mali and
the Sudan to develop more prevention commitments.
I should note that our existing action plans in South
Sudan and Yemen contain prevention elements, and I
would also like to highlight the work we have done with
regional organizations, such as the African Union and
the League of Arab States, with which we have extensive
cooperation. Such regional organizations work with
their member States to promote child protection
throughout their own processes and to further the
prevention of grave violations against children.
It is worth mentioning that 172 State parties have
ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict. The Paris Principles, the Vancouver
Principles and the Safe Schools Declaration have
each been endorsed by more than 100 Member States,
representing another strong commitment to protecting
children in armed conflict. Those instruments all
contribute to child protection and the prevention of

S/PV.9258

grave violations. But more needs to be done. There
are opportunities to develop national-level strategies,
or common approaches to prevention, as well as at
the subregional and regional levels, and Governments
willing to engage in that direction should be provided
with sufficient capacity to do so. That includes sharing
best practices for information-sharing, capacitybuilding and follow-up with regard to existing
protection and prevention commitments, including
Security Council resolutions. It could also include a
coordinated mapping of vulnerabilities on the ground
in close collaboration with United Nations entities
in countries or regions where such situations exist,
possibly through deployable expertise. Ideally, the
capacity and expertise of the United Nations in terms
of child protection should be deployed to support
that effort.
For those reasons, my Office and I have strengthened
our partnership with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Violence against Children
and with her Office to better address the continuum
of violence and anticipate risks before, during and in
the aftermath of conflicts in order to close the conflict
loop. We commit to better understanding and externally
communicating the integral linkages between the
two agendas going forward, including between early
warnings and incidents of violations and abuses against
children, with children and their voices at the centre.
The humanitarian-peace-development nexus straddles
prevention, protection, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction and should be better understood.
In conclusion, in October 2022, in presenting my
annual report to the Third Committee, I called on it to
gather together all existing tools and initiatives related
to children and armed conflict into one comprehensive
international framework for unifying the elements of
this agenda with the goal of better protecting children
and preventing violations against them. I hope that my
call will be heeded, as it is clearer than ever that the
best way to protect children is to prevent violations
from occurring at all. That includes delivering on
the improved reintegration of children and finding
sustainable solutions for peace to which children
themselves contribute. The Council stands poised to
undertake that task, and we stand ready to support its
members in their continued work.
The President: I thank Ms. Gamba de Potgieter for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Maalla M’jid.

23-042483/22

S/PV.9258

Children and armed conflict

Ms. Maalla M’jid: I thank you, Madam President,
for inviting me today and for your country’s commitment
to promoting higher standards for the protection of
all children. Malta’s leadership in creating a better
understanding of the continuum of violence before,
during and after conflicts that millions of children
face around the world, as well as the importance of
a strengthened focus on prevention, could not be
more timely, as my friend Ms. Gamba de Potgieter
just highlighted.
Let us pause for a moment and look at all the
multiple crises that affect the lives and well-being of
children around the world, with and through their eyes.
Globally, as members know, many millions of children
live in conflict zones. Conflicts remain the biggest
driver of protection challenges worldwide and a major
threat to the lives, safety and well-being of children,
and are therefore rightly everyone’s concern. Conflicts
often overlap with other crises, such as the climate
and financial crises, and they amplify pre-existing
social inequalities, poverty, hunger and discrimination,
further exacerbating the risks and impacts of violence
on children. Millions of children have been displaced
from their homes as a result of conflict, violence and
other crises.
Already vulnerable prior to conflict, children in
conflict areas and children fleeing conflict within and
across countries are on the front line. The range of their
vulnerabilities is wide and, as highlighted by Special
Representative Gamba de Potgieter, they include
children living in poor and remote areas; girls; children
deprived of family care; children in detention; children
in institutions; children on the streets; children from
minorities; children with disabilities; and migrant,
refugee, asylum-seeker and stateless children. They
often face a continuum of violence encompassing
multiple forms that are often interlinked, such as
abduction, sexual abuse and exploitation, gender-based
violence, forced labour, trafficking, smuggling, child
marriage, enrolment in armed and criminal groups, and
deprivation of liberty.
Through it all, children lose access to critical
health, education and protection services. Their
developmental, mental health and psychosocial needs
are often neglected, with consequences that can last
a lifetime. Children who have no role in conflict
suffer the most from its consequences, but that is not
inevitable. Prevention of the six grave violations and
their interlinked forms of violence is possible across the
4/22

13/02/2023

conflict continuum if, first, children’s pre-existing risks
and vulnerabilities are identified and duly addressed
before conflict erupts; secondly, the highest standards
of protection, including the provision of access to
humanitarian aid and support for children and their
caregivers, are adhered to by all parties during conflict;
and thirdly, support and investment in rebuilding their
lives are consistently provided after conflict.
As demonstrated by today’s briefing, I am confident
that all Council members feel the urgency of addressing
the risks and impacts of that continuum of violence
prior to, during and after conflict, which is the door
to prevention. Only through investment in integrated
national child protection systems can we ensure
effective and proactive preventive measures. That is
why our solid cooperation and close coordination with
my colleague, Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, and
all United Nations agencies and programmes, including
in humanitarian settings, are key. They continue to
demonstrate that the complexities of the continuum of
violence must be addressed, while looking at all drivers
in close cooperation. Let me share some thoughts and
concrete preventive measures.
First, it is critical to understand and identify
who the vulnerable children are and where they live.
That means ensuring the early detection of the most
vulnerable children and caregivers by establishing
centralized in-country information management
systems to keep track of the exact number of children in
vulnerable situations, as well as rapid emergency childalert systems and awareness-raising. Also essential is
the provision of information, in language that children
can understand, on available support services such
as helplines, safe corridors and spaces, and family
reunification services.
Secondly, it is crucial to ensure the provision
of easy access to humanitarian aid and support for
all children, with particular emphasis on the most
vulnerable. Sustainable multisectoral humanitarian
programming is needed to reduce risk factors and
support protective factors that can make children,
families and their communities more resilient to the
adverse impacts of conflict. That means supporting the
scaling-up of integrated services, including in the areas
of education, health, mental and psychosocial support,
social protection, safe sheltering, child protection
mechanisms and justice.
23-04248

13/02/2023

Children and armed conflict

Thirdly, forced displacement due to conflict
heightens the risk of child abduction and trafficking
and children going missing. To prevent those crimes,
strengthening cross-border cooperation is critical, which
means ensuring child-friendly border management,
the rapid exchange of information and the proper
registration, referral and tracking of children who are
unaccompanied or have been separated. Pre-developed
cross-border data systems that can be reactivated in
crisis situations must be put in place. Such cooperation
will enable greater accountability for perpetrators,
including traffickers, through improved capabilities for
criminal investigations and mutual legal assistance.
Fourthly, all actions to address child protection must
be informed and shaped by children’s experiences, as
they know best where existing systems have failed them
the most. Children affected by conflict have already
taken action by providing peer support, promoting
peace and peacebuilding, and preventing radicalization.
In Yemen, children requested peace through a peace
resolution. In Syria and in Ukraine, girls have shared
their stories with the world to promote peace. In
Afghanistan, they have promoted peace through art and
writing. In Africa and Latin America, young leaders
have been actively engaged in peacebuilding. Those are
just a few examples.
Within the work of my mandate, I engage with all
United Nations Member States by providing tools and
supporting initiatives that help to ensure alerts of risks,
as well as the early identification of drivers of violence.
Over the past two years, we have engaged with more
than 80 Member States through their processes to
self-assess the progress made in achieving their
commitments under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and in relation to all the Sustainable
Development Goals in order to end violence against
children in all settings, including conflict areas. That
is a clear example of the three interrelated pillars of
development, peace and security, and human rights as
the essence of the Organization’s work.
In all my country visits over the past year to Africa,
Asia, Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean, the
Middle East and North Africa, I identified, together
with partners, varying levels of vulnerabilities and ways
to ensure early detection and early action. Through
my Office, we also provided guidance to the United
Nations system and States on ensuring the engagement

S/PV.9258

and participation of children, including by sharing
experiences of child-led initiatives and connecting
children across countries and regions.
Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter and
I are very pleased to have facilitated an exchange of
experiences today with Ms. Divina from Cameroon.
Enhancing the participation of children, boys and girls
in decision-making and establishing long-term policies
to address their aspirations and needs are fundamental
to building a peace that can be sustained. Our recent
joint advocacy brief on protecting the rights of children
on the move in times of crisis with UNICEF, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the International Organization for Migration,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe was a recognized contribution to guidance in
that direction.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm my
commitment to continuing to work closely with
Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter and all my
United Nations counterparts to provide joint technical
support and guidance, share practices, and conduct
joint country missions and policy dialogues in order to
assist Member States in their efforts to prevent violence
against children and protect all children across the
conflict continuum, leaving no child behind.
The President: I thank Ms. Maalla M’jid for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Divina.
Ms. Divina: Permit me to thank Almighty God
for this wonderful moment and Malta for convening
this important discussion at the Security Council and
giving me the opportunity to represent civil society
and children at this briefing. I also thank the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and on Violence against Children,
respectively.
My name is Divina Maloum. I am 18 years old and
an award-winning peacebuilding practitioner from
Cameroon, focusing on prevention, children’s rights and
gender-related issues. I started my journey as a young
activist at the age of 14 by creating an organization that
then comprised 100 children as changemakers. Since
then, the organization has mobilized at least 5,000
children per year in peacebuilding activities. Today
we are still seeing wars and armed conflicts across the

23-042485/22

S/PV.9258

Children and armed conflict

world that could prevent the achievement of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. In Africa and the
Middle East, the sociopolitical context is characterized
by an escalation of violence and insecurity perpetrated
by armed groups, including some designated as terrorist
groups by the United Nations. Many children have been
forced to flee. In Africa they are used as combatants,
mine testers and cooks.
My country, Cameroon, is in the grip of multiple
conflicts and is being affected by increasing levels
of violence and insecurity. Around the world today,
conflicts have huge consequences on human rights,
particularly for children, girls and women. As I just
mentioned, in Africa, thousands of children and young
people have been forced to serve as combatants, mine
testers, messengers and cooks, and some of them have
even been used as human shields. Girls and women, in
particular, are targeted for horrendous purposes — to be
used as sex slaves for military or armed-group leaders.
After living through this terrible situation, I
decided to take the bull by the horns. Responding to the
needs of those children, in 2015 I created Children for
Peace, a child- and girl-led movement working across
Cameroon and several African countries in complex
cultural systems and affected areas by working to
democratize the public sphere for inclusive governance
and greater political and economic expression of
children in public spheres.
Children for Peace works in various areas and
regions in Cameroon, with more than 100 permanent
members. Our strategy relies on art, capacitybuilding, the operationalization of gender peace clubs,
documentaries, mentoring, advocacy, psychosocial
assistance and even software design.
With Children for Peace, we have implemented
several projects, among which Silence the Guns, launched
in 2019, is one of the flagships. It is an integrated citizenengagement project led by girls, aiming to realize a
conflict-free Africa, thereby engaging all stakeholders
and mobilizing them to contribute to children’s rights
and effective socioeconomic development, as well as
peacebuilding. Through the project, children are taking
positive actions to find better solutions to issues related
to peacebuilding, violent extremism and human rights.
Children, religious and traditional leaders and even
local authorities are working together closely in order to
combat hate, violent speech and the illicit proliferation
of weapons.
6/22

13/02/2023

My work with Children for Peace has been
acknowledged and recognized because it yields
results. Through community awareness and advocacy
campaigns, the Silence the Guns project has helped
to reach at least 5.5 million people. The project
facilitated support for the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of 5,000 children formerly
enrolled in armed groups. I can concretely see that
the stigmatization of disengaged children and excombatants has decreased by 45 per cent in the targeted
areas — the far north and north-west of the country.
We also created over 270 peace clubs, which we
have been operationalizing in schools, neighbourhoods,
mosques and churches. These girl-led clubs seek to
improve children’s understanding on topics related to
peacebuilding, children’s rights, gender equity and build
their capacity in conflict prevention and resolution. As
part of that initiative, children have elaborated and
implemented a children’s declaration against violent
extremism and radicalization.
To strengthen prevention within the children and
armed conflict agenda and to fully leverage existing
tools to prevent grave violations against children
in situations of armed conflict, I will focus on one
specific recommendation that is close to the efforts of
my organization: children’s perspectives on peace.
In order to better integrate children’s perspectives
on peace and develop initiatives and sustainable
solutions, States have to encourage the involvement of
children and youth of diverse identities in the co-creation
process from the start, so as to better understand
their context and realities and, ultimately, design
more relevant, effective and inclusive programmes.
In projects and policy implementation, stakeholders
should create an enabling environment in which young
people can participate, so that everyone can make the
most of the opportunities available. For example, before
implementing projects, my organization makes field
trips to administer questionnaires to make sure that
children really understand a specific issue and issue a
proposal to mitigate — or maybe end — the problem.
We make sure that the beneficiaries are represented in
the conceptualization, implementation and follow-up of
the project in order for them to own it and to ensure the
replicability and durability of the obtained results.
Facilitating the involvement of children in
decision-making also means removing technical
and financial barriers that stand in the way of youth
23-04248

13/02/2023

Children and armed conflict

participation. From my experience, it has been
difficult to identify and obtain the necessary funding
in order to intensify my work and actions — either
because Governments do not fund children’s or girls’
organizations or because the procedures of many
funders are often generally complex. As an African,
when it comes to working with Governments or major
international organizations locally or internationally,
my feeling is that most of them seem to not take
children and young girls seriously. They do not always
allow or give them space to make decisions. They
prefer to work with adult-led organizations working
on issues that concern children and girls. To close the
cycle of conflict, there is a need to invest in children
and facilitate their participation. Stakeholders should
support the development of platforms that prioritize the
perspectives of children, including their experiences,
and allow for collaboration with peers, young people
and youth leaders to work together for peace, human
rights and initiatives that prioritize the inclusion of
children in peace processes.
Education is also fundamental to help to include
children’s participation in decision-making. That means
investing in education that includes critical thinking,
mediation, communication and working with others.
Education and advocacy must also target adults in order
to encourage them to better understand the perspectives
of children and their views on peace and security.
Further efforts should be made to empower children to
exercise and claim their rights by advocating for and
facilitating their participation in national, regional and
international human rights mechanisms and processes.
States too should strengthen the accountability to
children by building synergies between the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and other treaties and
mechanisms — the Human Rights Council, the
Sustainable Development Goals and the youth agenda.
We need coalitions to influence international political
discourse and agendas by setting and promoting
innovative discussions and perspectives on children’s
rights in a changing global environment. Finally,
States should ensure that the diversity of children’s
experiences in conflict, which can vary depending on
factors such as gender, race, ability, sexual orientation,
age, socioeconomic background and other forms of
exclusion and marginalization, are factored into the
development of law, policy and practice.
In conclusion, there is no doubt that children can
play a key role in peacebuilding and, specifically, in

S/PV.9258

protecting their human rights, with or without sufficient
resources. I believe that children are key stakeholders
and are capable of driving societal transformation.
There is one sentence that truly speaks to me — if
you want to see change in your community or in the
world, be that change — because change is the change
until the change changes the changer.
The President: I thank Ms. Divina for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Malta.
Let me first warmly welcome and thank Special
Representative Gamba de Potgieter and Special
Representative Maalla M’jid for their contributions. I
also thank Ms. Divina for sharing her insights and for
inspiring us to do better.
The Security Council’s unanimous adoption in 2018
of resolution 2427 (2018), with 98 sponsors, established
the centrality of children to United Nations conflict
prevention and peacebuilding. Malta underlines that
cycles of violence can be broken only by identifying
and addressing the risks children face before a conflict
erupts. Those risks include systemic factors that
increase susceptibility, such as poverty, displacement
and a lack of social protections. Resolution 2427 (2018)
emphasizes that children who are accused of committing
crimes during armed conflicts should be treated
primarily as victims and insists that particular attention
be given to children associated with terrorist groups.
The Human Rights Council also plays an important
role through its inclusion of the protection of children
in its resolutions and in the recommendations of the
Universal Periodic Review process. A sustained,
effective and coordinated response across the
United Nations system is critical to preventing
child trafficking and cross-border abduction and
for protecting children who are unaccompanied or
separated from their families or caregivers. In that
regard, we believe that we should leverage existing
mechanisms to strengthen cross-border monitoring and
reporting and to repatriate and reintegrate children who
are captured or released in countries other than those
of their origin. Regional and subregional organizations
also have a central role to play.
We would certainly welcome more systematic
reporting by the Secretary-General on early-warning
indicators of grave violations against children in
armed conflict and the implications of such violations

23-042487/22

S/PV.9258

Children and armed conflict

for regional peace and stability. Survivor-centred
approaches must also inform prevention and early
warning, as conflict-related sexual violence is often
preceded by discrimination, persecution, hate speech
and incitement to violence based on gender or group
identity. Although conflict-related sexual violence
disproportionately affects girls, we also see sexual
violence being used to target boys in order to torture,
subjugate and emasculate them, particularly in
situations of detention. It is important to note that boys
account for more than 95 per cent of conflict-related
detainees. Military training and standard operating
procedures should also address the gender-specific
needs of girls and boys.
Engaging children’s participation in identifying
pre-existing risks and vulnerabilities leading to
grave violations is an important principle. Their
perspectives are crucial to improving understanding
about the context in which violations occur and the
impact of conflict and peace processes on them. Malta
further underscores the importance of equal access
to literacy and quality education, which can help to
prevent conflict and provide children with alternative
pathways. Education is safeguarded under international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
as well as political frameworks such as the Safe Schools
Declaration and the Paris Principles. I would like to
take this opportunity to encourage all States to endorse
and implement those important instruments, as well as
the Vancouver Principles.
In conclusion, Malta welcomes a coordinated
approach between the Office of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and
the Office of the Special Representative on Violence
Against Children to strengthen prevention, respond
to violations and address risk factors in dealing with
conflict-related sexual violence. We also welcome
further coordination with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Ms. Gamba de Potgieter, Ms. Maalla M’jid and
Ms. Divina for their briefings.
8/22

13/02/2023

The protection of children in situations of armed
conflict must remain a priority for the Council. France
has been committed to this agenda since its beginnings,
and the Maltese presidency of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict knows that it can count
on us.
First and foremost, preventing violations means
respecting our commitments. France underscores
the importance of the existing normative framework.
The Council’s resolutions should be implemented.
The blacklists in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/493) should condemn all who commit abuses
against children. France commends the launch of
a United Nations task force in Ukraine to monitor
and report on grave violations against children. The
perpetrators of violations must be held accountable. We
welcome the role of the International Criminal Court
in that regard. We must ensure that United Nations
mandates contain robust provisions with sufficient
capacity and resources to implement the Monitoring
and Reporting Mechanism on Grave Violations against
Children in Situations of Armed Conflict. Its personnel
must be trained on child-protection-related issues. We
commend the work of the Special Representative and
of Malta’s chairship in organizing a summer school on
the subject.
National action plans have already led to the
release of more than 180,000 children from armed
groups and their reintegration into society, and the
Council’s work on that front is effective. Yet despite
those tangible results, children continue to suffer
in the impact of conflicts. It is our responsibility to
continue our collective commitment to the prevention,
release and reintegration of children who are victims
of conflict. That protection is crucial to long-term
peace. The recruitment of child soldiers draws young
people away from education and the prospects for postconflict reconstruction, which makes them vulnerable
to being recruited once again by armed groups. We call
for the universal ratification of the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and universal
endorsement of the Paris Principles. France will play its
full role in that effort. Let us protect and free children
from war.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Madam President, for presiding over today’s
meeting, and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Virginia Gamba de Potgieter and Special
23-04248

13/02/2023

Children and armed conflict

Representative of the Secretary-General Najat Maalla
M’jid for their briefings. I also listened carefully to
Ms. Divina’s statement.
In armed conflict, children are the most innocent
group and the most vulnerable victims. The 2022
report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/493) alone
documents nearly 24,000 verified grave violations
against children. There is little doubt that in the real
world, more children are paying dearly for conflicts.
The international community must take action and
shore up its defences to shield them from harm, so that
at a minimum every child can grow up healthy in an
environment of peace and calm. In that connection, I
would like to make three points.
First, conflict prevention and conflict resolution
must be the primary and ultimate means of protection.
Prevention is the best protection, and the most definitive
approach to prevention is eliminating armed conflict.
Ms. Maalla M’jid mentioned in her briefing that it is
conflict that has visited the greatest harm on children.
According to a relevant agency’s report released at
the end of 2022, approximately 449 million children
worldwide, or one in six, were living in a conflict
zone in 2021. In conflict areas, millions of children
wake up daily to the thunderous sound of guns and
artillery. They are dogged by and languish in violence,
displacement, poverty and hunger. As long as the
flames of war continue to burn, children will forever
remain in peril, terrified and exposed to danger. They
need more than crisis response and humanitarian relief.
What they really need is peace that is truly sustainable.
In order to achieve that, it is imperative to continue to
seek political solutions, which is the most conclusive
way to resolve conflicts, and to invest more efforts
in negotiation, good offices and mediation, instead
of automatically resorting to sanctions and other
enforcement measures, which add fuel to the fire
and merely serve the self-interest of some parties by
prolonging and spreading conflicts.
To achieve such peace, it is imperative to act
in good faith in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which
entails respecting other countries’ sovereignty and
territorial integrity, refraining from interfering in
their internal affairs, opposing manoeuvres aimed at
changing Governments and opposing the practice of
creating chaos and exporting unrest in the name of
counter-terrorism or democracy. To achieve such peace,
it is imperative to uphold genuine multilateralism,

S/PV.9258

strengthen dialogue and cooperation, work together
to build an architecture of common security and
unequivocally reject and oppose unilateralism, the Cold
War mentality, bloc politics and confrontations between
“us and them”. The choices we make are a matter of war
and peace, with consequences for the well-being of the
next generation. As the children of the world look on,
history is being written.
Secondly, prevention must be guided by the spirit
of the rule of law at all times. Both the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and Security Council resolutions
on children and armed conflict, of which there are
more than 10, clearly define the responsibilities and
obligations for the protection of children in conflict
situations. To effectively prevent violations against
children, we must enhance the spirit of the rule of
law, act on the basis of law and put into practice the
requirements of international law on the protection
of children in armed conflict. We therefore call on
the only country in the world that has not ratified the
Convention on the Rights of the Child to act without
delay, allowing that vital Convention to truly achieve
universal coverage. The six grave violations, including
the killing of children, sexual violence against children
and attacks against schools, are explicitly prohibited
by Council resolutions, yet despite being proscribed
in international law, those red lines are repeatedly
crossed. If the violations that have already occurred
are not effectively addressed and punished, how can we
deter and prevent new violations?
With regard to Haiti, our UNICEF colleagues have
told us that acts of gang violence against schools in
the country, including shooting, ransacking, looting
and kidnapping, have increased ninefold over the past
year. In the face of such heinous, outrageous acts,
fighting gang violence in accordance with the law is a
matter of great urgency. In Afghanistan, what we find
concerning is the fact that foreign troops have killed
civilians indiscriminately and committed violations
against children for the past 20 years, causing a series
of horrific tragedies. Some people have told stories of
their personal experiences, but to date there has been no
full investigation into those incidents, no accountability
has been established and no necessary compensation
has been made pursuant to law. We are equally
concerned to note that the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/46) once again states that in Iraq, the
killing and maiming of children have persisted, with
explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive

23-042489/22

S/PV.9258

Children and armed conflict

devices being the leading cause of child casualties.
There is no doubt that the countries that started that
war have an inescapable legal and moral responsibility
in that regard.
Thirdly, supporting children’s development must
be the overarching objective of our efforts. Preventing
violations against children is admittedly an onerous
job, but it is only a reactive goal. A proactive goal is the
holistic development of children. People’s childhoods
often shape their destinies throughout their lives,
and changing the childhood of a generation may also
change the future of a nation. The United Nations must
coordinate humanitarian and development resources
in a way that prioritizes in its work the eradication of
poverty, zero hunger, universal education, and physical
and mental health in order to protect children. However,
the harsh reality that confronts us is that unilateral
sanctions have undermined the economic foundations
and development capacity of the affected countries,
depriving many children of the rights to survival and
development, which are the most fundamental of all
rights. At the largest children’s hospital in Kabul, in
which many children suffer from disease and severe
malnutrition, we hear the distressed and indignant
appeal of the hospital’s President, Dr. Muhammad
Haseeb Wardak, for the unfreezing of Afghanistan’s
overseas assets, which he said, “is our hope”.
In the aftermath of the recent powerful earthquake
in Turkey and Syria, we have seen that unlawful
unilateral sanctions have led to a severe shortage
of heavy equipment and search-and-rescue tools in
Syria, leaving local people with no choice but to dig
with their bare hands. How many children may have
perished under the rubble as a result of untimely rescue
operations or insufficient rescue capacity? Once again,
we urge the countries concerned to immediately lift all
their unlawful unilateral sanctions without conditions,
not to become enablers of natural disasters or deprive
Syrian children of their hope of survival, and to desist
from their hypocritical political grandstanding.
The Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict is an important Council body for the protection
of children in conflict areas. I congratulate Malta on
its election as Chair of the Working Group and look
forward to it further improving its methodology,
including its planning, while monitoring all conflict
situations on the Council’s agenda and advancing its
deliberations and consultations with a view to reaching
country-specific conclusions in a balanced manner.
10/22

13/02/2023

We support the efforts of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Gamba de Potgieter to protect
children in conflict situations and highly commend
her visit to Palestine and Israel last December. We
look forward to her briefing the Working Group on
her visit and providing advice and recommendations
on strengthening child protection. Saving succeeding
generations from the scourge of war is what the United
Nations set out to achieve at the time of its founding,
and protecting the next generation is the abiding moral
responsibility of humankind. We should discharge the
Council’s responsibilities. It is not just about holding
meetings. We must take concrete action on the ground.
Let us tell every child in a conflict situation, “With our
action, we are not failing you”. The future is and should
be something we can all look forward to.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Madam President, for convening this briefing.
We take note of the information provided by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter;
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Violence against Children, Ms. Najat Maalla M’jid;
and by the young and courageous civil society speaker,
Ms. Divina.
As almost five years have passed since the
adoption of resolution 2427 (2018), which reaffirmed
the importance of preventive diplomacy in building and
sustaining peace, we must ask ourselves several key
questions. What is the status of conflicts compared to
2018? And more importantly, what is the trend in the
number of grave violations committed against children?
The answers to those questions are disheartening. The
global horizon note on the period from April to June
2022, as well as the Secretary-General’s annual report
on children and armed conflict (S/2022/493), show
that children continue to be killed, maimed, tortured,
displaced, forcibly recruited, abducted and targeted
by sexual violence. In the context of our consideration
of today’s topic, my delegation would like to raise
three points.
First, we must identify the root causes of
conflicts, including inequality, social, gender and
intergenerational injustice, a lack of opportunities and
weak institutions, which, along with other factors,
set the stage for confrontations and leave civilians,
including children and young people, in situations of
vulnerability. It is a demonstrable fact that societies
23-04248

13/02/2023

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.9258

that achieve acceptable levels of political stability,
democracy and governance are less likely to succumb
to such conflicts.

armed groups, because we believe in the power of
global solidarity in ensuring transitions towards stable
and peaceful societies.

Secondly, we should discuss the implementation
of early-warning systems and the exchange of good
practices on peace education at the national, bilateral,
regional and global levels. Ecuador supports the
Secretary-General’s call on States to utilize existing
mechanisms to protect the right to education for girls,
boys and adolescents. We must strengthen the synergies
and complementary work between the Security
Council, the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and all other partners within
the United Nations system to facilitate preventive
diplomacy, in accordance with resolution 1612 (2005).
Similarly, we should encourage States to join political
and pragmatic international instruments such as the
Safe Schools Declaration, to enable them to understand
and address the problems that limit access to education
in times of conflict.

Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes the convening of today’s debate.
We thank the Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Gamba de Potgieter and Ms. Maalla M’jid,
for their briefings and above all for the invaluable work
they do for children. Ms. Divina’s welcome contribution
underlines the importance of including the voices of
young people in such work.

Thirdly, my delegation believes that we must work
to find long-term solutions to this issue, including
by promoting the participation of minors, without
discrimination and with a gendered and intercultural
approach, in discussion processes, political transitions
and peace negotiations. For example, it is vital that
we listen to the needs and proposals of Afghan girls
and young women, who have been banned from
accessing secondary and university education and from
participating in the public arena.
We should address the difficult situation of child
soldiers, including by ensuring their physical and
mental health, as well as their reintegration into society
as victims and not as combatants. In addition, we must
undertake demining activities to facilitate the safe and
voluntary return of displaced minors and their families
to their territories of origin.
Finally, I want to express Ecuador’s commitment,
as Vice-Chair of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict and a signatory to the Vancouver
Principles, to the implementation of long-term solutions
geared to conflict prevention and the protection of
children and young people. In that connection, we
have formally endorsed the Paris Principles and
Commitments regarding children associated with

Every child has the right to a childhood. Every child
has the right to grow up in a safe environment, develop
his or her potential and be heard and taken seriously.
That is what the General Assembly enshrined more
than 30 years ago in the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, whose scope is nearly universal. And yet we are
still reading testimonials such as this one, in a recent
publication from Ms. Gamba de Potgieter’s Office.
“[They] were using a school [...] to bury the bodies
[...], children are being raped, several schools and
health centres in the provinces are being used as
bases for armed groups.”
No child should witness such violence. As we meet
today in this Chamber, grave violations continue to be
committed against girls and boys in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Myanmar and Ukraine, to name
only a few theatres. We have a responsibility to do
better. States have a solid framework to rely on in that
regard, which includes the resolutions of the Security
Council, in particular resolution 2427 (2018), as well
as the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its
Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in
armed conflict, and international humanitarian law.
Against that backdrop, Switzerland would like to
highlight three points.
First, the Council has developed a number of tools
to prevent grave violations. For those tools — including
the annexes to the Secretary-General’s annual report
on children and armed conflict (S/2022/493) — to
maintain their deterrent effect, we must preserve their
independence, impartiality and credibility. The United
Nations must be able to continue to engage with all
stakeholders to develop action plans to end and prevent
violations against children. Besides that, resolution 1379
(2001) requests that the Secretary-General bring to
our attention situations of concern that are not yet on
the Council’s agenda. The timely inclusion of such

23-0424811/22

S/PV.9258

Children and armed conflict

situations in the annual report will further strengthen
prevention, as it reminds all parties of their obligations
under international humanitarian law, international
human rights law and international refugee law.
Strengthening prevention also means working tirelessly
to combat impunity.
Secondly, ensuring the right to education is a
fundamental aspect of prevention, and our efforts in
that regard are under severe strain, as demonstrated by
the situation of women and girls in Afghanistan, among
other countries. Children who are not in school are
more vulnerable to grave violations, and yet attacks on
schools continue to increase in many conflict zones. An
estimated 222 million children affected by crises are in
need of educational support. That is why Switzerland
and the United Nations fund Education Cannot Wait, in
close collaboration with Colombia, Germany, the Niger,
Norway and South Sudan, will be holding a highlevel conference in Geneva this week dedicated to the
promotion and financing of education in emergencies
and protracted crises.
Thirdly, reintegrating children associated with
armed groups or forces is critical to maintaining peace,
preventing re-recruitment and ensuring that they have a
future. Many of those children are girls. Reintegration
programmes must therefore be sensitive to gender,
age, and specific vulnerabilities. And children should
be more involved in designing them. We welcome the
work that the United Nations, Member States and civil
society are doing on the ground. The development of
a rapidly deployable child-protection capacity could
further support those efforts.
The Security Council often falls short of expectations
when it comes to fulfilling its prevention-related
responsibilities. Strengthening the preventive aspect of
the agenda for children in armed conflict will enable us
to make concrete progress in that regard as well as to
protect the rights of children, as the Convention on the
Rights of the Child calls for. That is how we can enable
girls and boys to shape their own future and become
actors for peace.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would first
like to thank Malta for convening this meeting today,
and I congratulate you, Madam President, on taking
up the Chair of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. We look forward to working closely
together. I also thank our briefers today for their
powerful contributions.
12/22

13/02/2023

The international community must do more to
prevent grave violations against children. In countries
such as Ukraine, Afghanistan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, children are experiencing the
horrors of war and conflict. When violations occur, we
must act robustly to ensure that children receive the
support required. In that regard, I want to make the
following three points.
First, we must ensure that the existing United
Nations mechanisms are able to work effectively. The
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict and the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Violence against Children are critical
pillars of the Security Council’s architecture for
addressing such violations. We urge all Member States
to engage constructively and collaboratively with them
to that end.
Secondly, the United Kingdom is concerned by the
dramatic rise in conflict-related sexual violence against
children, with a 20 per cent increase recorded in the
Secretary-General’s 2022 report on children and armed
conflict (S/2022/493). Last November, the United
Kingdom launched the platform for action promoting
the rights and well-being of children born of conflictrelated sexual violence. Along with key partners and
Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter, the United
Kingdom has committed to taking action under the
Platform. That includes the deployment of United
Kingdom expertise to support the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in conducting a national review of laws,
policies and practices. We believe that such actions will
help to change the lives of tens of thousands of children.
Thirdly, and finally, the United Kingdom is
exploring all levers, including sanctions, to deter
perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence. We
have already announced a sanctions package, which
includes six targets in Mali, Myanmar and South Sudan.
Those countries were designated for their involvement
in sexual and gender-based violence, including conflictrelated sexual violence.
The international community must send a clear
message to all parties that violations against children
are intolerable. The United Kingdom is committed to
playing its part in that cause.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Gamba de
23-04248

13/02/2023

Children and armed conflict

Potgieter and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Maalla M’jid, as well as the civil society
organization briefer, for their insightful information.
Major progress has been made in the course of
the past 25 years, since the General Assembly created
a mandate to strengthen the protection of children in
armed conflict (see resolution 51/77). That once again
shows that the measures that we take collectively
matter and that they help to make a difference in the
real world.
The figures exist. More than 170.000 children
were released from armed groups and armed forces.
Thirty-seven action plans were signed, 20 of which
are under implementation. The Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict was ratified
by 171 States. It should become universal.
Nevertheless, as we heard, there is not much reason
to rejoice, as the reality that millions of children face
is still grim. The basic rights of children continue to
be massively and systematically violated, especially in
conflict situations.
In every situation of hardship, it is always the
most vulnerable who suffer the most and are the first
to see their basic rights denied. Armed conflicts only
exacerbate such violations, especially for children.
They are often deprived of their childhood, denied
schooling and terrorized by weapons and fighting
around them. Many of them will carry those scars for
their entire lives.

S/PV.9258

First, we need to invest more in prevention by
intensifying our collective efforts to develop and
implement concrete and time-bound action plans
between parties in conflict and the United Nations.
Prevention is also served by building on the existing
mechanism and tools to enhance accountability.
Effective accountability serves as a powerful deterrent
against further breaches of basic rights. In that spirit,
Albania supports the incorporation of the six grave
violations against children in armed conflict as a standalone designation criterion for targeted sanctions.
Secondly, we need to make better use of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism, the SecretaryGeneral’s annual report on children and armed
conflict and the tools available to the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict. But, to ensure both
credibility and effectiveness in common efforts, we
must incorporate measures against grave violations
against children in mandate authorizations and the
renewals of peace operations.
Thirdly, we must address obstacles to reingratiating
and rehabilitating children, who today make up half
of the refugees worldwide. Children everywhere need
a safe home and a safe environment to grow into
healthy adults.
Finally, signing, ratifying and endorsing the
relevant international treaties and normative acts are
crucial to better protecting children in armed conflict.
But, for commitments to become actions, we need to
ensure full implementation and accurate periodical
reporting in order to serve as guardians of children’s
basic rights.

We are appalled by the increase in extreme violence
against children in conflict areas around the world,
including Burkina Faso, Mali, the Sudan, Yemen,
Syria, Myanmar, Afghanistan and many other places.
Reports from Ukraine also remain deeply concerning,
with grave violations of the fundamental principles of
child protection in wartime. A total of 438 children have
been killed and hundreds more injured, and millions of
children have been forced out of their homes, including
thousands of Ukrainian children having reportedly
been forcibly deported and put up for adoption. That
is a major concern raised, which was also raised by
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. Grandi, only a few weeks ago.

It is in that spirit that my country, Albania,
repatriated children of Albanian origin from the hellish
refugee camps in Syria and Iraq in order to give them a
second chance at life. In accordance with pledges made
at the high-level segment on statelessness, the new
Albanian law on citizenship provides for an unrestricted
safeguard to grant Albanian citizenship to all children
born in Albania. In the same spirit, the guidelines of the
Ministry of Education provide for the registration and
support of children in situations of migration, refugee
children, unaccompanied refugee children, children
returned from migration, children from conflict zones
and children who are victims of trafficking at public
pre-university education institutions.

We must do more to protect children and ensure
their rights in all circumstances. Allow me to highlight
some key areas for further action in that regard.

In conclusion, let us remind ourselves that the
circumstances in which children are born, raised
and educated will determine their behaviour later in

23-0424813/22

S/PV.9258

Children and armed conflict

society. It is our individual and collective duty and
responsibility to make sure that their rights are ensured,
that they are protected from harm and that are provided
with everything possible to become healthy adults and
responsible citizens.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter and Ms. Najat Maalla
M’jid. I listened carefully to Ms. Divina, and we thank
her for her contribution and commitment.
Wars are claiming an increasing number of victims
among children. Thousands of girls are victims of rape
and other forms of sexual violence and exploitation. The
cross-border trafficking of children to and from conflict
zones has been repeatedly documented. It is fuelled by
complex international criminal networks, which trigger
conflicts in order to better plunder natural resources in
exchange for weapons and tools of war.
Such trafficking has led to an increased number of
child victims and their greater involvement in conflict.
The extent of the psychosocial damage, the disruption
of socialization processes and the loss of traditional
values affecting children are life sentences for most
of them.
The landmark United Nations report by Graça
Machel on the impact of armed conflict on children (see
A/51/306) estimated that nearly 25 million children are
displaced by conflict every decade.
Conflict exacerbates situations in which children
are abused and increases the risk of sexual exploitation
and abuse. Such abuses often persist in the post-conflict
period in the form of domestic labour that becomes
servitude, increased trafficking of children, increased
sexual violence or sexual exploitation in refugee camps.
Beyond the principles set forth in the Worst Forms
of Child Labour Convention, 1999 (No. 182), including
the prohibition of the forced or compulsory recruitment
of children under the age of 18 years for their use
in armed conflict, the situations that lead to the
recruitment of children and their experiences in armed
forces or groups are part of a continuum that affects
their well-being and development. In that regard, we
must re-examine that phenomenon in the broader
developmental perspective covering the time before,
during and after the conflict. Our understanding of
child soldiers must be as broad as possible in order
to best protect those recruited and used in conflict
14/22

13/02/2023

while they are in reintegration and rehabilitation
programmes. Such an understanding must include all
children associated with an armed force or group who
are or were recruited or employed by an armed force or
armed group in any capacity, including but not limited
to boys or girls used as combatants, cooks, porters,
messengers or spies or for sexual purposes.
We must continue to demonstrate fortitude in
our response to the effects and persistence of the
phenomenon of child exploitation in armed conflict. In
addition to the resolutions on the issue of the exploitation
of children in armed conflict adopted by the Council
since 1999 and the annual reports of the SecretaryGeneral, which include a list of entities recruiting or
using children in armed conflict, we must position the
efforts of the international community in a more robust
and dissuasive posture in order to protect children more
effectively. The perpetrators, leaders, commanders and
other adults involved in the exploitation of children
in conflict must be prosecuted and held accountable.
The decision of the International Criminal Court in the
case of Thomas Lubanga Dyilo sends an encouraging
message in that regard.
At the legal level, the Convention on the Rights
of the Child provides the most comprehensive legal
framework in terms of States parties’ responsibilities
for all children who live within their borders, in times
of both peace and conflict. The Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the involvement of children in armed
conflict and the African Charter on the Rights and
Welfare of the Child are particularly important in that
they strengthen the protection of children in preventing
their participation in armed conflict. The adoption of
those legal instruments by all have proven to be of
vital importance.
We must address the root causes of child
recruitment, including the risk and vulnerability
factors leading to their recruitment, including social,
economic and ideological factors. It is clear that the
majority of child soldiers in almost all conflicts come
from the poorest, least educated and most marginalized
segments of society. Those who live in areas in conflict,
who have been separated from their families or whose
family life has been disrupted, particularly within
refugee and displaced populations, are particularly at
risk. Poverty puts children’s lives at risk. It increases
their vulnerability to other dangers by increasing
their exposure to violence and exploitation, including
child labour in dangerous working conditions and
23-04248

13/02/2023

Children and armed conflict

trafficking. Predators who sell children into slavery or
for sexual exploitation recruit them from the starkest
slums and most disadvantaged rural areas, in which
extreme poverty makes children more vulnerable.
In implementing specific demobilization and
reintegration programmes, we must ensure that they
are tailored to children associated with armed forces
or groups and children who have been victims of
sexual violence, with a focus on community-based
reintegration that is as inclusive as possible in order
to prevent all forms of re-recruitment. In that regard,
the decision of the children and the communities
concerned on how such reintegration programmes
are run is critical to ensuring their maximum
effectiveness. When institutions are weakest, social
networks are least effective, infrastructure has been
destroyed on a large scale and social roles have been
upended, then reintegration programmes must be put
in place in order to provide real prospects and genuine
alternatives for the children concerned in order to
prevent their re-recruitment by the same forces and
even other countries.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the need to
base our global strategies for conflict resolution — and
above all the work we do on behalf of child victims of
conflict — on the need for protection and prevention,
in particular by establishing multifaceted partnerships
and strengthening resilience, while addressing the root
causes of armed conflict. Such a child-centred approach
is an invaluable investment in our future and one of
the best guarantees of ensuring that today’s children
will realize tomorrow our aspirations for security and
dignity throughout the world.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Malta for convening
today’s briefing. We would like to thank Ms. Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict;
Ms. Najat Maalla M’jid, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Violence against Children; and
the young civil society representative, Ms. Divina, for
their comprehensive and useful briefings.
The Russian Federation condemns crimes against
children in the strongest terms. The perpetrators
of such crimes must be brought to justice and held
accountable. Resolution 1612 (2005) laid the foundation
for monitoring the protection of children in armed
conflict. We would like to recall that the Security

S/PV.9258

Council agenda item “Children and armed conflict”
is limited to six categories of grave violations against
children — the recruitment and use of children; the
killing and maiming of children; rape and other forms
of sexual violence against children; the abduction of
children; attacks on schools and hospitals; and the
denial of humanitarian access. Resolution 2427 (2018)
is also of importance, as it significantly expands the
toolbox of measures for protecting children, including
preventive measures. We believe that today’s discussion
will draw attention to the need for the increased use
of the potential of resolution 2427 (2018), especially
since it explicitly calls on United Nations Member
States to prioritize the protection of children in efforts
to prevent and resolve conflicts and in post-conflict
reconstruction. In resolution 2427 (2018), the Security
Council reaffirms the intention to use the full range of
United Nations instruments to establish early warning
of potential conflicts in order to protect children and
ensure sustainable peace. It is important that such
work be coordinated at the international, regional
and national levels. Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
Gamba de Potgieter is doing very useful work that
deserves our full support. She and her Office and staff
are doing a great deal of positive work in helping States
to take practical measures. The Office of the Special
Representative has prepared a number of very useful
documents, in particular the publication Practical
guidance for mediators to protect children in situations
of armed conflict and other important tools.
The Working Group on Children in Armed
Conflict also plays an important role. That unique
mechanism contributes to better protecting children in
conflict and preventing future violence. The Working
Group is designed to deal primarily with the most
acute and large-scale situations of armed conflict on
the Council’s agenda. Unfortunately, over the past two
years the effectiveness of the Group’s work has declined
noticeably. It has become politicized, and instead of
in-depth dialogue on the physical protection of children,
there have been attempts to refocus its attention on
addressing human rights issues, which comes under
the purview of other United Nations bodies. As its
Chair, Malta is facing the difficult but important task
of establishing a constructive and mutually respectful
dialogue within the Working Group, avoiding
politicization and enhancing the effectiveness of its
work. At the same time, it is important to remember
that within the scope of their mandates, issues related

23-0424815/22

S/PV.9258

Children and armed conflict

to children are also being addressed by the General
Assembly and the Human Rights Council. It is essential
to adhere carefully to the existing division of labour
between the Organization’s various organs, in line with
the Charter of the United Nations and other instruments.
It is crucial to emphasize unconditional respect
for the universal norms of international humanitarian
law and the use of universally recognized international
legal instruments, which do not include the Safe Schools
Declaration and the Paris and Vancouver Principles. As
political initiatives introduced by individual groups
of countries, they do not enjoy universal support. The
Safe Schools Declaration, which our former Western
partners love to talk about, is completely ignored even
by countries that have officially accepted obligations
arising from it. Take the example of Ukraine, which
subscribes to the Safe Schools Declaration. We are
constantly seeing and recording attacks and shelling by
the Armed Forces of Ukraine on schools and hospitals,
which are also being used for military purposes to
accommodate military contingents and store heavy
weaponry. The United States, Britain and France are
also violators of the Safe Schools Declaration, as Kyiv’s
militants are using the artillery systems and other
weapons supplied by them are to inflict direct strikes on
schools and hospitals. In the case of the American High
Mobility Artillery Rocket System (HIMARS) multiple
rocket launchers, those targets are first agreed on with
Ukraine’s United States sponsors. Meanwhile, Kyiv
and its Western accomplices in those crimes do not so
much as bat an eye when it comes to talking about their
commitment to protecting schools and children.
Needless to say, I should not neglect the details of
what is happening in Ukraine. Relying on their backers,
the Kyiv authorities are continuing to wage war on their
own people. Kyiv has been brutally suppressing anyone
who disagrees with its inhumane policies in Donbas
since 2014. Over the years, hundreds of children have
died in the region, with ten times more injured. The
Ukrainian armed forces have deliberately targeted
civilian objects, including kindergartens, colleges,
schools and children’s hospitals. Let me cite just a few
of the most recent examples.
On 21 January, Kindergarten No. 279 in Donetsk
was damaged in Ukrainian troops’ shelling of the city’s
Kirovskyi district. On 28 January, there was a targeted
HIMARS attack on a hospital in the city of Novoaidar,
killing 14 people and injuring 24. On the same day, a
children’s hospital in Nova Kakhovka was shelled. Early
16/22

13/02/2023

in the morning of 3 February, Ukrainian forces shelled
the village of Bulavynivka in the Luhansk people’s
republic using HIMARS rocket systems, damaging the
school, the cultural centre and 10 residential buildings.
Such inhumane methods of warfare endanger children’s
lives, deprive them of their right to education and destroy
Ukraine’s educational infrastructure. Last year alone
4,574 civilians were killed in Donbas, including 153
children, and 279 children were injured. We regularly
provide the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
with information on the crimes committed by the
Armed Forces of Ukraine against children, especially
killings, injuries and attacks on schools and hospitals.
Russia has taken in hundreds of thousands of
children and their families who have fled to our country
to escape the Ukrainian forces’ barbaric bombing.
During that time, about 400,000 children have found
shelter in the Russian Federation. Ms. Maria LvovaBelova, the Presidential Commissioner for Children’s
Rights of the Russian Federation, is currently taking
steps in close cooperation with the authorities of the
Donetsk and Luhansk peoples’ republics and other
recently liberated regions to build a child protection
system and restore social institutions. Programmes
have been launched to prioritize keeping children in
families and placing them in foster care in the event of
the absence or death of parents and relatives. We are
ready to share our experiences with Member States and
experts from the Office of the Special Representative.
Finally, if we are speaking about the protection of
children in conflict, we should not fail to mention the
Syrian Arab Republic. We are extremely concerned
about the situation of children in areas that are not
under the control of Damascus, including the Idlib
de-escalation zone and in the country’s north-east.
Years have gone by and the disastrous situation in the
Al-Hol and Roj camps for internally displaced persons
in the north-east has still not been resolved. The
occupying Power controlling those camps, the United
States, refuses to address the problem. We once again
call on all countries to fulfil their obligations under
international law and take steps to repatriate their
citizens’ children from conflict zones. For our part,
we are consistently working to return Russian children
to their homeland and are actively engaged in their
rehabilitation. We stand ready to share our experiences
in that area, too.
23-04248

13/02/2023

Children and armed conflict

Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): I would like to
start by thanking Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Najat Maalla
M’jid, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Violence against Children, for their
comprehensive briefings. I have also taken note of the
recommendations of Ms. Divina Maloum, our youth
briefer. They have made us even more aware that
conflicts have a negative impact on the whole of society,
and that within it, children are the worst affected and
the primary victims of armed conflict.
Mozambique is therefore deeply concerned about
the trends in violations of children’s rights, specifically
those described by the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General. We consider them a warning
of the need to intensify our individual and collective
actions in order to prevent violations against children in
conflict situations from recurring. In that connection,
the adoption of resolution 1261 (1999) was a historic
milestone for the Security Council, as it formally
placed the issue of children and armed conflict on the
Council’s agenda.
In that connection, we would like to point to the
important and tireless work done by Mozambique’s
former First Lady, Mrs. Graça Machel. The report she
authored (A/51/306) was universal. Rather than merely
reflecting Mozambique’s own horrific experience in
the conflict that the apartheid South African regime
waged against our country and the southern African
region until 1992, it synthesized the experience of
children in war-ravaged countries around the world. It
was an important step towards the General Assembly’s
establishment through its resolution 51/77 of the
mandate of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, and a mark
of major progress in our collective action aimed
at preventing violations against children. We must
recognize that despite those efforts, there is still much
to be done, considering the number of current conflicts
with a profoundly negative impact on children.
Mozambique considers the protection of children
vitally important. Children have always occupied a
privileged position in our society. The Constitution of
the Republic of Mozambique ensures that children’s
right to protection and care for their well-being are
guaranteed and promoted nationwide.

S/PV.9258

Guided by that constitutional command, we
have ratified or acceded to numerous regional and
international legal instruments on the promotion and
protection of children’s rights. By embracing those
instruments, we are committing to respect and ensure
respect for the norms of international humanitarian law
with regard to children’s rights and to adopt all possible
measures to prevent violations against children,
including those in armed conflict situations.
In the context of our current counter-terrorism
initiative, we set up measures aimed at defending our
children, who represent our precious future. We also
embarked on the development and strengthening of
child-protection capacities within our national defence
forces and other key institutions in order to ensure an
adequate response to the needs of affected children.
Prevention is the key word in the efforts to protect
children in situations of armed conflict. Our primary
mission is to promote socioeconomic development
and address some of the root causes of children’s
vulnerability in the region.
I wish to conclude by reiterating the unwavering
commitment of Mozambique to continuing to implement
preventive measures that are conducive to the creation
of a brighter future for our children.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Brazil would
like to congratulate Malta for organizing this briefing
on such an important matter. Brazil is fully engaged
in the children and armed conflict agenda. We, too,
hosted a signature event on children and armed conflict
during our presidency of the Council, in July 2022 (see
S/PV.9096), at which we discussed the most recent
annual report (S/2022/493) of the Secretary-General on
the subject.
Let me thank Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Najat Maalla
M’jid, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Violence against Children, for their commitment
and continued efforts in engaging with parties in
conflict-affected countries to protect children. I would
also like to thank Ms. Divina for her moving and
inspirational testimony.
A world that abandons its children has no future.
It is a world that inspires neither confidence nor hope.
Children brutalized by armed conflicts lose their right
to a future and the project of life, and they may lose faith

23-0424817/22

S/PV.9258

Children and armed conflict

13/02/2023

in peace. Let us not lose sight of our intergenerational
responsibilities, and let us not forget the temporal
dimension of human existence.

for a comprehensive approach involving mutually
reinforcing political, security, economic, social and
human rights considerations.

Despite our efforts to date, there is still a long road
ahead of us. In many contexts, children remain subject to
six grave violations as a result of failures of compliance
with international humanitarian law, international
human rights law and international refugee law.

In that context, we call for increased cooperation
between the Security Council, the Economic and Social
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission in order to
make the integration of efforts more effective. Brazil
also encourages the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict to make full use of the
expertise of the Peacebuilding Commission, which is
uniquely positioned to bridge cross-pillar discussions.

Brazil believes that children could bring the
members of the United Nations together. While we have
recently seen deep divisions between members of the
Council on a range of issues, protecting children from
war should be a unifying force capable of bringing
Member States to common ethical and political grounds.
I would like to share some key ideas on the
prevention of grave violations against children in
armed conflicts.
First, a crucial part of prevention is ensuring
accountability at the earliest stages possible. Impunity
stimulates further violations. Accountability plays
an essential role in curbing impunity and, therefore,
preventing violations. Brazil not only calls for the
adoption of national accountability measures, but also
urges relevant international mechanisms, including
the International Criminal Court, to complement
domestic efforts. There can be no protection of children
with impunity for crimes committed against them,
and domestic and international jurisdiction must be
complementary in the realization of justice.
Greater attention must be paid to children who have
been forcibly displaced, regardless of their legal status.
Stateless, refugee, migrant and internally displaced
children are at a higher risk of facing grave violations
and other serious abuses, including recruitment and use
by parties to conflict, sexual exploitation, trafficking
and detention. Experience of physical and psychological
trauma and the lack of access to services to fulfil
children`s basic needs can have lasting consequences
for them and their families.
Secondly, there can be no dignity for children
without social and economic development. The Council
has already recognized that security and development
are mutually reinforcing and key to attaining sustainable
peace. In order to prevent and respond to violations
against children, Brazil believes that there is a need
18/22

Thirdly, education is an important pillar
of prevention. In countries facing security and
humanitarian crises, education is at the forefront of
peacebuilding efforts. Schools must be protected from
attack, as every girl and boy has the right to education
without fear of violence. It is particularly important to
prevent the undermining of girls’ education by targeted
attacks on girls’ schools and the denial of schooling
in certain countries. We need to integrate a solid
gender perspective in the monitoring and reporting of
violations against children, as boys and girls are likely
to suffer in different ways.
Education for peace is key to breaking the cycle of
violence in situations of conflict. If I may rephrase the
famous preamble of the UNESCO Constitution, it is in
the minds of girls and boys that the defences of peace
must be constructed.
Fourthly, if counter-terrorism takes place at
the expense of our children, it will have defeated its
purpose. Any counter-terrorism action must abide by
international law. Children should always be treated
primarily as victims, including those associated with
groups designated as terrorists, and they should be
detained only as a measure of last resort and for the
shortest appropriate time.
Brazil calls for preventive action to be taken at
national, regional and international levels. States,
United Nations entities and regional bodies play a
complementary role in preventing abuses against
children. In that context, Brazil reiterates the
importance of ensuring that child-protection provisions
and capacities are included in all relevant mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping operations and special
political missions.
23-04248

13/02/2023

Children and armed conflict

In conclusion, while children do not initiate wars,
they are among those who suffer their consequences the
most. Hence, the most effective way to protect children
from the inevitable suffering caused by war is to
prevent it from occurring in the first place. Investments
in the peaceful settlement of disputes, education and
economic and social development are always the best
choice, as they also provide children with a telling
example of how to resolve disputes through dialogue,
not violence or coercion.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I would like to begin
by borrowing the words of Maya Angelou, who in
recognition of the direct implication of our actions on
the lives and future of our children, stated, “each child
belongs to all of us, and they will bring us a tomorrow
in direct relation to the responsibility we have shown
to them”. As we meet in the Chamber, therefore, we
should be united by a common aspiration to protect
the children of our world and ensure their well-being
through enhanced protection measures and the pursuit
of a rigorous culture of prevention, as envisaged by
resolution 2427 (2018) and other relevant Security
Council resolutions.
In that context, Ghana welcomes Malta’s convening
of today’s timely briefing on children and armed
conflict. We share in the objective of strengthening
the regime for the prevention of grave violations
against children, especially in the context of armed
conflict, and we assure you, Madam President, of our
utmost cooperation and commitment to the work of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
which you now chair. I would also like to thank Special
Representatives Virginia Gamba de Potgieter and Najat
Maalla M’jid for their briefings, as well as the youth
representative, Ms. Divina, for her unique perspective,
which has placed yet another challenge before the
Council with regard to the need to be more proactive in
preventing grave violations against children.
Ghana is encouraged by the outcomes that the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF
and other partners managed to achieve in 2022. We
encourage the continuing engagement of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General with parties
to conflict, regional organizations, civil society
organizations and United Nations actors, which last year
led to successful outcomes, including the development
and implementation of relevant protocols and action
plans in Burkina Faso, Nigeria and Yemen.

S/PV.9258

Past outcomes inspire hope in existing capabilities
to ensure child safety, although existing needs also
mean that more should be done. We remain deeply
concerned about the fact that the children growing up
in communities ravaged by armed conflict continue
to witness and experience unimaginable horrors
of great proportions and frequency. The incessant
refusals by parties to conflict to lay down their arms
often means that children are caught up in the line of
fire and used as weapons of war. Violations such as
killing and maiming as a direct or indirect result of
hostilities, including through explosive remnants of
war, improvised explosive devices and the excessive
use of force, should not continue to deprive our children
of their future. The plethora of actors operating with
impunity or even in power vacuums should be stopped
and we must not relent in our efforts to prevent conflicts
if we are to assure the full protection of children. We
would like to share four key messages on how we can
strengthen prevention within the children and armed
conflict agenda.
First, we believe that United Nations early warning
and violence-monitoring efforts should employ
relevant child-sensitive indicators. Prevention can
be truly successful if risk factors that lead to grave
violations against children are identified, understood
and thoroughly addressed before the eruption of
a conflict — and if not, then proactively while a
conflict is still in full force. An example of a major
risk area that can be focused on and addressed is the
impact of socioeconomic factors, such as poverty and
the lack of educational opportunities, which increase
the susceptibility of children to recruitment and
re-recruitment by armed groups and sexual violence.
Peacekeeping missions by the United Nations and
regional organizations should also seek to integrate
child-protection obligations into mission planning,
policies, decisions and activities, and must endeavour
to include child-protection focal points in their
field operations.
Secondly, given the cross-border nature of some
violations against children in armed conflict, there
is a need for synergies among the United Nations,
regional organizations and member States, through
the development and implementation of joint
strategies and coordination mechanisms that enhance
information-exchange and cooperation to prevent crossborder recruitments and use, as well as trafficking.

23-0424819/22

S/PV.9258

Children and armed conflict

Thirdly, we urge regional organizations to deepen
their collaboration with civil society organizations
(CSOs) in the areas of early warning and early response,
with a tailored focus on child protection. Platforms
such as the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Peace and Security-CSO Platform,
if strengthened, could help to better detect and predict
threats to peace and security in West Africa and their
effects on children. For that reason, we encourage
ECOWAS, in its partnership with West Africa’s network
of CSOs, to foster the sharing of information and
experiences towards more effective conflict prevention
and child protection.
Fourthly, an indication of the level of importance
we attach to the children and armed conflict agenda is
reflected by the resources we devote in support of its
implementation. We therefore encourage the Council’s
full support for the allocation of targeted, practical
and rapid resources to facilitating responses to threats
against children or avert the potential dangers they may
face. Moreover, there is an urgent need for targeted
resources to be provided and collaborative efforts to
be made by the international community and Member
States to sensitize communities on explosive ordnance
risks, as well as to ensure the identification, fencingoff and eventual destruction of all types of explosive
ordnance that could endanger the lives of children.
We also urge continuing support for schools as hubs
of peace, including through enlightened education and
sustained support for school-feeding programmes.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that while
significant strides have been made globally in raising
awareness and preventing grave violations against
children in armed conflict, the distance left to travel is
greater. Ghana is committed to travelling the extra mile
for the cause of protecting children and securing their
safe and sustainable future.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I want to
thank very much Special Representative Gamba de
Potgieter, Special Representative Maalla M’jid and
Ms. Davina for their thoughtful and useful briefings
today. I thank you, Madam President, for hosting
today’s important briefing. We look forward to Malta’s
tenure as Chair of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict (S/2022/493) provided
a sobering snapshot of how conflict continues to affect
20/22

13/02/2023

children. For all of us, it was surely heartbreaking to
read of the nearly 24,000 verified violations in the
report. The United States remains firmly committed
to the children and armed conflict agenda item and is
keen to see it integrated into all the work of the Security
Council. When we take preventive steps to protect
children, we protect and safeguard our collective
future. To prevent future violations and abuses against
children, we must make clear to those who commit
those acts that they will be held accountable.
The Russian delegation attempted to spin its war
in Ukraine as somehow a positive for the children of
Ukraine. Let me be clear. In Ukraine, Russia’s brutal
full-scale invasion is having a devastating impact on
children. We commend the Secretary-General for
including Ukraine as a country of concern in his recent
report, which highlights the ongoing unconscionable
violations and abuses by Russia against Ukrainian
children. During his recent visit to Ukraine, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. Grandi, highlighted a tragic aspect of Russia’s
war — the impact on children and in particular
the issuance of Russian Federation passports to
unaccompanied children from Ukraine during wartime.
It has been widely reported that Russia is engaged in
the extensive relocation of Ukraine’s children within
Russian-controlled and Russian-occupied territories of
Ukraine, as well as the transfer of children to Russia
itself, and in some cases the deportation of children
from Ukraine for the purposes of Russification and
adoption by or placement with families in Russia.
Another indispensable tool in preventing those
kinds of violations is the expertise provided by the
United Nations country task forces on monitoring
and reporting, and by other United Nations missions’
child protection specialists around the world. Without
their tireless efforts and vital work, countless more
children would suffer. And it is our responsibility as
Member States to help ensure that adequate resources
and dedicated child-protection personnel are deployed
where needed in United Nations peace operations,
special political missions, and country teams to deliver
on their mandates. When we leave those positions
vacant or understaffed, we leave children at risk.
Children, especially girls, have been subjected
to alarming rates of gender-based violence. We are
especially distressed by the 41 per cent increase
worldwide in the abduction of girls, who are then
commonly subjected to gender-based violence, such
23-04248

13/02/2023

Children and armed conflict

as forced marriages, rape and other forms of sexual
violence. We are encouraged by the positive outcomes
of efforts to engage with parties to conflicts, which
did result in the release of 12,214 children from armed
groups and armed forces. Still, more should be done
to promote justice and accountability for those child
survivors and to urgently address the long-term effects
on their mental and physical health.
Children in conflict zones face acute protection
challenges. In Ethiopia, thousands of children have
been forced from their homes, separated from their
families and subjected to sexual violence. We are
encouraged by the cessation of hostilities agreement in
northern Ethiopia and hope that the Government and
the Tigrayan authorities will build on that momentum.
We also underscore that any lasting solution to the
conflict must involve comprehensive solutions,
including transitional justice for victims and survivors
and accountability for those responsible for atrocities.
In Afghanistan, patterns of child, early and forced
marriage and recruitment have been crippling to the
physical and emotional well-being of children and
youth. Girls have been particularly affected, as there
have been instances amounting to early and unsafe
pregnancies. Survivors of gender-based violence and
demobilized child soldiers, including those who are
trafficking survivors, need access to shelter and longterm care. The United States condemns and calls on the
Taliban to eliminate the harmful practice of bacha bazi
and expand protection and rehabilitative services for
the children affected. The United States also condemns
the 24 December 2022 edict barring women from
working for non-governmental organizations, which
will disproportionately harm women and children
as recipients of humanitarian assistance, including
medical services.
In conclusion, it is important, as I think we all agree,
that the Council speak with one voice for increased
compliance with international humanitarian law, respect
for human rights and strengthened accountability for all
violations and abuses against children. The Council can
and should do more to protect children worldwide, and
we can start by strengthening existing accountability
mechanisms and dedicating more resources to
United Nations child-protection specialists.
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like at the outset to thank you, Madam
President, for keeping the children and armed conflict

S/PV.9258

agenda a priority for the Security Council, and for
choosing prevention for our discussion today. We look
forward to working with you as Chair of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. I also would
like to thank Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Najat Maalla M’jid,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Violence against Children, for their valuable briefings
and tireless efforts to strengthen the protection of
children. And we are grateful to Ms. Divina for joining
us today and sharing her perspective.
I will focus today on the unacceptable reality of
children’s suffering in our region as a result of conflict
situations. I want to emphasize that every child in
conflict, and every conflict situation affecting children,
warrants the Council’s full attention. According to
UNICEF reports, in 2022 in the Middle East and North
Africa alone, 580 children were killed as a result of
conflicts or acts of violence. In the region overall,
some 50 million children are in need of humanitarian
assistance, and more than 13 million are displaced.
Resolution 2427 (2018) was a milestone in the work of
laying out a preventive approach to the agenda for the
protection of children, including through partnerships
across the United Nations system. As today’s meeting
is an opportunity to refocus our efforts on that issue, I
would like to highlight three elements that should guide
our partnerships in the area of prevention.
First, we need to prioritize and invest in education
as a tool for prevention. Education empowers future
generations and promotes mutual understanding and
dialogue among them. It also protects against child
recruitment and the hatred and intolerance that fuel
conflicts. Investing in education requires us to be
explicit, in our national capacity or as members of the
Council, about the need for equal access to education
and the protection of places of learning, as guaranteed
by international law.
In Afghanistan, girls have tragically been deprived
of their fundamental right to education. In Yemen,
the Houthis continue to use summer camps to teach
children their extremist principles and to recruit them,
in violation of their obligations under international law
and the action plan they signed with the United Nations.
Schools and other teaching institutions should never
be used to promote radicalization and should always
be sanctuaries for learning, nurturing and providing
children with opportunities. The United Arab Emirates

23-0424821/22

S/PV.9258

Children and armed conflict

calls on the parties to conflicts to comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
to safeguard, protect, respect and promote the right
to education.
Secondly, Member States should exchange
experiences and best practices on the rehabilitation,
reintegration and repatriation of children, and provide
the necessary technical and financial assistance. Wars
inflict severe, long-term harm on the physical and
mental well-being of boys and girls. That demands
comprehensive reintegration programmes that take
into account differences in children’s ages, abilities
and other needs. For instance, in Iraq, the authorities
and the broader community continue to grapple with
the traumatic legacy of crimes perpetrated by Da’esh
against girls, with an alarmingly increasing trend in
suicide among members of the Yazidi community.
Similarly, the dire situation of children in Al-Hol
camp in Syria, which has become a breeding ground
for radicalization, urgently requires the international
community’s attention. In that regard, we welcome
that efforts that have been leading to the repatriation of
some children, and encourage the countries that have
undertaken such steps to share best practices so that
others can take similar initiatives.
Thirdly and finally, coordinated mine action
should be a core part of our partnership for ensuring
a preventive approach. Even in times of truce or postconflict, children continue to be killed and maimed
by landmines. Regrettably, that is especially true in
our region. Throughout the years, the United Arab
Emirates has participated in funding clearance projects
for mines and explosive remnants of war, including in
Afghanistan, Lebanon and Yemen, and we will continue
to support mine clearance and awareness efforts.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Ms. Virginia Gamba
de Potgieter, Ms. Najat Maalla M’jid and Ms. Divina
for their insightful briefings. This year marks the fifth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2427 (2018),
which underscores the protection of children as a key to
preventing conflict and sustaining peace. Japan highly
values the efforts and achievements made to date in
that regard. However, it is regrettable that children
in armed conflict continue to experience grave and
large-scale violations of their most basic rights. Japan
urges all parties to armed conflict to fully comply

22/22

13/02/2023

with their obligations under international law and
implement all the resolutions of the Security Council
on children and armed conflict. We need to recall that
resolution 2427 (2018), which the Council adopted
unanimously, strongly condemns attacks against
schools, and we urge all Member States to ensure that
such attacks are investigated and those responsible
duly prosecuted.
One of the concrete tools for protecting children in armed conflict that is highlighted in resolution 2427 (2018) is ensuring access to quality education. Ms. Divina also pointed out the importance of
education in promoting children’s participation in decision-making. Access to quality education is a fundamental human right and a powerful tool for preventing
and mitigating conflict. It helps stop the recruitment of
child soldiers and also provides the necessary skills for
the reintegration and rehabilitation of children affected
by conflict.
From that viewpoint, Japan has supported a number
of education programmes in conflict-affected countries.
For instance, the Japan International Cooperation
Agency has for many years provided non-formal literacy
programmes for girls and women and teacher training
in Afghanistan. Also, with Japan’s funding assistance,
UNICEF supported the Government of Burkina Faso
in constructing secondary schools and developing
specific learning modules for promoting peace and
social cohesion. Building on the outcomes of last year’s
Transforming Education Summit, Japan is ready to
accelerate its efforts towards ensuring inclusive and
equitable educational opportunities for all children and
young people, including those affected by conflict.
Children must not fall victim to armed conflict;
they must instead be the seeds of hope to build peace
and sustainable development. We should spare no
effort to improve learning environments, ensure access
to safe and quality education and guarantee human
security for all children. Japan will continue to work
closely with other Member States, the United Nations
system, international humanitarian organizations and
civil society organizations in that endeavour.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

23-04248
