Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
lution 496 (XVI), by the insertion of a new paragraph 8 ( i) reading as follows :
"Improve the situation with respect to health,
education and social welfare in the N on-Self-Governing and Trust Territories;"
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council:
(a) To keep the development of the programme
under consideration with a view to its progressive
improvement ;
( b) To consider, as appropriate, further practical
measures which may be undertaken in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 535 (VI) and Economic
and Social Council resolution 496 (XVI) with the
addition thereto recommended to the Economic and
Social Council by the General Assembly at its eighth
session;
(c) To report to the General Assembly on the progress achieved.
454th plenary meeting,
23 October 1953.

733 (VDI).

Studies on internal migration

The General Assembly,
Considering the close connexion existing between
internal movements of population and economic and
social progress in the economically less developed countries,
Noting with satisfaction that the Economic and
Social Council, in examining the work of the Population Commission, has recently paid attention to the
problems of internal migration ( resolution 471 D
(XV) of 14 April 1953) which have generally not
been sufficiently studied,
1. Invites the Economic and Social Council, in cooperation with the International Labour Organisation
and other interested agencies, to develop, within available resources, an appropriate programme of studies
on internal migration, especially in the economically
less developed countries, to be carried out at the
request of the countries concerned;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to communicate
to the Economic and Social Council, for its guidance
and information, the records of the debate on this question in the General Assembly at its" eighth session.
460th plenary meeting,
28 November 1953.
734 (VIII). Recognition and enforcement
abroad of maintenance obligations
The General Assembly,
Having noted that the question of the reciprocal
recognition and enforcement abroad of maintenance
obligations has been before the Economic and Social
Council which, at its fifteenth session, decided 3 to
postpone consideration until its seventeenth session,
Being aware of the urgent need to improve the situation of members of families whose legal supporters
living in another country fail to comply with their
maintenance obligations,
Requests the Economic and Social Council to do
its utmost to complete, if possible, its work on this
question in such time as to enable it to report on
8 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifteenth Session, Supplement No. 1, page 32.

17

the results to the General Assembly at its next regular session.
460th plenary meeting,
28 November 1953.

735 (VID).

The Social Commission

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the provisions of Articles 61 and 68 of
the Charter,
Considering that one of the aims of the United Nations is to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom and to this end to be a
centre for harmonizing the actions of nations,
Considering that the General Assembly at its present session has adopted 4 a programme of concerted
practical action in the social field,
Recalling that the Economic and Social Council, in
its resolution 414 (XIII) of 18, 19 and 20 September
1951 decided that the Social Commission should meet
biennially instead of annually,
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with its resolution 414 (XIII), the Economic and Social Council
must review in 1954 the question of organization of its
functional commissions,
Having considered the draft proposals 5 made with
a view to the possible revision of the pattern of meetings of the Social Commission, as well as to the expansion of its membership to provide improved representation of under-developed areas and various economic and cultural patterns,
l. Invites the Economic and Social Council, in its
review of this question, to consider the aforementioned
draft proposals, as well as the suggestions made in the
discussion of this matter during the eighth session of
the General Assembly;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to communicate
to the Economic and Social Council the records of
the debate on the question during the eighth session
of the General Assembly.
460th plenary meeting,
28 November 1953.
736 (VIII).

Freedom of information

A
The General Assembly,
Recalling the decisions contained in the resolutions 6
on freedom of information adopted at its seventh session,
Regretting that the Economic and Social Council
was unable 7 to give consideration at its sixteenth session to the subject of freedom of information, including the report 8 of its Rapporteur,
Noting that, at its sixteenth session, the Economic
and Social Council postponed consideration of the
question of freedom of information to its seventeenth
session and decided, in agreement with the Rapporteur,
that the Rapporteur would present his report at the
seventeenth session,
See resolution 732(VIII).
See documents A/C.3/L.376, A/C.3/L.382, A/C.3/L.384 and
A/C.3/L.386.
6 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventh
Session, Supplement No. 20.
7 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixteenth Session, Supplement No. 1, page 25.
, 8 lbid., Supplement No. 12.
4

5
