United Nations

S/PV.6359

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6359th meeting
Thursday, 15 July 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Araud
Mr. Onanga Ndiaye
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Assaf
Mr. Heller
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Quarrey
Ms. Anderson

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that country
(S/2010/335)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-45202 (E)

*1045202*

S/PV.6359

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country
(S/2010/335)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Guinea-Bissau, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Guinea-Bissau to participate in the consideration
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Queta
(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I wish
to extend a warm welcome to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Guinea-Bissau, His Excellency Mr. Adelino
Mano Queta.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Mutaboba to take a seat at the
Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Her
Excellency Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent
Representative of Brazil, in her capacity as Chair of the

2

Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2010/335, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, and Her Excellency Mrs. Maria Luisa
Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent Representative of Brazil, in
her capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mutaboba.
Mr. Mutaboba: It is a great privilege for me to
present to the Security Council the second report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/335) on the activities of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS). I also appreciate the
opportunity to exchange views on the most recent
developments in Guinea-Bissau.
The latest report of the Secretary-General before
the Council focuses on the political and security
situation leading up to and following the events of
1 April, when troops acting under the orders of the then
Deputy Chief of General Staff took control of the
armed forces headquarters, detained the Chief of
General Staff and briefly detained the Prime Minister.
On the same day, military armed elements forced their
way into the United Nations premises in Bissau to
demand the immediate release of the former Navy
Chief of Staff, Bubo Na Tchuto, who left the building
after signing a statement that he was leaving
voluntarily and peacefully. The report also focuses on
the efforts of international stakeholders in the country
and in the subregion to impress upon national
authorities the need to restore and respect
constitutional order and enhance control of legitimate
civilian institutions over the defence and security
forces of the country.

10-45202

S/PV.6359

In my last presentation to this Council (see
S/PV.6281), I emphasized the significance of this year
as a turning point for sustaining progress in GuineaBissau, building on the good economic performance
and reformist commitment of the Government and the
leadership of the armed forces at that time, and for
advancing major reforms for the long-term stability of
the country. The 1 April events, which constituted a
serious breach of constitutional order, as well as
defiance of the international community with the
violation of the United Nations premises in Bissau,
have underlined the extreme fragility of the
peacebuilding process and its vulnerability to reversals.
Key challenges and obstacles to stability in GuineaBissau are well known, including the weakness of State
institutions, the insubordination of the armed forces to
the civilian leadership, critical development gaps, and
the illicit drug trafficking and organized crime that
have been affecting the whole subregion. Allow me at
this stage to highlight major developments since the
issuance of the report before the Council.
On 24 June, Prime Minister Gomes Júnior
chaired a session of the Council of Ministers which
considered a proposal submitted by the Ministry of
Defence regarding the nomination of the new Chief of
General Staff of the armed forces. The communiqué
issued by the Council of Ministers urged the President
to appoint a new Chief of General Staff without delay
and recommended that the President proceed with the
release of the former Chief of General Staff, Vice
Admiral Zamora Induta, who to this day is being held
in detention at Mansoa barracks.
On 25 June, Prime Minister Gomes Júnior met
President Malam Bacai Sanha, and speaking to the
press after the meeting, confirmed that he and the
President were in agreement on the issue of the
military leadership. Subsequently, on that same day,
President Sanha issued a presidential decree dismissing
Vice Admiral José Zamora Induta from his position as
Chief of General Staff, and appointing Major General
António N’djai as the new Chief of General Staff of the
armed forces of Guinea-Bissau. Major General N’djai
was formally sworn in on 29 June and promoted to the
rank of Lieutenant General. President Sanha stressed
that the decision to appoint General N’djai was a
sovereign decision not taken under coercion, and called
on the new military chief to ensure respect for the
civilian authorities.

10-45202

These recent developments are an indication that
civilian authorities in Guinea-Bissau are yet to exercise
full control over the armed forces. The appointment of
Lieutenant General N’djai was criticized by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the European Union, the African Union
and the United States Government, among other
partners, given his lead role in the 1 April military
insurrection. In an immediate reaction, a meeting of
ECOWAS Chiefs of Defence Staff scheduled to take
place in Bissau on 28 and 29 June was called off by the
ECOWAS Commission. Subsequently, consultations
were held at the margins of the ECOWAS Summit of
Heads of State and Government, which took place in
Sal, Cape Verde, from 1 to 3 July. However, these
consultations were held without the authorities of
Guinea-Bissau, who decided not to attend the informal
meeting convened on 3 July. During the informal
meeting, attended by the Foreign Ministers of Angola,
Brazil, Cape Verde and Portugal, as well as
representatives from ECOWAS, the European Union,
the Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries and
myself, on behalf of the United Nations, a consensus
was reached on the need to continue to advance key
reforms in Guinea-Bissau, and in particular a more
robust security sector reform programme, as a first step
towards strengthening civilian oversight of the security
institutions and creating professional and effective
security forces capable of confronting the severe
internal and external challenges the country now faces.
Let me, in this context, update members of the
Security Council on recent developments in the area of
security sector reform (SSR). As announced at my last
briefing to the Security Council in March, an
international sensitization conference on security
sector reform was held on 23 and 24 June in Bissau.
The conference was opened by President Malam Bacai
Sanha and closed by Prime Minister Carlos Gomes
Júnior, who also attended the opening ceremony. It was
co-organized by the Government of Guinea-Bissau and
UNIOGBIS, and attended by the main national and
international actors involved in the SSR process in
Guinea-Bissau, including ECOWAS, bilateral partners,
civil society and non-governmental organizations. The
conference gave an opportunity to international
partners, including ECOWAS and the United Nations,
to remind national authorities that, beyond their
renewed political commitment to pursuing key reforms,
some prerequisites set by international partners had to
be addressed to sustain the support of the international

3

S/PV.6359

community. It is important to continue to push for
these prerequisites to be met, in particular the
immediate release of former Chief of General Staff,
Vice Admiral Induta.
With respect to the Commission of Inquiry into
the March 2009 assassinations of President Vieira and
Chief of General Staff Tagme Na Waie, the Prosecutor
General informed me that the investigation is nearing
completion and that he needed to meet witnesses who
are abroad, including the widow of the late President.
He requested in that regard financial assistance and
international expertise, including from Brazil and the
European Union, so as to conclude the investigations.
Together with other international partners on the
ground, we have conveyed to the national authorities
that granting the assistance requested by the Minister
of Justice and the Prosecutor General would require
that guarantees of the fairness and credibility of the
investigations conducted so far be obtained first,
simply because we do not want to be a rubber stamp
for what has been done.
I would also like to highlight recent progress
made on the socio-economic front. From 17 to 25 June,
a mission of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
visited Bissau and expressed satisfaction at the
economic performance through May and the good
progress made in meeting structural benchmarks
established for mid-June. It also indicated that if
performance remained at current levels, the country
could reach the completion point for the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative in late 2010.
The IMF will be sending a mission in September to
review Guinea-Bissau’s economic performance in the
first half of the year under the Extended Credit Facility.
While these developments are encouraging, economic
performance depends on political stability, and we
must therefore make sure that international assistance
on the socio-economic front is fully consistent with our
efforts on the political and security issues.
The challenges in Guinea-Bissau are significant,
but not insurmountable if addressed without delay. The
status quo would certainly allow the challenges, not to
mention the spillover effect on the entire subregion, to
grow bigger. While the onus is clearly on the national
authorities to be mindful of these challenges and to
address them urgently, the international community can
resort to a firmer posture to ensure that critical steps
are taken that will help stabilize the country. What is
needed at this stage is the firm and genuine

4

commitment of the national authorities to continuing
with security sector and other reforms, more efficient
strategies, leaders respectful of constitutional order and
the rule of law, as well as a practical and time-bound
road map developed by national stakeholders for the
implementation of these strategies.
We also need more robust international action in
addressing key challenges such as drug trafficking and
organized crime. Such actions should be combined
with a firm posture vis-à-vis national authorities,
especially the leadership of the armed forces, to ensure
their understanding of the need to stay the course of the
reform process based upon internationally accepted
standards.
The President: I thank Mr. Mutaboba for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to
Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti.

Her

Excellency

Mrs. Viotti: I thank you, Madam President, for
inviting me to brief the Security Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission. I extend a warm
welcome to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of GuineaBissau, His Excellency Mr. Adelino Mano Queta. I also
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, for his remarks and for
his work at the helm of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).
Since I last briefed the Council (see S/PV.6281),
a number of developments have affected the peace
consolidation process in Guinea-Bissau and the
engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission in that
country. I refer, in particular, to the acts perpetrated by
members of the military on 1 April, which brought
further challenges to the prevalence of civilian rule in
Guinea-Bissau.
The members of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
met on 26 April to discuss the situation on the ground.
It was agreed that I should send a letter to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, which I have done. The letter
expressed concern with the situation created after the
events of 1 April and regretted that they took place at a
time when Guinea-Bissau was making important
progress in many domains. It noted the importance of
the Government and the military leadership working
together to strengthen State institutions, promote
economic development, uphold the rule of law, fight

10-45202

S/PV.6359

impunity and combat drug trafficking and organized
crime. It also called on the civilian and military
authorities to engage in genuine national dialogue.
The Peacebuilding Commission emphasized that
the April events illustrated the centrality of security
sector reform and referred to the high-level event that
was being planned before the events of 1 April to
mobilize resources to establish a pension fund for the
military. It also noted that successful security sector
reform efforts would require the appointment of new
military leadership in accordance with the letter and
spirit of the constitutional framework. It further
stressed the priority attached by the Peacebuilding
Commission to the need for the former Chief of
General Staff of the armed forces and other officers
arrested in April to be either released or legally
prosecuted.
In his response to the Peacebuilding Commission,
Foreign Minister Mano Queta reiterated his
Government’s commitment to the peacebuilding
process and the implementation of critical reforms,
including the reform of the security sector. He
informed us that the Government had taken action to
restore constitutional order and the normal functioning
of State institutions. Minister Mano Queta also
expressed the expectation that the planned security
sector reform high-level event would strengthen the
Government’s relations with the Peacebuilding
Commission and generate support for urgent projects.
The Peacebuilding Commission remains firmly
committed to supporting Guinea-Bissau in its peace
consolidation efforts. We so stated in the
aforementioned letter to the Minister of Foreign Affairs
and would like to reiterate it now. Our engagement is
based on the principle of mutual accountability and
aims at consolidating democratic institutions, without
which peace and stability will always be fragile.
The April events reflected a sad pattern of
addressing political disputes by force and therefore
should be strongly condemned. Events such as these
send a wrong message of disrespect for the rule of law.
They represent a setback to the peace consolidation
process and tend to discourage partners from
deepening their engagement with the country. Instead,
what should be required at this stage is a message of
strong commitment to the rule of law. The population
needs to perceive Government institutions as legitimate

10-45202

bodies that work within a framework of democracy and
constitutional order.
In this regard, a solution to the Zamora Induta
case is indispensable to boosting the peacebuilding
process in the country. We reiterate the need for the
former Chief of General Staff and other detained
officers to be either released or legally prosecuted with
full respect for due process.
In spite of the current challenges, it is necessary
to find ways to maintain the international engagement
with Guinea-Bissau. It is imperative to help Bissau
Guineans to consolidate their institutions as a means of
addressing the root causes of instability.
Security sector reform remains a critical
peacebuilding priority. Measures to train the security
and military forces and strengthen professionalism are
indispensable. It goes without saying, however, that
any successful security sector reform strategy in
Guinea-Bissau must rely on cooperation and dialogue
between the international community and national
interlocutors who have the full support of the
Government and international partners alike. The
subordination of the military to civilian rule is also an
essential ingredient of such a collective endeavour. The
Secretary-General has proposed, in this regard, ways to
strengthen the security of civilian authorities.
Another issue of grave concern to the members of
the Peacebuilding Commission is drug trafficking. An
effective fight against illegal drugs requires
functioning State institutions, especially in the areas of
justice and security, as well as firm political will. The
latter is key to securing the international assistance
necessary for Guinea-Bissau to increase its national
capacity in this domain.
We welcome the recent statement by President
Malam Bacai Sanha in which he urged the armed
forces to submit to civilian rule. He also highlighted
the importance of a security sector reform process led
by the State and of a relentless fight against drug
trafficking and organized crime.
These efforts must be reinforced by a regional
approach. We therefore emphasize the important role
played by the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). Also,
as individual Governments and collectively, we must
all do more and better to support implementation of the
ECOWAS regional action plan and the West Africa

5

S/PV.6359

Coast Initiative. These are all necessary undertakings
to strengthen the capacity of the Bissau Guinean police
forces in their fight against drug trafficking.
International cooperation efforts to consolidate
peace should not rest solely upon security-related
aspects. In order for peace to take hold, the foundations
for social and economic development must be
strengthened. We need to support capacity-building and
help the country revitalize its economy. At the end of
the day, it is the revitalization of the economy and the
creation of job opportunities that will generate the
resources to provide basic services to the population
and those necessary for the State to function in a
sustainable manner.
In
Guinea-Bissau,
as
everywhere
else,
peacebuilding will succeed if society and its leaders so
wish and if, as a country, they are ready to make the
difficult decisions needed to consolidate stability and
lay the foundations for prosperity.
The events of 1 April, despite their worrisome
consequences, reflected one positive aspect — the
significant support shown by the population for the
country’s democratic institutions. This is a clear
indication that Bissau Guineans are a peaceful people
who cherish the value of democracy and are eager to
reap the long-awaited dividends of peace. The
reconciliation forum to be organized by the National
Assembly in January 2011 will be a good opportunity
to further engage the population in a frank discussion
of the country’s future. We hope that it will contribute
to identifying ways and means to break the pattern of
settling disputes through violent means.
The President: I thank Mrs. Viotti for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Guinea-Bissau, His Excellency Mr. Adelino
Mano Queta.
Mr.
Queta
(Guinea-Bissau)
(spoke
in
Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation):
Allow me, Madam President, to congratulate you on
behalf of my Government on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July. Your country, Nigeria, has always played a
decisive role in the resolution of conflicts on our
continent, in particular in the West African subregion
in the framework of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). We are convinced that the

6

Security Council will review the situation in GuineaBissau with particular attention under your presidency
and contribute to the search for peace and stability in
our country.
Allow me, on behalf of my Government, to thank
the Secretary-General for his report on the situation in
Guinea-Bissau (S/2010/335). We note with particular
attention the observations contained in the report.
We would like to express our gratitude to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Joseph Mutaboba, for his tireless
dedication and contribution to peace and stability in
Guinea-Bissau. His presentation illustrates the
complexity of the situation and the seriousness of the
pressing problems facing Guinea-Bissau. The current
situation clearly results from various factors that have
contributed negatively to the persistent cyclical crises,
which we regret. Such recurrent crises have placed
Guinea-Bissau on the agenda of the Security Council
for many years. Time is of the essence and we
Guineans must assume our responsibilities, turn the
page once and for all and set our country on the path to
sustainable peace and stability.
We express our gratitude to Ambassador Viotti
for her presentation of the work of the Guinea-Bissau
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which she has led with great dedication
and skill. We highly appreciate the efforts of the
Peacebuilding Commission, which have greatly
contributed to creating better conditions for dialogue
among Guineans aimed at restoring political stability in
my country.
My presence at this meeting of the Security
Council is a testimony to the importance my
Government accords to the Council’s deliberations and
reflects its determination to work tirelessly to achieve
peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau. The challenges
are enormous and the means to tackle them scarce.
Alone, Guinea-Bissau will not be able to overcome the
current situation. We are at a crucial turning point. The
aspirations and legitimate expectations of our people
must not continue to be compromised, and we are fully
aware of that.
The progress in consolidating democracy and the
rule of law must not be permanently stalled. The recent
tragic developments in our country, in particular the
assassinations of the President of the Republic, the
Army Chief of General Staff and other high-ranking

10-45202

S/PV.6359

officials have profoundly affected Guinean society and
are contrary to our cultural values of dialogue and
brotherly coexistence. As recently stated by President
of the Republic Malam Bacai Sanha at a meeting of the
defence corps, the events of 1 April are unacceptable
and must not be repeated.
The authorities of my country are of the view that
the reform of the defence and security sectors is
fundamental and must not be postponed. We are fully
conscious of the fact that Guinea-Bissau needs a
republican and modern army dedicated to the important
role of consolidating the rule of law. The recent
conference on the reform of the defence and security
sectors, held in June in Bissau, took place in an
environment of candour and cordiality and
demonstrated the resolve of the military to undertake
these reforms. I take this opportunity to thank the
members of the international community — in
particular our brothers from ECOWAS, the European
Union, Portugal and Brazil — for their tireless support
for our country in this process.
Significant steps have already been taken and we
must now persevere in the same spirit of cooperation
and determination. If these security and defence
reforms are to take place, the Government of GuineaBissau must enjoy the support of the international
community in the establishment of a pension fund. In

this regard, the convening of a high-level meeting on
security sector reform and a round table with our
development partners is essential to the future of our
country.
We reaffirm the determination of our Government
to fight resolutely against drug trafficking in our
country and the subregion, of course with the technical
and legal assistance of our partners.
In spite of the persistent crises that have shaken
our country in recent times, Guinea-Bissau should not
be considered a lost cause. We understand the
legitimate concerns and questions of the international
community, but on behalf of my country I can assure
the Council that the authorities of my country are
firmly committed to consolidating democracy and the
rule of law, fighting impunity and creating an
environment conducive to stability and the well-being
of our people. We count on the international
community’s solidarity and support.
The President: I thank Minister Queta for his
statement.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I now invite
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

10-45202

7
