S/PV.5127 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5127

th meeting
Thursday, 17 February 2005, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adechi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Benin)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. El Hadj Ali
Mr. Garcia Moritan
Mrs. Maierá
Mr. Li Song
Mrs. Machon
Mr. Journès
Mr. Andreades
Mr. Omura
Ms. Taguiang
Ms. Mihu
Mr. Smirnov
Mr. Bye
Mr. Salaita
Mr. Olson

Agenda
Small arms
Report of the Secretary-General on small arms (S/2005/69)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-24256 (E)

*0524256*

S/PV.5127 (Resumption 1)

The meeting was resumed at 3.25 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Mali in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Diarra
(Mali) took the seat reserved for him at the side
of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): I wish to
remind all speakers of what I indicated at this
morning’s meeting, that is, that they should limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
Also, I will not individually invite speakers to
take seats at the table or invite them to resume their
seats at the side of the Chamber. When a speaker is
taking the floor, the Conference Officer will seat the
next speaker on the list at the table.
I thank representatives for their understanding
and cooperation.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Australia, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Dauth (Australia): Mr. President, it is a
pleasure to be here under your watch. Forgive me, I
had understood that the Council was resuming at
3 p.m., not 3.30 p.m.; I apologize for having got that
time wrong.
Let me say also that I was somewhat disappointed
not to have been able to speak before lunch. I had
thought that those of us who were prepared to give
statements within the prescribed limits should be
rewarded, not punished. So I gave some thought over
lunch to expanding my three-minute statement from
three minutes to 30 minutes, to see how that would fly.
But out of concern for my reputation — which I hope

2

is well established — for giving very short statements,
and out of my deep affection for you, Mr. President, I
will stick to the three-minute version.
Australia welcomes the Council’s ongoing
consideration of small arms and light weapons issues.
The Secretary-General’s latest report is a solid
assessment of the Council’s efforts over the past
12 months to address small arms issues within its
mandate, highlighting achievements and gaps. We urge
the Council to continue actively considering the
security and humanitarian dimensions of the illicit
small arms trade and their impact on stability in
conflict and post-conflict situations.
In particular, when imposing United Nations arms
embargoes
and
establishing
United
Nations
peacekeeping operations, the Council must be attuned
to the impact of illicit small arms transfers. The
Council’s continued attention to small arms issues,
particularly in the regional context, will strengthen the
international community’s resolve to increase pressure,
through embargoes and monitoring mechanisms, on
those responsible for illicit transfers.
The Council cannot work on its own, alone, of
course, in addressing the small arms threat. It is highly
incumbent on Member States themselves to strictly
enforce United Nations arms embargoes and to
implement strong national export controls, including
systems of end-user certification, to prevent the
uncontrolled spread of small arms.
Australia has been active in promoting effective
measures against the illicit small arms trade in our
region, including by co-hosting, in August 2004, with
the Governments of Fiji and of Japan and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in
Asia and the Pacific, the Third Pacific Islands Small
Arms Workshop. The Workshop’s practical focus on
the implementation of model weapons control
legislation endorsed by Pacific Island Forum leaders in
2003 is helping materially to institute a common
regional approach to weapon control. The Workshop
also promoted regional adherence to the United
Nations Programme of Action.
At the fifty-ninth session of the General
Assembly, Australia led the adoption by consensus in
the First Committee of a new resolution on preventing
the illicit transfer of, unauthorized access to and the
use of Man-Portable Air Defence Systems
(MANPADS), creating the first international standard

S/PV.5127 (Resumption 1)

on MANPADS. Australia urges Member States to
implement the resolution by taking practical measures
to control the production, stockpiling, transfer and
brokering of MANPADS, and to enact or improve
legislation to ban the transfer of MANPADS to nonState actors.
Australia welcomes recent progress at the second
session of the open-ended working group on the
marking and tracing of small arms and light weapons
and looks forward to the conclusion of an international
instrument at the final session in July. A marking and
tracing instrument will be a further concrete step in
international efforts to better understand and control
illicit transfers. Australia encourages Member States to
take a pragmatic approach to the final round of
negotiations to construct an instrument that is credible
and implementable.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Australia for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Nigeria, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Wali (Nigeria): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, on behalf of the Nigerian delegation for
your initiative in organizing this important debate. It
affords the Security Council an excellent opportunity
to address the global threat of illicit arms trafficking.
We look forward to a successful and fruitful conclusion
of the debate under your able guidance. My delegation
also wishes to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on small arms.
Illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons
constitutes a major impediment to peace, stability,
security and economic development in many
developing countries, especially in Africa. Over the
past decade alone, the use of illicit small arms and light
weapons has caused more than 20 million victims in
Africa, many of whom were civilians — women and
children. An estimated 2 million children have been
killed, 5 million people have been handicapped,
12 million have been left without shelter and as many
as 17 million have either been displaced or become
refugees. Indeed, in Africa, the ever-expanding illicit
trade in small arms is thriving at the expense of the
continent’s youth. As a consequence, a whole
generation of African children is being inducted into a
culture of violence marked by injury and violent death.

The Government of Nigeria therefore welcomes
all of the efforts made by the international community
to tackle this problem. Let me re-emphasize the
importance of the early and full implementation of the
2001 United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All its Aspects. In doing so, I
wish to underline Nigeria’s commitment to the
December 2000 Bamako Declaration on an African
Common Position on the Illicit Proliferation,
Circulation and Trafficking of Small Arms and Light
Weapons. It is noteworthy that the positions expressed
in the Declaration continue to be validated by events
unfolding around the world.
Nigeria views as a positive development the
conclusion, two weeks ago, of the second substantive
session of the Open-ended Working Group mandated to
negotiate an international instrument on tracing illicit
small arms and light weapons. It is our expectation that
the Group’s final session in June will result in a firm
agreement on a legally binding instrument that will
address global concerns on that important matter. That
is the only way that the international community can
demonstrate a true commitment to this problem.
Indeed, we believe that such an outcome will have a
positive impact on the forthcoming Biennial Meeting
of States to Consider the Implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, which is to take place in
July, as well as on the review conference on the
Programme of Action that is to be held next year.
One of the greatest difficulties in controlling the
illicit proliferation of small arms is their easy
accessibility to non-State actors. In appreciation of that
problem and of the need for concerted action, President
Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria has, in clear terms and
in various forums, including the General Assembly,
drawn attention to the need for global action to control
the trade in small arms and light weapons. We believe
that the failure of the international community to hold
arms manufacturers, their agents and brokers to
account has been largely responsible for the
uncontrolled illicit proliferation of small arms and light
weapons in Africa, with its attendant consequences on
the continent. That situation should not be allowed to
continue.
Four months ago, in the First Committee of the
General Assembly, the Nigerian delegation called on

3

S/PV.5127 (Resumption 1)

the international community to intensify efforts to
investigate and identify the link between the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons and the illicit
exploitation of natural and other resources, particularly
those of affected countries in Africa. We are therefore
pleased to see that that was one of the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2005/69). However, we urge the Security
Council to ensure the full implementation of the
findings and recommendations of its panels of experts
and monitoring mechanisms that have so far
investigated such links.
Nigeria shares the view of the Secretary-General
that the failure of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes in many post-conflict
situations is due principally to the non-inclusion of
such programmes in ceasefire agreements and in the
mandates and budgets of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We therefore urge the Council to ensure a
secure funding basis from the assessed budget for
peacekeeping that would guarantee the return of excombatants to their communities under planned
reintegration activities, as required by Security Council
resolutions. That should include specific measures for
the collection and disposal of illicit and surplus arms.
In addressing the threat posed by illicit small
arms trafficking, there is a need to enhance cooperation
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
on the one hand, and the Department for Disarmament
Affairs, on the other. We believe that strengthening the
role of the Coordinating Action on Small Arms
mechanism would lead towards that goal.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Nigeria for the kind words he
addressed to me.
I now call on the representative of Senegal.
Mr. Niang (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to say how pleased my delegation is, Sir, to see
you presiding over the work of the Security Council
this month. We also wish to congratulate you very
warmly on your commendable initiative to hold an
open debate on the subject of small arms. We would
also like to thank Mr. Nobuyasu Abe, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Disarmament Affairs, for his very relevant
presentation this morning.
Never in the history of humankind has the world
suffered so much from the horrors of the proliferation

4

of, and illicit trafficking in, small arms and light
weapons. Easy to use, durable and easily available on
the black market, such weapons — whose number is
now estimated to be over 500 million — due to the
lack of an adequate constraint mechanism, easily make
their way into illicit trafficking, fuelling conflict,
perpetuating crime and fostering mercenary activities.
It has been estimated that, from 1990 to 2001 alone,
such weapons resulted in the deaths of more than
4 million innocent people, mostly women and children,
and caused massive population displacements,
condemning people to live in itinerant poverty, in grave
violation of international humanitarian law.
The lethal character of these weapons has sadly
been proved in West Africa, where they have been
recycled from conflict to conflict by death merchants
whose activities have increased the fragility of the
economic and social fabric of the States in which they
operate. It is for that reason that the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) deems
the fight against the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons to be one of the fundamental priorities of its
common policy. That is also the reason why we
established a moratorium on the manufacture, import
and export of small arms. As mentioned in the report
(S/2005/69) of the Secretary-General, with the
cooperation of the United Nations Development
Programme and the Programme for Coordination and
Assistance for Security and Development, the States of
the subregion have mobilized themselves to transform
the moratorium into a legally binding instrument. In
that connection, I continue to believe that ECOWAS
will be able to count on the ongoing support of all its
partners, foremost among which is the United Nations.
My delegation believes that, once adopted by
ECOWAS, such an instrument will serve as a strong
subregional pillar in the legal architecture on small
arms that the international community must establish.
Senegal therefore voices the ardent desire, shared by
the majority of States, for a successful conclusion, as
soon as possible, to the international negotiations on
two binding legal instruments in the sensitive areas of
the tracing of, and brokering in, small arms and light
weapons. Were they to be concluded, those two
instruments would address the concerns underlying
several of the Secretary-General’s 12 recommendations.
Here, I would mention recommendations 1 and 2, on
tracing; recommendation 6, on the links between the
illicit trafficking in weapons and the illegal

S/PV.5127 (Resumption 1)

exploitation of resources; recommendation 9, on the
export and transfer of small arms; and recommendation
12, on transparency in armaments.
Beyond those, my country supports all the
relevant proposals made in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, which include two proposals that have
particularly drawn Senegal’s interest. The first, which
pertains to the regional and subregional aspect of the
problem, entails the establishment and implementation
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) programmes while at the same time ensuring
that doing so does not suffer as a result of insufficient
resources. My country would therefore like to see a
line item on DDR programmes as part of the
peacekeeping operations budget. The second point
pertains to scrupulously observing Security Council
arms embargoes. However, my delegation believes that
here there must be a clear mechanism to detect
violations and punish violators.
Furthermore, my delegation would have been
even more satisfied with the excellent report
introduced today if its recommendations had included
an item on cooperation to strengthen capacity-building
in combating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in countries and regions suffering from this
scourge, as well as to address the limited financial and
human resources available for that task.
The proposals for action to which I have referred
should be implemented as soon as possible, in order to
quickly defeat this multinational criminal enterprise
that has been wiping out innocent lives and to hasten
the dawn of a world that is more prosperous by virtue
of being safer and more peaceful.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Senegal for the kind words he
addressed to me.
I now call on the representative of Venezuela.
Mrs. Núñez de Odremán (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of the delegation of Venezuela,
allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council.
The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela considers that the issue of small arms and
light weapons is of the utmost importance. We are as
concerned about it as all the other members of the
international community. We believe that the

indiscriminate and illicit use of such weapons and their
unbridled proliferation are increasing insecurity.
We stress the need for effective efforts to resolve
the problem of small arms and light weapons through
administrative measures and legislation, and we call on
manufacturers and on the nations possessing the largest
arsenals to make significant reductions in the
production of and trade in conventional weapons —
which constitute the main source of the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons.
All of this is linked to the public harm caused by
the trade in those weapons, in addition to its ties to
such criminal activities as organized crime, drug
trafficking and terrorism. However, that must not
undermine the right of self-determination, taking into
account the special situation of peoples that have been
subjected to colonial domination or other forms of
domination and foreign occupation, and recognizing
the right of those peoples to adopt legitimate measures
to ensure their inalienable right to self-determination,
as noted in the report of the United Nations Conference
on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons
in All Its Aspects.
In
that
regard,
we
agree
with
the
recommendations outlined by the Secretary-General in
his report, in particular recommendation 1 on the
negotiations being pursued in the Open-ended Working
Group to negotiate an international instrument to
enable States to identify and trace, in a timely and
reliable manner, illicit small arms and light weapons,
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 58/241.
We also agree that States are endowed with the
right to manufacture, import and stockpile small arms
and light weapons to meet their legitimate defence and
security needs. We believe that such operations
represent the sovereign right of nations to equip
themselves. In that respect, we believe it appropriate in
this forum to denounce the uncertainty expressed by
spokesmen of the Department of State of the United
States of America regarding the purchase of Russian
equipment by my Government. We wish to make it
clear that the purchase and provision of equipment to
our national armed forces serve two purposes: to
support the civil population and to defend the national
sovereignty.
We categorically reject the statements made by
the spokesmen of the United States Department of
State to the effect that the weapons purchased by my

5

S/PV.5127 (Resumption 1)

Government could fall into the hands of international
criminals. Those statements are exaggerated,
tendentious and aimed at persuading international
public opinion that the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela is a country that shelters criminals and
terrorists, and not a sovereign State endowed with the
legitimate right to defend itself and to purchase any
weapons it deems necessary to maintain its territorial
integrity and to defend its sovereignty.
Reiterating the comments made by the President
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Mr. Hugo
Chávez Frías, we also believe that the United States
has no authority to question the purchase of equipment
and we urge it not to intervene in the internal affairs
and to respect the sovereignty of States. We also ask
the Council to remain vigilant for any measure aimed
against the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela is complying with and implementing
measures established under the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. In that regard, I note here
in the Security Council that Venezuela submitted its
national report last year.
Regionally, we have complied with the norms
established under the Inter-American Convention
Against the Illicit Manufacture and Trafficking in
Weapons, Munitions, Explosives and Related
Materials, adopted by the Organization of American
States. We also participated in the meeting in South
Africa of the group of experts mandated with drafting
the Andean Plan to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in all
its Aspects, and we are signatory to the Quirama
Declaration on that issue.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Venezuela for her kind words
addressed to me.
I now call on the representative of Turkey.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to express our
appreciation for the convening of this important open
debate on an issue that greatly affects us all.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report, as well as Mr. Abe for his excellent

6

introduction of it. The report indicates that important
progress has been made in various fields of concern,
though there is still much to do.
Turkey has already aligned itself with the
statement made by the representative of Luxembourg
on behalf of the European Union. I will therefore
briefly expound on a certain aspect of the issue of
small arms.
Today, we all recognize that the excessive
accumulation and uncontrolled spread of small arms
and light weapons pose a significant threat to
international peace and security, as well as to the social
development of many countries. The issue is not
merely about arms control and disarmament. It has
many aspects, including humanitarian issues, organized
crime and terrorism. The threat weighs no less than
that of weapons of mass destruction and requires
concerted and resolute action by all United Nations
Members.
We took a significant step forward with the
adoption in 2001 of the United Nations Programme of
Action, which still stands as the only globally
recognized framework. Yet, there is no international
legal instrument for dealing with the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons.
In that context, I would like to underscore the
importance of the work of the Open-ended Working
Group, which is currently negotiating an international
instrument on the marking and tracing of small arms
and light weapons. Turkey hopes that the instrument to
be agreed will contain all of the elements needed to
guarantee its effectiveness. That can be achieved if our
efforts lead to an instrument which has a legally
binding and comprehensive nature covering all kinds
of such weapons, including their ammunition. We
therefore call upon all United Nations Members to take
firm and resolute action to curb that global scourge.
The illicit proliferation of small arms requires the
development of long-term strategies. In that respect,
we also acknowledge the role of the Security Council
in making small arms a focus of global attention and
action. Turkey will continue to support all efforts and
to advocate enhanced international cooperation to
combat and eradicate the illicit trade in small and light
weapons in the framework of the United Nations and in
other forums.

S/PV.5127 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Turkey for his kind words addressed
to me.
I now call on the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): My delegation is gratified
that, once again, the Security Council is meeting in an
open format to discuss the multifaceted challenges
posed by small arms and light weapons, which involve
security, humanitarian and development dimensions. In
that regard, I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Abe for introducing the report as the basis of
our discussion.
As is widely acknowledged, in many regions of
the world, the excessive availability and misuse of
small arms and light weapons have led to violent
conflicts, unabated crime and gross violations of
human rights, which have contributed to immense
suffering and a pervasive sense of insecurity. Over
500,000 people continue to be killed each year and
millions more are wounded by small arms and light
weapons. The horrendous toll in human lives and
countless injuries reflects the fact that, in reality, small
arms and light weapons are actually weapons of mass
destruction.
As we reassess the nature and scope of violence
in a number of conflicts in the world today, it is clear
that the proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
particularly those that are illicitly and illegally
transferred, constitutes the primary reason for
addressing the problems posed by their illegitimate
acquisition. Such illegal activities have not spared any
country or region. A sizeable number of those transfers
are directed at our region, thereby endangering stability
at the national and regional levels.
In Indonesia, such unlawful smuggling of small
arms and light weapons has posed grave threats to our
territorial integrity by fostering separatist movements
and promoting criminal activities. Hence, their
unregulated circulation is no longer tenable and, in
fact, would be detrimental to our national interests, in
particular our internal stability.
Furthermore, like other South-East Asian
countries, Indonesia tends to view this problem in the
context of transnational crime because it is generally
recognized in our region that arms smuggling is
interlinked with cross-border crimes, such as terrorism,
money-laundering and drug trafficking.

At the global level, it is pertinent to recall the
Millennium Declaration of 2000, by which Member
States collectively decided
“to take concerted action to end illicit traffic in
small arms and light weapons, especially by
making arms transfers more transparent and
supporting regional disarmament measures”.
(General Assembly resolution 55/2, para. 9)
Thus, as we approach next September’s high-level
plenary meeting of the General Assembly to review the
Declaration, the coordinating and consultative role of
the United Nations has been crucial and is bound to
take on greater significance.
In recognizing the continued efforts to deal with
the critical problems posed by the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons, the Security Council has
undertaken numerous measures to prevent, combat and
eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, as set out in the 2001 United Nations
Programme of Action. While those measures have led
to positive results in some areas of the world, the
problem has persisted in others, with the potential to
ignite ever greater disasters. This has therefore become
a concern of the international community.
Next year, the United Nations will once again
host a conference to review the follow-up to and
implementation of the 2001 Programme of Action.
Preliminary discussions on the relevant issues have
already begun, including possible agreements on
legally binding measures, marking and tracing,
brokering, export controls, civilian possession and the
role of non-State actors.
My delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General contained in document S/2005/69
and is gratified to note that substantial progress has
been achieved in some key areas. However, we deem it
essential that efforts be undertaken in other areas as
well. In that regard, allow me to address some of the
report’s recommendations that we consider very
important.
On recommendation 4, we share the widely held
view on the need for greater interaction between the
General Assembly and the Security Council to deal
with the threats posed by illicit transfers of small arms
and light weapons. While no structured mechanism
between the two organs has been established, we will
support continued efforts to develop a coherent policy

7

S/PV.5127 (Resumption 1)

and a comprehensive strategy of the United Nations on
small arms and light weapons.

and resources it needs to be able to achieve the
objectives that we have set for ourselves.

In post-conflict situations, as reflected in
recommendation 7, we underscore the importance of
implementing programmes related to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR), in particular
as an essential part of the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. In that context, we welcome the work
initiated by the Secretariat to develop a set of policies,
guidelines and procedures for planning, implementing
and monitoring DDR.

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Indonesia for the kind words he
addressed to me.

With regard to recommendation 12, given the
voluntary nature of the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms, we are gratified to note the
remarkable progress made with respect to participation
in two reporting instruments which have contributed
greatly to confidence-building and security among
Member States. Nonetheless, in our view, the Register
needs to be further developed in order to attract the
widest possible participation.
Finally, we commend the work undertaken by the
Open-ended Working Group on tracing illicit small
arms and light weapons, which has recently completed
its second substantive session. With regard to the
nature of an instrument on that matter, we fully
recognize the existence of differing views among
Member States and will endeavour to resolve them at
the next substantive session, to be held in June this
year.
We are also aware that the 2001 Programme of
Action is a politically binding document which was
adopted as a result of consensus. However, taking into
account the increased danger posed by the illicit
acquisition and transfer of small arms and light
weapons, an international instrument of a legally
binding nature for tracing such weapons has indeed
become imperative.
In conclusion, we believe that small arms and
light weapons continue to pose a grave threat to human
security throughout the world and that they will not go
away without impetus from the highest levels and
without stronger unity of effort, including on the part
of the Security Council. The United Nations — and its
organs, such as the General Assembly and the Security
Council — is naturally the body under whose auspices
comprehensive strategies can be developed and where
such efforts should be coordinated. It stands to reason
that all of us should give the Organization the support

8

I call next on the representative of the Republic
of Korea.
Mr. Kim Sam-hoon (Republic of Korea): Allow
me, Mr. President, to convey to you my heartfelt
appreciation for your leadership in conducting this
open debate of the Security Council on small arms and
light weapons. The scourge of small arms and light
weapons is abominable, but it is an unavoidable issue
that deserves the attention and care of the international
community no less than that of weapons of mass
destruction. My delegation is happy to note that the
Security Council, as the organ with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, continues to address this issue with
unswerving determination and vigour. We also
commend the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts
to deal with the question of small arms and light
weapons, specifically through the 12 updated core
recommendations contained in his report to the
Security Council (S/2005/69).
The Republic of Korea attaches great importance
to the ongoing negotiations to develop an international
instrument to enable States to identify and trace illicit
small arms and light weapons quickly and reliably. We
are pleased to note that, through dedicated and
intensive discussions, considerable progress was made
at the first and second substantive sessions of the
Open-ended Working Group on that matter. We hope
that the Working Group will resolve all the outstanding
issues, including the nature of the instrument and the
question of ammunition, and that it will reach a
successful conclusion at its June negotiating session. A
viable and effective international instrument on
marking and tracing, working in tandem with the
existing relevant international instruments, including
the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
and the United Nations Programme of Action on small
arms and light weapons, would be a powerful tool in
preventing and eliminating the scourge of illicit small

S/PV.5127 (Resumption 1)

arms and light weapons in both conflict and criminal
situations.
We encourage the Security Council to devote a
share of its attention to the issue of illicit brokering in
small arms and light weapons. Pending the outcome of
the work of a group of governmental experts on illicit
brokering, to be established by the Secretary-General
by 2007, we would welcome an opportunity to
participate in any meaningful discussions to further
study and identify the nature, scope and character of
illicit brokering in small arms and light weapons. In
that regard, we appreciate the efforts of the Department
for Disarmament Affairs in convening open-ended
informal forums on this issue.
While we support all 12 core recommendations,
we attach particular importance to the following points.
First, we are of the view that smooth and
effective
implementation
of
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes
in post-conflict situations is of the utmost importance,
especially in connection with United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We also support regional
initiatives in that regard. We believe that DDR is not
only crucial to freeing affected regions from the yoke
of illicit small arms and light weapons but also
essential for reordering and rehabilitating societies in
distress.
Secondly, if we are to cut off the sneaky routes of
illicit arms transfers and stop the illicit flow of arms to
conflict zones, we must achieve full compliance with
all relevant Security Council resolutions on sanctions.
Thirdly, we recognize the need to identify further
the links among the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, the illicit exploitation of natural and other
resources and the trade in illegal drugs. We share the
view that innovative measures should be developed to
prevent precious natural resources from becoming a
source of revenue for sinister purposes.
Fourthly, we recognize the urgent need for States
to establish legislative and other measures, including
the use of authenticated end-user certificates, to ensure
effective control over the export and transit of small
arms and light weapons. We believe that well
established export-control systems, together with
sound legislative structures, are imperative for
combating and eradicating the illicit transfer of small
arms and light weapons.

Last but not least, we also support broader
participation in the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms and the United Nations System for
the Standardized Reporting of Military Expenditures.
In particular, we welcome the expanded coverage of
the Register to include man-portable air defence
systems (MANPADs). The reckless use of MANPADs
by terrorists is an increasing threat to global security,
and this concern should be duly reflected in the
Register.
The Republic of Korea’s active participation in
the worldwide campaign against illicit small arms and
light weapons is well known. We would be happy to
share our knowledge, expertise and technology for the
safe and responsible management of firearms. In
addition, we are eager to contribute further to
eliminating or lessening the problem of small arms and
light weapons in those regions most seriously affected.
In this vein, we plan this year to invite renowned
African experts to our country to deepen mutual
understanding on this issue and to seek ways for us to
work towards the noble goal of ending the problem of
illicit small arms and light weapons in Africa.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the Republic of Korea for the kind
words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of India, to
whom I give the floor.
Mr. Sen (India): As we are speaking in the
Council for the first time this year, I would like to take
this opportunity to welcome the presence of the new
members of the Security Council — Argentina,
Denmark, Greece, Japan and Tanzania — and to extend
our good wishes to them.
We would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this open debate of the Security
Council on small arms, although we would like to
reiterate our view that thematic debates should have no
place in the Security Council and that they are best left
to the General Assembly.
We are particularly aware of the complexity and
lethality of the proliferation of the illicit traffic in small
arms and light weapons. Over the past two decades,
thousands of innocent civilians in India have fallen
victim to the acts of terrorists, who use such illicitly
obtained weapons for their nefarious activities. Since
1990, the Government of India has seized close to

9

S/PV.5127 (Resumption 1)

40,000 such weapons whose
unmistakably, external origin.

markings

indicate,

We remain deeply concerned that small arms and
light weapons continue to pose a grave danger to the
security of States. Such weapons have disrupted
political stability and social harmony, derailed
pluralism and democracy and hampered growth and
development. They have also fuelled international
terrorism and internal conflicts. In some regions, there
is a clear linkage with the trade in narcotic drugs and
the illicit exploitation of natural and strategic
resources. In others, they have fuelled civil strife and
civil war. Their indiscriminate and irresponsible use,
particularly by non-State actors, has caused enormous
humanitarian concern that is evident in its most potent
form in Africa, particularly in some of the countries of
Central and Western Africa.
India welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral contained in document S/2005/69, on ways
and means by which the Security Council could
contribute to this issue. We have been closely
following this issue in both the General Assembly and
the Security Council and remain committed to
supporting all international endeavours to curb and
eradicate the illicit traffic in such weapons.
India has had the privilege to chair the Group of
Governmental Experts on small arms and light
weapons. We are also actively participating in the
Open-ended Working Group currently negotiating an
international instrument to enable States to identify and
trace in a timely and reliable manner illicit small arms
and light weapons. We accord a high priority to that
exercise.
Efforts towards evolving an instrument on the
marking and tracing of illicit small arms and light
weapons should be seen in the context of the overall
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action adopted in 2001. An important underlying
theme of our collective effort is to help in the
international effort to combat terrorism. Indeed, the
Programme of Action highlighted the fact that the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons fuels
crime and terrorism. We believe that such an
instrument would contribute substantially to the efforts
to combat terrorism.
We are happy to note the reference to the report
of the Monitoring Group in paragraph 12 of the
Secretary-General’s
report,
which
states
that

10

“combating weapons smuggling must definitely be an
active part of the fight against terrorism”, and adds that
all States should be encouraged to adopt the measures
incorporated in the United Nations Programme of
Action.
Illicit trade occurs because of illicit production,
or because licit production or licit stocks enter the grey
and black markets, thus swelling the illicit weapons
market. These weapons end up in the possession of
criminals, exacerbating problems for law enforcement
agencies and — worse — get into the hands of
unscrupulous arms brokers, ending up in areas of
conflict and in the hands of extremists and terrorists.
The Programme of Action recognizes that stringent
measures are needed to ensure that there are effective
controls over legal transfers of small arms and light
weapons.
India follows a strict policy with regard to the
export of small arms and light weapons that includes
the requirement for end-user certificates on a
Government-to-Government basis and a ban on exports
to countries that are under a United Nations arms
embargo. It is our hope that all other States will also
undertake the obligation not to supply such weapons to
non-State actors, insist on authenticated end-user
certificates to ensure effective control over the export
and transit of such weapons, and not seek exemptions
for State-to-State transactions or for transactions
related to national security priorities. The international
community, for its part, must also ensure that the trade
in arms flows only through channels authorized by
both the exporting and the importing Governments.
India remains committed to seeking stronger and
more binding mechanisms to ensure cooperation for
our collective security. The final instrument that
emerges from the Open-ended Working Group on
marking and tracing should reflect not only the
concerns and priorities of all Member States but also
the expectations of the wider international community.
While States are committed to the eradication of the
illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons in all its
aspects, that commitment can be effectively translated
into concrete action and tangible results only if it is
backed by a legal obligation.
We also believe that arms are only the means of
delivery and that it is the availability of illicit
ammunition that allows them to be used as instruments
for spreading violence and committing terrorist acts.

S/PV.5127 (Resumption 1)

India, therefore, ideally favours a legally binding
instrument and the inclusion of ammunition and
explosives within the scope of the instrument in order
to tackle the issue in a comprehensive manner.
In conclusion, the boundaries between crime,
conflict and terrorism are blurred in the context of
illicit small arms and light weapons. Trafficking in
illicit arms straddles not only organized crime, but
conflicts and the activities of terrorist and insurgent
groups who may be aided and abetted either directly by
States or indirectly through individuals who are part of
State structures. We therefore believe that obligations
undertaken by Member States under the instrument
must include all small arms and light weapons, whether
they are manufactured for Government or private use
or for export on a State-to-State basis.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker is the representative of Zambia, on whom I
now call.
Mr. Mpundu (Zambia): On behalf of the
Zambian delegation, allow me to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency for the month of
February. My delegation has full confidence that your
immense experience and diplomatic skill will enhance
the efficiency and effectiveness of the work of this
supreme body of our Organization.
My delegation wishes to commend the SecretaryGeneral for his report on small arms, contained in
document S/2005/69.
The issue of small arms and light weapons should
not be viewed as a light one, as some suggest.
Although they are light in nature, small arms are
capable of inflicting enormous suffering on innocent
people and destroying property. The question of illicit
arms deals, therefore, must be tackled vigorously by all
Member States if the world is to attain meaningful
peace and security for all.
It is gratifying to note that Member States have
recognized that the world today is faced with this
common problem, which requires a common solution.
Governments have a collective responsibility to ensure
that peace and security prevail within and beyond their
borders by cooperating with one another. Zambia
shares the view of the rest of the international
community that concerted efforts at national, regional
and international levels can be most effective in

addressing the problem of small arms and light
weapons.
One of the most effective and practical ways in
which to deal with the menace of the illegal trade in
small arms and light weapons is through destroying
them. In that context, my Government has formulated a
deliberate policy in which it offers amnesty from
prosecution to anyone who surrenders an illegal
firearm or provides information leading to the recovery
of such a firearm to the police. In return, that person
receives payment of up to the equivalent of $55. Since
the amnesty was announced, my Government has seen
more than 3,000 firearms surrendered to the police.
Some of those firearms were burned at the ceremony
on 17 July 2003.
Since its independence in 1964, Zambia has been
a sanctuary to many refugees fleeing armed conflicts in
their countries, especially during the wars of liberation
in the Southern African region. Some of the former
combatants entered Zambia with their weapons and
later either sold their arms cheaply to criminals or
exchanged them for food. Subsequently, the weapons
were used in the commission of crimes.
As a result of that proliferation of arms, my
Government enacted a law to regulate civilian firearm
ownership, called the Firearms Act. The Act prescribes
strict control over the licensing of firearms and limits
the number of permits to civilians to 600 per year. It
also restricts dealers’ sales of arms to licensed
Zambians alone and limits the amount of ammunition
they can sell to them at any given time.
At the regional level, Zambia has been active in
the Southern African Development Community’s
programme on small arms and light weapons through
the Southern African Regional Police Cooperation
Organization (SARPCO), which was established in
October 1995. My Government continues to encourage
non-governmental organizations and civil society to get
involved in the dissemination of information in this
noble fight, which will enhance national and regional
security and ultimately the welfare and safety of our
people.
I should like to conclude by reaffirming Zambia’s
commitment to the fight against the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons in all its aspects.
Although Zambia does not manufacture or export arms,
it has been a victim of fraudulent end-users at the
hands of international arms-dealer cartels. In that

11

S/PV.5127 (Resumption 1)

regard, the Zambian Government calls for stronger and
more effective controls in the export, import, transit
and retransfer of small arms and light weapons. It is
our considered view that the manufacturing and
exporting countries are in a better position to control
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons than
the recipients.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Zambia for the kind words he
addressed to me.
I now call on the representative of Norway.
Mrs. Juul (Norway): Allow me first to thank the
Secretary-General for his substantial and informative
report on small arms. The report’s many concrete
recommendations to the Council deserve our close
attention and support.
Norway aligns itself with the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of Luxembourg on
behalf of the European Union, but I will make some
supplementary comments.
We are constantly reminded that illicit small arms
and light weapons undermine conflict prevention and
peace-building efforts. Illicit arms transfers to conflict
regions continue at a disturbing rate. As pointed out in
the report, such transfers are very often linked to the
illicit exploitation of natural resources as well as to the
trade in illegal drugs, creating a vicious circle of
instability
and
crime-based
economies.
That
undermines political stability as well as economic and
social development and the attainment of the
Millennium Development Goals.
Norway believes that the Security Council has a
key role to play in this respect. Preventing, combating
and eliminating the uncontrolled spread of small arms
and light weapons must be a core element of the
Council’s peace efforts. More attention should be
focused on the need for effective arms embargoes. The
Council can certainly do its part through the
establishment of special monitoring mechanisms and
other measures. However, we must not forget that arms
embargoes cannot be implemented effectively without
the cooperation of Member States.
The Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects remains the key global
instrument in dealing with the issue of small arms. It is
encouraging to see that national implementation of the

12

Programme of Action is well under way and that many
regional organizations are giving high priority to it. We
believe that regional efforts are of particular
importance in the light of shared challenges and similar
experiences in dealing with the issue. Norway has
assisted such efforts in a number of regions and will
continue to do so. Civil society representatives have
shown themselves to be constructive partners in that
regard.
Norway strongly supports the efforts of the Openended Working Group to Negotiate an International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a
Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons. We are pleased with the progress made
at the second session of the Working Group in New
York recently, but we regret the continuing
disagreement on the status and scope of the instrument.
To our mind, it is imperative that the instrument be
legally binding. We also believe it should cover
ammunition, given that that issue is so closely linked to
the use and misuse of small arms and light weapons.
The issue of brokering remains essential in our
efforts to deal effectively with the destabilizing effects
of illicit small arms and light weapons. We welcome
the focus on brokering in the Secretary-General’s
report in relation to its relevance both in the fight
against terrorism and in ensuring effective arms
embargoes in conflict areas. We need as much
transparency as possible in that area.
Norway is pleased that the recent report by the
High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change
noted the threat to stability posed by small arms and
light weapons and recommended that Member States
expedite and conclude negotiations on legally binding
agreements on the marking and tracing, and the
brokering and transfer, of small arms and light
weapons. In our view, the issue of small arms and light
weapons deserves to be further highlighted in the
follow-up to the High-level Panel’s report.
The Security Council and the Secretariat should
continue their discussions of questions related to small
arms. We believe it would be useful to consider
whether any of the particular issues raised in the
report’s recommendations could lend themselves to a
more focused debate in the Council at a later stage.
The interaction between the Security Council and
the General Assembly on the issue of small arms and
light weapons should also be looked at. We welcome

S/PV.5127 (Resumption 1)

the Secretary-General’s recommendation that the two
organs establish a committee to look into how they
could work together in that area.
We all agree on the seriousness of the issue of
illicit small arms and light weapons, but we still have a
way to go when it comes to developing effective
international cooperation to meet the challenges
involved. This debate should serve to remind us of the
challenges and should encourage us all to work more
effectively to deal with them.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Moldova.
Mr. Grigore (Republic of Moldova): I would like
to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the current month, and for presiding over this
important debate. We are also thankful to
Mr. Nobuyasu Abe, Under-Secretary-General for
Disarmament Affairs,
for his
comprehensive
presentation.
The Programme of Action adopted at the 2001
United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects
emphasized the multidimensional nature of this issue
and the real threat that the illicit trade in these weapons
poses to the security of Member States and entire
regions. We welcome the Security Council’s continuing
consideration of the issues related to the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons.
The Republic of Moldova also welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General in document S/2005/69
on the ways and means in which the Security Council
could contribute to dealing with the question of the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. The report
continues the tendency of critical analysis of the
situation, acknowledging the significant progress
achieved in various fields of concern and underscoring
a series of actions that the Council and the General
Assembly may take on the issue of small arms and
light weapons.
My delegation shares the conclusion of the Highlevel Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change that
much more needs to be done in the area of arms control
and disarmament regimes, particularly in relation to the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. The
Panel’s recommendation on the acceleration and
conclusion of legally binding agreements on the

marking and tracing, as well as the brokering and
transfer, of small arms and light weapons is echoed by
Recommendation 1 of the Secretary General’s report,
and we hope that upcoming events, such as the meeting
on the Programme of Action and the 2006 Review
Conference, will be marked by tangible results.
The
Moldovan
Government
is
strongly
committed to the implementation of the Programme of
Action and is undertaking all the necessary efforts in
this respect. The Republic of Moldova has developed
an export control system that is largely compatible
with European standards, and it has aligned itself with
other efforts made at the regional and subregional level
to establish mechanisms to prevent, combat and
eradicate the illicit trade in small arms.
Small arms, light weapons and landmines were
identified as the primary weapons in most civil wars in
the 1990s, and those arms are still one of the main
causes of human suffering throughout the world. And
while some conflicts — with the active involvement of
the international community, and primarily due to the
efforts of this body — were solved and affected
countries returned to the path of development and
prosperity, others are still making enormous efforts to
resolve difficult situations that are aggravated by the
presence of huge amounts of weapons.
Regretfully, the unresolved conflict in the eastern
regions of Moldova, which are controlled by a
separatist regime, continues to pose a serious threat to
the security, sovereignty and territorial integrity of my
country, as well as to the stability of the whole region.
That region remains an area of illegal production of
different types of light weapons and trafficking in
small arms. Those weapons end up in the possession of
criminals,
extremists
and
terrorists,
thereby
exacerbating problems for law-enforcement agencies,
fuelling corruption and cross-border smuggling,
helping to finance criminal networks and diminishing
the international efforts to combat terrorism and
transnational organized crime.
Due to the lack of control by the constitutional
authorities over the Transdniestr segment of the border
between Moldova and Ukraine, there are no guarantees
that the illegally produced or trafficked armaments are
not reaching other conflict zones. Furthermore, small
arms trafficked from this region often lack serial
numbers, which makes them ideal for organized
criminals and terrorist networks. The close cooperation

13

S/PV.5127 (Resumption 1)

of the Governments of the Republic of Moldova and
Ukraine, with the assistance of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European
Union, will substantially contribute to the prevention
and elimination of illicit trafficking and will facilitate
the identification of an appropriate solution for this
problem.
The presence of large, unaccounted stockpiles of
foreign weapons and munitions in the eastern part of
the Republic of Moldova complicates the efforts to
solve the political conflict and is particularly risky
because of the constant danger that they may be stolen
for use by the separatist paramilitaries or sold off along
with illegally produced armaments. From this
perspective, the Government of the Republic of
Moldova considers it important that an international
assessment be made to assess the stocks of armaments
of the foreign troops stationed on our territory and of
those belonging to the illegal paramilitary units from
the eastern districts of the Republic of Moldova.
Foreign troops stationed without the consent of the
host State are subject to complete and unconditional
withdrawal, in accordance with international
commitments.
I would like to conclude by mentioning that the
Security Council can provide valuable support to
initiatives aimed at negotiating an international legal
instrument to identify and trace illicit small arms and
light weapons, as well as to national and regional
efforts to curb the proliferation and illicit trafficking of
these weapons, and the Republic of Moldova will fully
support these activities.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the Republic of Moldova for his kind
words. I now call on the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Stagno Ugarte (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Mr. President, we are pleased that under your
presidency the Security Council once again has
recognized the harmful impact of the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and consequently has
decided to include this item on its agenda. This body
has already adopted a number of valuable
recommendations, such as the request that all States
use end-user certificates in their arms transfers. There
was an appeal to weapons-exporting countries to
shoulder greater responsibility, an invitation to
establish national registers of arms brokers and an

14

appeal for sanctions against those who violate arms
embargoes.
The implementation of all of all of these
recommendations is essential but not sufficient. The
action of the international community in the area of
small arms and light weapons must go far beyond
marking and implementing existing arms embargoes. It
is now time to look at the problem of small arms from
a human rights perspective. It is now time to ban the
transfer of military matériel and personnel and
financial and logistic support to those States whose
military units or security forces participate in
systematic violation of human rights. It is now time to
ban the sale of weapons to those who do not respect
democratic principles or who have not ratified the main
human
rights
instruments
and
international
humanitarian law.
We should ask ourselves seriously if the 191
Member States of the United Nations have the political
will to regulate the international trade in weapons in
order to eradicate those practices, transfers and sales
that, due to a lack of transparency and conscience, have
irresponsibly contributed to the proliferation of death
and the violation of the entire range of human rights. In
the past five decades we have not seen the exercise of
responsibility stemming from Article 26 of the Charter,
although that explicitly recognizes the link between
disarmament and development by entrusting this body
with establishing arms control systems in order to
promote the establishment and maintenance of
international peace and security with the least
diversion for armaments of the world’s human and
economic resources.
In a world of limited resources where all States
must
establish
spending
priorities
it
is
incomprehensible that developing countries — which
include my own — spend 22 billion dollars a year to
purchase weapons, when that amount would enable us
to achieve the Millennium Development Goals with
regard to universal primary education and to reducing
infant mortality, for example. The overstockpiling and
underdevelopment equation is a sad reality, which,
unfortunately, continues to drain many of our peoples.
Security is not achieved by increasing the number
of weapons, as history has shown far too often. It can,
however, be achieved by righting wrongs, overcoming
deficiencies,
pursuing
shared
objectives
and
disseminating universal values. However, with a few

S/PV.5127 (Resumption 1)

exceptions, we have followed a path based on a
misunderstanding of security, which has left us
completely vulnerable to poverty, ignorance and
epidemics. We have given priority to a kind of security
that has consumed a considerable portion of the limited
resources available and has hampered and halted
development.
In 2001 alone, more than 16 billion units of
ammunition were manufactured — that is, more than
2 bullets per person on the planet. That means that we
all are targets and that, every minute of every hour of
every day, a person dies.
While we welcome and are grateful for the
Secretary-General’s report, and we fully agree with its
12 recommendations, we regret the fact that no
reference is made therein to the need to draft an
international and legally binding instrument that would
put an end to all irresponsible sales and transfers of
weapons which contribute to violations of international
humanitarian law and of human rights.
Because we are sickened and horrified at the
bloodshed and its unconscionable nature, we decisively
and enthusiastically support the Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT), and we appeal to all Member States that are
committed to transparency in the arms trade and to full
respect for of human rights to support that preventive
instrument. The ATT sets a series of limitations on the
arms trade that are based on existing obligations under
international law and on expected use.
It encompasses existing obligations stemming
from the Geneva Conventions, the Mine-Ban Treaty
and the Convention on Genocide, with a view to the
incorporation of those criteria into the national
legislation of each State. It is time to put an end to the
irresponsible trafficking in weapons, and time to empty
the arsenals of illicit weapons. To date, nine Member
States, including a permanent member of the Council,
have publicly expressed their support for such an
initiative, and Costa Rica is honoured to be one of
them.
As a basic principle, the draft framework
convention establishes that authorization is required for
all arms transfers. The text further stipulates a number
of restrictions on transfers that devolve directly from
existing obligations on States under international
humanitarian law, such as the ban on the use of
weapons or weapons whose effects are deemed to be
indiscriminate or excessively cruel. Additionally, the

draft establishes a number of bans on weapons
transfers when it is foreseeable that they will be used
in violation of the Charter of the United Nations, to
commit serious violations of human rights or of
international humanitarian law, or to perpetrate
genocide or crimes against humanity.
The ATT does not seek to create new obligations.
It seeks simply to spell out categorically the logical
and necessary consequences of existing norms and
principles.
In addition, the draft calls for the adoption of
innovative precautionary measures that, in principle,
should be borne in mind in authorizing any arms
transfer. We hope that this draft will become a model
for internationally binding agreements that, once
adopted, will facilitate coordinated and specific action
aimed at regulating arms transfers.
The Security Council must devise new
mechanisms to ensure compliance with arms
embargoes. The most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral makes clear once again that compliance with
recommendations on embargoes continues to fall short.
We need only recall that, in 2001, 54 countries were
linked to transfers or resales, in express violation of
existing arms embargoes. In the meantime, the
sanctions committees established by the Security
Council to verify compliance with those embargoes
were incapable of taking more effective action.
But sanctions committees are political bodies that
do not have the technical capacity for genuine
verification. For that reason, we deem it necessary to
consider creating within the Secretariat a mechanism
that would proactively monitor the implementation of
arms embargoes and provide technical support to the
political work done in the sanctions committees.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Costa Rica for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Mali, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Diarra (Mali) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, allow me to express my delegation’s
satisfaction at your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council during this month of February.
Moreover, my delegation is grateful to Benin for
having initiated this debate on the topic of small arms,
which is so very important to our African continent.

15

S/PV.5127 (Resumption 1)

It has been a little more than a year since the
Security Council considered and adopted a statement
on this issue. The report submitted by the SecretaryGeneral on 7 February 2005 (S/2005/69) evaluates the
progress achieved since 2004 in the implementation of
the 12 recommendations contained in his previous
report of 20 September 2002.
I should like here to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Abe for his presentation of the report.
Regarding recommendation 1 — on the development
of an international instrument to enable States to identify
and trace, in a timely and reliable manner, illicit small
arms and light weapons — the second session of the
Open-ended Working Group, under the chairmanship
of Ambassador Anton Thalmann of Switzerland, made
progress in discussions on the standards that should
apply in this area in future. We look forward with
interest to the conclusion next June of the Working
Group’s efforts.
We welcome also the contribution made by the
United States and Canada to the strengthening of the
Interpol Weapons and Explosives Tracking System,
and we call on other countries to act along those lines.
That system could provide expertise in the framework
of the legal instrument that is in the process of being
negotiated. My delegation supports the establishment
of a mechanism to coordinate assistance to Member
States in implementing the United Nations Programme
of Action of July 2001.
Strengthened interaction between the General
Assembly and the Security Council in combating the
proliferation of small arms could be a way of ensuring
better cooperation aimed at the adoption of a long-term
strategy.
The Secretary-General has proposed the creation
of a small committee to study ways and means of
achieving such cooperation. That practical proposal
could be taken into consideration.
The illicit exploitation of natural and other
resources in conflict areas exacerbates crisis situations
by increasing the demand for arms and intensifying
their illicit proliferation. My delegation believes,
however, that in post-conflict situations — that is, at a
time when weakened States need resources to
consolidate their institutions and programmes —
embargoes on natural resources should be relaxed, if

16

not lifted, in order to enable the country to make use of
them.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) programmes have made noteworthy progress, as
noted in the report of the Secretary-General. My
delegation welcomes the work done since 2004 by the
inter-institutional working group on DDR to elaborate
policies, guidelines and procedures for the
establishment of such programmes.
My delegation believes that the Security Council
should give due consideration to the reintegration
aspect and ensure that it is covered by the budget for
peacekeeping
operations.
That
involves
the
reintegration of former combatants in their
communities and taking account of the needs of their
dependents.
Similarly, my delegation believes that regional
management of DDR programmes make it possible to
prevent transborder movements of combatants among
neighbouring countries in areas of conflict.
The adoption of legislative and other measures,
including end-user certificates, is part of the
international and regional cooperation framework that
includes the responsibility of supplier and user States
to prevent the diversion of such weapons for illegal
purposes. In that connection, the ECOWAS subregion
is working closely with the United Nations Office for
West Africa in order to agree measures to be taken to
implement the Secretary-General’s recommendations.
A programme of work for the two institutions covering
the period 2004-2005 has been agreed. That
cooperation will benefit the new ECOWAS Small Arms
Project (ECOSAP) established by ECOWAS in October
2004 to replace the Programme for Coordination and
Assistance for Security and Development (PCASED).
In order to limit the illicit proliferation of small
arms and ammunition, we must strictly implement all
the Security Council embargoes on weapons and
related matériel. The establishment of monitoring
bodies to support the work of sanctions committees is
an operational measure that should be supported by
strengthening the technical capacity of countries
bordering areas of conflict.
The growing participation by States in the United
Nations Register of Conventional Arms and the United
Nations standardized instrument for reporting military

S/PV.5127 (Resumption 1)

expenditures is a positive trend that should be
encouraged.

strengthening our coordination within the Secretariat
and with the related agencies.

At the national level, the contribution of the
Republic of Mali to the fight against the illicit
proliferation of small arms and related matériel
includes the strengthening of our law on arms and
munitions in order to include the international
commitments our country has assumed.

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for his statement.

On the bilateral level, Mali has established a
border commission with each of its seven bordering
countries to establish a framework for cooperation to
combat arms trafficking.
At the subregional level, the ECOWAS
Moratorium on Small Arms, which was renewed in
2004, should be made a legally binding instrument.
The recent creation of a Small Arms Unit in its
Executive Secretariat and the technical support
provided by PCASED also strengthen cooperation
between the States of West Africa. Our subregion is
also benefiting from the valuable support of the United
Nations Office for West Africa. My delegation calls for
the strengthening of that cooperation.
On the continental level, my country reaffirms its
commitment to the Bamako Declaration of December
2002 and to the September 2002 Algiers Plan of
Action.
Finally, at the international level, the conduct of
my country is determined by the July 2001 United
Nations Programme of Action, the negotiations under
way to agree an international instrument to identify and
trace illicit small arms and the resolutions and
statements of the Security Council on the subject.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Mali for his kind words addressed to
me.
I now call on Mr. Nobuyasu Abe to respond to
comments that have been made.
Mr. Abe: I just have a few words to say. I would
like once again to express my thanks for the
opportunity provided today by this open debate on the
question of small arms. I also wish to thank the
delegations that expressed words of encouragement to
the Secretariat for the continuation and intensification
of our work. Those of us in the Secretariat — its
departments and branches — will be intensifying our
work with renewed vigour. We shall also be

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council.
“The Security Council welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of his recommendations to the Council entitled
‘Small arms’ (S/2005/69) of 7 February 2005, and
reaffirms the statements of its President of
19 January 2004 (S/PRST/2004/1), of 31 October
2002 (S/PRST/2002/30), of 31 August 2001
(S/PRST/2001/21) and of 24 September 1999
(S/PRST/1999/28).
“The Security Council recalls its primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In this regard, the Security
Council recognizes that the dissemination of
illicit small arms and light weapons has hampered
the peaceful settlement of disputes, fuelled such
disputes into armed conflicts and contributed to
the prolongation of such armed conflicts. The
Council reaffirms the inherent right of individual
or collective self- defence in accordance with
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations
and, subject to the Charter, the right of each State
to import, produce and retain small arms and light
weapons for its self-defence and security needs.
“The Council encourages the armsexporting countries to exercise the highest degree
of responsibility in small arms and light weapons
transactions
according
to
their
existing
responsibilities under relevant international law.
It also encourages international and regional
cooperation in identifying the origin and transfer
of small arms and light weapons in order to
prevent their diversion, in particular to Al Qaeda
and other terrorist groups. The Council welcomes
the significant steps that have been taken by
Member States and international and regional
organizations in this regard. The obligation of
Member States to enforce the arms embargo
should be coupled with enhanced international
and regional cooperation concerning arms
exports. The Council encourages Members to

17

S/PV.5127 (Resumption 1)

undertake vigorous actions aimed at restricting
the supply of small arms, light weapons and
ammunitions to areas of instability.
“The Security Council takes note that the
United Nations Second Biennial Meeting of
States to consider the implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects will be held
July 2005, and encourages Member States to fully
cooperate with the Chair of the Meeting to have a
successful outcome.
“The Security Council notes with
appreciation that regional actions on illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects
have been strengthened in recent years, and
encourages the continuation of assistance at
national, regional and international levels that
would fit the needs of Member States to
implement the recommendations contained in the
Programme of Action adopted by the July 2001
United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects.
“The Council welcomes the ongoing efforts
by the open-ended working group established by
General Assembly resolution 58/241 of
23 December 2003 to negotiate an international
instrument to enable States to identify and trace,
in a timely and reliable manner, illicit small arms
and light weapons, and calls upon all Member
States to support all efforts aimed at this purpose.
It expresses the wish that the ongoing work
within the group will lead to a positive
conclusion at its third session as scheduled.
“The Security Council welcomes the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 59/86
of 10 December 2004, by which, among other
things, it requested the Secretary-General to
continue broad-based consultations on further
steps to enhance international cooperation in
preventing, combating and eradicating illicit
brokering in small arms and light weapons with a
view to establishing a group of governmental
experts to consider the issue.
“The Security Council welcomes the
inclusion of man-portable air defence systems

18

(MANPADs) on an exceptional basis in the
United Nations Register of Conventional Arms.
“The Security Council further encourages
Member States that have not already done so to
establish the necessary legislative or other
measures, including the use of authenticated enduser certificates, to ensure effective control over
the export and transit of small arms and light
weapons.
“The Security Council renews the support
given to the plan of ECOWAS to strengthen the
moratorium signed in Abuja on 31 October 1998
on the import, export and manufacture of small
arms and light weapons and to replace it with a
mandatory convention. It welcomes the decision
by the European Council on 2 December 2004 to
significantly support this initiative and calls upon
all States and organizations in a position to do so
to support this endeavour.
“The Council calls upon all Member States
to enforce all Security Council resolutions on
sanctions, including those imposing arms
embargoes, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, and to bring their own domestic
implementation into compliance with the
Council’s measures on sanctions. The Council
calls upon all Member States to continue to make
available to the sanctions committees all pertinent
information on any alleged violations of arms
embargoes and to take appropriate measures to
investigate such allegations. The Council urges
Member States in a position to do so to provide
assistance to interested States in strengthening
their capacity to fulfil their obligations in this
regard.
“The Security Council underlines that the
issue of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons must be addressed together with the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) process in the post-conflict phases. The
Council recognizes that DDR is closely linked
with the long-term peace and security in a postconflict situation and recalls that a growing
number of peacekeeping missions contain the
DDR element as part of their mandate. In this
regard, the Council stresses the importance of a
comprehensive
international
and
regional
approach to DDR that is not limited to the

S/PV.5127 (Resumption 1)

political and security aspects of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants, but addresses also its social and
economic aspects, including special needs of
child soldiers and women.
“The Security Council, while bearing in
mind that the issue of the illicit small arms and
light weapons has a multidisciplinary nature,
encourages Member States in a position to do so
to provide assistance and support to the United
Nations Coordinating Action on Small Arms
mechanism.
“The Council continues to recognize the
need to engage the relevant international
organizations, non-governmental organizations,
business and financial institutions and other
actors at the international, regional and local
levels to contribute to the implementation of arms

embargoes and to the wider objective of
preventing illicit trafficking of small arms and
light weapons.
“The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to update the Council on
28 February 2006 for its earliest possible
consideration of the implementation of all the
recommendations contained in his report entitled
‘Small arms’ of 20 September 2002 (S/2002/1053).”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/7.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

19
