S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6265th meeting
Wednesday, 27 January 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Zhenmin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Juen
Ms. Marinčić
Mr. Moretti
Mr. Kassianides
Mr. Onanga Ndiaye
Mr. Arima
Mr. Salam
Mr. Puente
Mr. Adamu
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Dizdar
Mr. Kamahungye
Mr. Afshar
Ms. Schedlbauer

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-22138 (E)

*1022138*

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
remind all speakers to limit their statements to no more
than five minutes, in order to enable the Council to
carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Oman.
Mr. Ba-Omar (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Arab
States in my capacity as its Chair for the month of
January.
In its various dimensions, the situation
throughout the occupied Palestinian territories is
extremely serious. That is due to illegal Israeli
practices, in particular in the Gaza Strip, which has
been besieged in an illegal and inhuman manner for
more than two years. As a result, the economy has been
paralysed and there has been a dramatic impact on the
health and the social and daily lives of more than
1.7 million civilians, whose lives are literally falling
apart. We continue to receive reports of the situation in
Gaza, the most recent of which came from the World
Health Organization. All of them refer to the gravity of
the situation, which poses a threat to both the life and
health of innocent civilians in the Gaza Strip because
of Israel’s ongoing siege.
A year has elapsed since the barbaric and brutal
military attack led by the Israeli occupying force in
Gaza, which resulted in wide-scale destruction. The
attack killed or injured thousands of Palestinians,
including hundreds of women and children. That
barbaric Israeli aggression served to increase the
suffering of civilians, the impact of which we continue
to see today in destroyed property and loss of
Palestinian lives. The occupying Power is also
preventing all attempts to rebuild and rehabilitate after
the horrors perpetrated in December 2008.
Through repeated incursions and military attacks,
Israel, the occupying Power, is attempting to destroy
all efforts to revitalize the peace process. That is also
fuelling conflict, violence and tension, which will have
dramatic implications and pose a serious threat to one
and all. Moreover, those actions illustrate the attitude
of the Israeli leadership towards the United Nations,
international law and Palestinian civilians living under
occupation.

2

Acts by the occupying authorities have reasserted
the idea of impunity and disregard for international
law. It is also quite clear that the Israeli leadership
attaches no importance whatever to the outcome of the
work of the Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza
Conflict, as evidenced by their repeated threats to
launch an additional military attack against the civilian
population in Gaza, which would be illegal and
barbarous.
It is therefore necessary that the international
community, including the Security Council, assume
their responsibilities in this regard. It is necessary to
defend the international order and to assert the
international will that was expressed in resolution 1860
(2009) by ensuring that Israel implements the
resolution. The Security Council must also address and
directly condemn Israel’s attacks on civilian lives, as
well as its violations of international humanitarian law.
If we remain on the sidelines while those threats
and attacks continue, the Israeli occupying authorities
will be encouraged to add additional crimes to the list
of war crimes that Israel has already perpetrated.
Women, children and older persons in Gaza continue to
suffer from the last Israeli war. They demand that a just
and moral position be adopted, one that is based on the
decisions of the international community, in particular
those of the Security Council.
The Arab Group would like to underscore the
gravity of the situation in occupied East Jerusalem as a
result of the illegal steps and measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power. The situation there is worse now
than at any time during 40 years of occupation. There
has been a change in the demographic profile, the legal
status and nature of the city as part of an attempt to
create a new reality on the ground. That jeopardizes
any final solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Before everyone’s eyes, the Holy City is being
subjected to an illegal aggressive policy by the Israeli
occupying authorities seeking to control occupied East
Jerusalem and ensure a Jewish majority there in a
completely artificial way that excludes and displaces
Palestinians, who were there from the very beginning.
Palestinians are being forced to leave by having their
identity cards taken, while more Israeli settlers are
brought in. We see that reflected in statements from
Israeli Government officials that assert that Jerusalem
is, and will continue to be, Israel’s capital. That is
clearly and fully in violation of international law and

10-22138

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

United Nations resolutions, which since 1967 have
reiterated that the use of force to acquire territory is
unacceptable.
Moreover, the occupying Power is continuing to
establish settlements. The barrier that is being built, the
closing of Palestinian institutions and the heightened
acts of provocation at or near Holy Sites in Jerusalem,
including the archaeological work that is threatening
the foundations of Al-Aqsa Mosque, as well as the
Church of the Nativity, are all illegal. They serve to
raise tensions and inflame feelings, and they have the
potential to worsen the tense and fragile situation in the
occupied territories.
The international community, including the
Security Council, must therefore address the situation
before it is too late, firmly reject acts of provocation
and take immediate and decisive steps to ensure that
Israel implements international law, including its
obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention.
There is no alternative to that; any other approach will
imperil the peace process and the stability and security
of the entire region. There can be neither negotiations
nor peace unless we address the issue of Jerusalem.
We would like to reiterate that Israeli measures to
change the legal, demographic and physical status of
the occupied Syrian Golan Heights and the
infrastructure there are null and void. Israel is
attempting to establish and enforce its legal and
administrative power in the Golan. Such efforts are
also null and void. We also reiterate that all those acts
and measures, including the building of Israeli
settlements in the occupied Syrian Golan, constitute a
provocation of the entire international community.
They also violate international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and resolutions of the Organization,
including Council resolution 497 (1981), and the
Fourth Geneva Convention.
We call on the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities and compel Israel to implement
resolution 497 (1981) and fully withdraw from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June 1967. The
Arab Group condemns Israel’s ongoing disregard of
resolution 1701 (2006) as it violates Lebanon’s
sovereignty on the ground and from the air and the sea.
It continues to occupy the northern part of Al-Ghajar
village, the Shab’a farms and the Kfar Shuba hills.
Israel’s obstinacy extends to refusing to provide

10-22138

information on cluster bombs and landmines planted in
south Lebanon.
The Arab Group supports Lebanon’s request that
the
international
community
ensure
Israel’s
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and the
transition from a situation of aggression to a total
ceasefire. We have demonstrated the earnestness of our
approach to the peace process through a variety of
initiatives, including the Arab Peace Initiative, which
was warmly welcomed internationally — except by
Israel, which continues to ignore it eight years after it
was launched.
The Arab Group welcomes all the efforts to
relaunch the peace process in full earnest and reiterates
the fact that the political process and the opportunity to
open balanced and serious negotiations can begin only
with the full withdrawal of Israeli forces from all Arab
lands to the 1967 boundaries in order to create an
independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. That will require that the international
community, including the Security Council, seriously
adopt a clear platform and a firm position in that regard
that are critical to addressing Israel’s illegal practices.
We must ensure in particular an immediate end to
settlement activities in Jerusalem and all Palestinian
territories, without exception. We must return to the
legal terms of reference: international law and United
Nations resolutions, particularly those regarding
Jerusalem. The situation of refugees must also be
resolved equitably, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III). A time frame must be
established for the completion of those negotiations.
All this must be accomplished under effective
international supervision.
These are not conditions; they are the starting
point that every peace process requires. They have
been endorsed by the international community and are
based on the various terms of reference of the peace
process, including the resolutions of the Security
Council. To achieve these objectives, the international
community, including the Security Council, must meet
its direct responsibilities and intervene effectively and
tangibly in order to compel Israel, the occupying
Power, to adhere to international law and to its
international responsibilities.
The first political necessity is to end all
settlement activities, particularly in and around
Jerusalem, and the incursions into Palestinian territory

3

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

and to lift the siege of Gaza. That will lend some
credibility and seriousness to the political process,
which is currently hindered by Israel’s illegal practices
on the ground and the international community’s
inability to act.
There is no excuse for the failure of the
international community and the Security Council to
take the measures and adopt the positions necessary to
end all of this — the settlements, the incursions, the
assassinations and the imposition of a new status quo.
During George Mitchell’s visit to the region, the Israeli
Prime Minister told him that a university was to be
built in the illegal settlement of Ariel, in the northern
West Bank. That is being undertaken under the very
nose of the international community.
The feverish settlement process has expanded
seventeen times since the peace process was launched
following the Annapolis Conference. Attempts to
Judaize Jerusalem continue apace, with the destruction
of houses and the transfer of the offices of international
and non-governmental organizations. I could go on and
on, listing all these aggressive Israeli policies.
Israel is totally out of control and is trying to
resolve all these issues by continuing to occupy Arab
lands, which naturally would undermine any
negotiating process and hinder any future progress.
What chance is Israel offering while it is destroying
any basis for a future Palestinian State and preventing
us from reaching any solution to the situation
whatsoever? That was manifest, for instance, in the
statement by the Israeli Prime Minister to the effect
that Israel will remain in the West Bank and the
Al-Aghwar region.
The Group of Arab States therefore calls on the
international community, the Security Council and the
Quartet to establish conditions conducive to peace by
taking measures and adopting a clear and resolute
position to protect the political process from the
manoeuvring of the Israeli Government, which claims
to seek talks but wants them to be completely
insubstantial. It refuses to make any commitment and
continues to defy the international community’s efforts
to salvage the peace process by continuing settlement
activities in Jerusalem and the West Bank. Israel
continues to ignore the terms of reference of the peace
process, including resolution 1515 (2003), which
enshrines the Road Map and calls on Israel to put an
end to all settlement activity.

4

Given these very serious developments, we
reiterate our firm rejection of all illegal acts and
measures by the occupying Power, which are null and
void. The international community and the Security
Council must assume their moral and legal
responsibilities for the Palestinian people until a just
solution can be found and their suffering and the
historic injustice done to them are over. The influential
international stakeholders must take measures that go
beyond timid rhetoric and good intentions. The
occupying Power must be made to face up to its
responsibilities and stop forthwith its illegal activities,
which destroy any hope for the establishment of an
independent, viable and contiguous Palestinian State
living in peace with its neighbours within the borders
of 1967.
The international community must therefore
demonstrate the firm resolve and the political and
diplomatic will to meet the situation squarely. It must
not remain silent or continue to respond ineffectively
and out of all proportion to the gravity of the situation.
Such a response reflects a kind of tacit support and
license for developments on the ground and clearly
violates the resolutions of the Security Council and
international law.
The time has come to oblige Israel, the occupying
Power, to end its illegal settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territories and East Jerusalem and
return to compliance with international law and the
Fourth Geneva Convention. This is a most serious
issue, with severe consequences for international peace
and security and for an inevitable peaceful solution.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), and to begin by
expressing our thanks to Assistant Secretary-General
Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his comprehensive
briefing today, as well as NAM’s sincere appreciation
to the Secretary-General for attending that briefing
today, stressing the importance of the subject under
discussion and the urgency of our debate today, which
comes at a crucial time when the peace process faces
one of its most difficult stages in the international
effort to realize the two-State solution and to put an
end to the occupation of the Palestinian, Syrian and
Lebanese territories since 1967.

10-22138

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

The current crisis of confidence is a direct result
of Israel’s refusal to move decisively towards a
political endgame and to implement its obligations
according to United Nations resolutions and the Road
Map, starting with a total freeze on all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem.
Despite all credible and serious efforts by the
Quartet and the regional partners to relaunch
negotiations and to achieve comprehensive peace in the
Middle East through the attainment of the two-State
solution and the Israeli withdrawal from all occupied
Arab territories, a just and lasting settlement to the
question of Palestine is still visibly far from being
achieved due to Israel’s positions and continued
defiance of international law and Security Council
resolutions.
As such, the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, remains critical,
continues to deteriorate and needs serious attention
from this body to overcome the current impasse and to
press on for the early resumption of the negotiating
process. This critical situation has been recognized
widely by neutral observers and the world’s media.
The international community must be resolute in
demanding that Israel abide by all its obligations under
international law and cease all of its violations and
unlawful measures, including its policy of collective
punishment of the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip
and its illegal settlement activities, and that it
unambiguously negotiate and resolve all core issues —
Jerusalem, settlements, the refugees, borders, security
and water — in a comprehensive manner and within a
fixed time frame.
Regrettably, since the last Security Council open
debate on this issue in October 2009 (see S/PV.6201),
Israel, the occupying Power, has failed to abide by its
obligations and continues to impede efforts to resume
peace negotiations by refusing to freeze all settlement
activities and by continuing to impose unilateral
measures aimed at altering the status, demographic
composition and Arab nature of the occupied
Palestinian territory, particularly East Jerusalem.
Moreover, Israel has not refrained from measures that
prejudice the outcome of negotiations on the final
status issues, thus undermining confidence, inflaming
tensions on the ground, preventing any progress and

10-22138

raising questions about Israel’s credibility as a partner
for peace.
The unacceptable decision of the Government of
Israel to restrain rather than to cease completely all
settlement activities, and even to exclude East
Jerusalem from the scope of this unilateral decision,
falls considerably short of Israel’s obligations under
Security Council resolutions, the Fourth Geneva
Convention and the Road Map, particularly because
settlement activity does not just violate international
law but undermines trust, aims at prejudging the
outcome of the future permanent status negotiations,
and imperils the basis of the two-State solution. The
Non-Aligned Movement condemns Israel’s deliberate
policy regarding the construction of more new
settlement units and the continued Israeli declarations
in this regard in defiance of repeated international calls
to stop all settlement construction and activities.
In this regard, in the short period since the
unilateral declaration by Israel on settlements, Israel
has announced the construction of more then 1,600
new units, particularly in Jerusalem, in addition to the
construction of thousands more already under way. The
international community must use its political tools,
including the Security Council, to take necessary
measures to bring Israel into compliance.
The Non-Aligned Movement expresses deep
concern regarding the extensive damage caused by the
Israeli settlements, the separation wall and the inhuman
network of checkpoints, which are severing the
Palestinian territory in the occupied West Bank into
separate cantons, isolating East Jerusalem, undermining
the contiguity, integrity, viability and unity of the
Palestinian territory, and jeopardizing prospects for
achieving the two-State solution.
Further, the Israeli authorities continue to
discriminate against the Palestinian residents of East
Jerusalem, including by revoking identity cards and
allowing violent Israeli settlers to attack Palestinians
and confiscate their homes, properties and land, as well
as to devastate their agriculture and desecrate their
places of worship. The ongoing Israeli measures in
occupied East Jerusalem have not only inflamed
tensions in the holy city, but also have the potential of
endangering the already fragile stability in the region
as a whole.
Meanwhile, the unresolved crisis in Gaza also
continues to have negative repercussions on all efforts

5

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

to advance the peace process and inflicts unacceptable
suffering on the fabric of civilian life in Gaza. Israel
continues to impose a blockade on the Palestinian
civilian population, depriving them of their humanitarian
needs and preventing Gaza’s reconstruction one year
after the unlawful attack in December 2008, in
violation of international humanitarian law and United
Nations resolutions, including Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009) and General Assembly
resolution ES-10/18, adopted at its tenth emergency
special session. The Non-Aligned Movement demands
that Israel immediately lift its illegal blockade and
allow the immediate and sustained opening of all
border crossings to alleviate the humanitarian crisis in
Gaza and to ensure its urgent reconstruction. The
Non-Aligned Movement again stresses the urgent need
immediately to begin reconstruction in Gaza and
deeply condemns the obstruction by Israel of the
import of essential reconstruction materials into Gaza,
as well as Israel’s negative response to the United
Nations proposal to kick-start civilian reconstruction
activity.
Further, the Non-Aligned Movement calls on
Israel to compensate the Palestinian people for the
damage and trauma they suffered during its military
aggression on Gaza last year, along with compensating
the United Nations for the human and material losses
that occurred in that attack. The Non-Aligned
Movement also reiterates its call for the restoration of
the situation in the Gaza Strip to that which prevailed
prior to June 2007, and stresses the importance and
urgency of achieving Palestinian reconciliation and
unity. In this regard, the Non-Aligned Movement
reiterates its support for every effort to achieve a
speedy Palestinian reconciliation, including Egyptian
and regional endeavours to realize the just and
legitimate national aspirations of the Palestinian
people, with all its political groupings.
Turning to Lebanon, the Non-Aligned Movement
remains deeply concerned over Israel’s ongoing air and
land violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty, in breach of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), and calls on
Israel to withdraw fully from the remaining occupied
Lebanese land in the Shab’a farms, the Kfar Shuba
hills and the northern part of Al-Ghajar village.
Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and

6

demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan and
its institutional structure, as well as the Israeli
measures to impose jurisdiction and administration
there, are null and void and have no legal effect. The
Non-Aligned Movement demands that Israel abide by
Security Council resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
4 June 1967, in implementation of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
The Non-Aligned Movement has repeatedly
warned of the danger and consequences of the ongoing
Israeli measures in the region. It is vital at this juncture
that the international community intervene and take a
robust and united position in order to strengthen the
process and to reaffirm the clear terms of reference for
negotiations on all core issues that are grounded in the
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms of
reference and the agreements reached between the
parties, starting with a total freeze on settlement
activities.
Accordingly, the Non-Aligned Movement remains
committed to supporting all endeavours that aim at
ending occupation and the establishment of a
Palestinian State living side by side with Israel in
peace and security, in accordance with the established
parameters of the peace process, as defined by Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008); the Madrid
terms of reference, including the principle of land for
peace; the Arab Peace Initiative; and the Road Map.
The Non-Aligned Movement calls for serious and
concrete actions from the Security Council in this
regard.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I call on the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this very important meeting of the Security
Council. We also thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing this morning.
We have to acknowledge the fact that little
progress has been made since the last time the Security
Council reviewed this question. The situation in the
Middle East, and particularly in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
continues to be a matter of great concern. The ongoing
illegal occupation by Israel of Palestinian and other
Arab territories remains the major obstacle to

10-22138

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in
the region.

hostilities, while 11,000 homes have been destroyed
and hundreds of thousands are forced to live outdoors.

Cuba reiterates its deep regret over the continued
suffering of the Palestinian people under Israel’s brutal
military occupation and colonization for more than 40
years, as well as the fact that they continue to be
denied their basic human rights, including the
inalienable right to self-determination and the right of
Palestinian refugees to return to their lands, in
accordance with international law and General
Assembly resolution 194 (III).

Cuba calls once again for Israel to lift its illegal
blockade and allow the entry of supplies of all kinds
into the Gaza Strip, enabling reconstruction to begin.
These measures and policies carried out by Israel are
serious, flagrant breaches of international law, the
Charter of the United Nations and numerous General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, as well as
the Advisory Opinion of 9 July 2004 of the
International Court of Justice. Israel must forthwith
cease all its offences against the Palestinian people in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and meet its obligations under international
law, particularly international humanitarian and human
rights law.

In flagrant violation of international law, and
contrary to the objectives of the peace process, the
occupying Power continues its illegal construction of
settlements and the wall throughout the West Bank and,
in particular in and around East Jerusalem. Cuba is
deeply concerned about Israel’s continued demolition
of Palestinian homes and eviction of Palestinian
families in East Jerusalem, as well as other illegal acts
of incitement, provocation and aggression by extremist
settlers against the Palestinian population and holy
places, which have made the present situation very
unstable and dangerous.
The enormous physical, economic and social
devastation that these illegal and destructive practices
have wrought has a profound effect on the peace
process and could also prejudice the outcome of an
agreement on Jerusalem’s final status. The situation in
East Jerusalem is increasingly difficult and perilous.
Israeli settlement activities are accelerating, and more
than 5,000 people have lost their homes. The
Palestinian population of East Jerusalem is growing,
but they are forbidden to build and are forced to live in
slum conditions, deprived of their most basic human
rights.
The situation in the Gaza Strip following Israel’s
brutal attack a year ago continues to be of great
concern. Israel’s imposition of closures and restrictions
to the free movement and access of people and goods,
including humanitarian and medical supplies, has made
the area’s recovery and reconstruction practically
impossible, and has also aggravated already precarious
levels of unemployment and poverty. The ongoing
siege in the Gaza Strip has left a million and a half
people living under constant threat of death and
deprived of the most basic services. More than
20 civilians have died so far this year because of Israeli

10-22138

Cuba reaffirms that every measure or action taken
by Israel with the purpose of changing the legal,
physical or demographic condition and the institutional
structure of occupied Syrian Golan, as well as any
measure taken by Israel in order to impose its
jurisdiction and administration over that territory, are
null and void and carry no legal weight. We also
reaffirm that all those measures and actions, including
the illegal construction and expansion of Israel
settlements in the Syrian Golan since 1967, are
violations of international law, international agreements,
the Charter and resolutions of the United Nations,
including Security Council resolution 497 (1981), and
of the Fourth Geneva Convention, and are in defiance
of the international community. Cuba demands that
Israel withdraw completely from the occupied Syrian
Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967.
Israel cannot be allowed to continue to act with
impunity. It is able to do so only because of the support
it receives from the super-Power. Cuba supports the
quest for a peaceful, just and lasting solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and reiterates its hope that
the current efforts will put an end to the occupation of
all Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, and
enable the establishment of an independent State of
Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I call on the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Mr. President, let me
begin by expressing my delegation’s appreciation to
you and the members of the Council for convening this
open debate on such an important issue. We also wish

7

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

to thank Assistant Secretary-General FernandezTaranco for his briefing. My delegation associates
itself with the statement delivered earlier by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, and with the statement to be delivered later
by the representative of Syria on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.
It has now been one year since the Israeli military
incursion into the Gaza Strip. My delegation reiterates
its endorsement of the report of the United Nations
Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/
12/48). In this regard, Indonesia looks forward to the
follow-up to the adoption on 5 November 2009 of
General Assembly resolution 64/10. There is no doubt
that Israel’s excessive and disproportionate use of force
and its policy of collective punishment are crimes
against everything we stand for: the values of humanity
and respect for the sanctity of the Charter. They are
clear violations of international law and international
humanitarian law. These are such sad and depressing
circumstances when we, communities of democracies,
communities of nations, are forced to act as bystanders.
The list of the suffering of the Palestinian people
caused by Israeli action is long and continues to grow
by the day, the week and the year.
The irony of this issue is that the Council has
abundant patience in taking its time to solve this very
important question. Yet, when it comes to some other
issues, it lacks patience and endurance. It acts
decisively and with vigour, and we highly commend
such “impatient” acts of the Council. We certainly wish
that this impatience could be imposed on the Palestine
issue.
While recognizing the multifaceted nature of the
Middle East conflict, let me highlight two issues.
First, the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip
has continued to deteriorate since the end of the Israeli
military incursion. The situation is pathetic because it
is man-made. For years, Palestinians have deliberately
been denied the true recovery and economic growth to
fulfil their potential. The humanitarian suffering caused
by the illegal blockade and the closure of the Gaza
crossings by the Israeli authorities are well chronicled
and are unacceptable. Indonesia therefore joins other
countries and the Secretary-General in calling on Israel
to end its policy of mayhem and to fully respect
international law.

8

Secondly, Israel’s settlement policies and
practices, which are aimed at altering the demographic
composition, physical character and status of the
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, are
nothing but a blatant violation of international law. As
the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories
continues and as Israeli settlers keep encroaching further
into the territories, Palestinians watch with horror as
their land claims disintegrate before their eyes, thus
making a viable Palestinian State very difficult.
Israel must stop all settlement construction,
expansion and planning in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and dismantle the
settlements built therein, in compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. The settlement
issue is the greatest obstacle to the peace process.
The conflict in the Middle East has indeed
continued for far too long. The illegal Israeli
occupation since 1967 has made the region a theatre of
tension and violence. For many years, Indonesia has
joined the international community in drawing attention
to the consequences of Israel’s continued illegal activity
in the occupied Arab territories. We thus support the
current surge in diplomacy, aimed at relaunching
negotiations and jump-starting a comprehensive peace
process, including the ongoing efforts of the United
States.
We also recognize the role of the Quartet in
promoting solutions to the conflict in the Middle East.
Not least, we have consistently recognized the
contribution of countries in the region and of the
League of Arab States to Middle East peace efforts,
including through the Arab Peace Initiative.
Unfortunately, the Security Council’s own record
on the issue has been less than sterling. The Security
Council must, and indeed can, exert a positive
influence on the Middle East peace process.
A truly comprehensive and lasting peace in the
Middle East also requires a solution on the IsraelLebanon and Israel-Syria tracks. My delegation
therefore wishes to once again express its deep concern
about Israel’s ongoing land and air violations of
Lebanon’s sovereignty, in violation of resolution 1701
(2006). We call on Israel to withdraw fully from the
remaining Lebanese occupied land. We wish to make a
similar call for Israel’s withdrawal from the occupied
Syrian Golan, in implementation of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).

10-22138

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

Finally, we wish to reaffirm our full support for a
two-State solution that envisions the creation of an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State
living side by side in peace and security with its
neighbours. We fervently hope that 2010 will be the
year when the international community fulfils its
obligation to the Palestinian people and a year of
remarkable progress and transformation in the history
of the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to say how pleased my
delegation is to participate in this meeting under the
presidency of China, with its principled and patient
stance on addressing the various issues before the
Security Council. I would also like to thank Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his comprehensive briefing on the
latest developments in the Middle East region.
The Security Council’s regular monthly briefing
on this issue comes at a time when the already dire
humanitarian situation in Gaza is deteriorating and in
the shadow of the lack of any sign of negotiations
resuming in the near or medium term. My delegation
would like to endorse the statements made by the
representatives of Oman on behalf of the Arab Group,
Syria on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. Given the responsibilities of His Majesty
the King of the Kingdom of Morocco as Chair of the
Al-Quds Committee, I would like to focus in my
statement on the dire situation in Jerusalem and that of
its Palestinian population owing to the Israeli
authorities’ determination to implement their plans
seeking to change its heritage and its demographics
and to seize Arab homes and property in that holy city.
With the ceasefire that followed the adoption of
resolution 1860 (2009), the international community
had hoped that Israel would put an end to its practices
and halt the collective punishment of the Palestinian
people and, indeed, its continuing attempts to impose a
de facto situation and to annex Palestinian land, acre
after acre. However, the opposite happened. Settlement
activities have continued illegally in the West Bank,
with Israelis seizing more Arab land and forcing Arab
inhabitants to leave their homes to be replaced by
Israeli settlers.

10-22138

Regarding Jerusalem, Israel continues its policy
of Judaization by confiscating more land in Arab
neighbourhoods, persisting in building new units and
facilities in the illegal settlements in Jerusalem,
continuing to build the separation wall that divides
Jerusalem’s Arab inhabitants from their natural,
political and demographic environment, demolishing
homes and confiscating residency permits. Israel
continues to target Islamic holy sites in the city
through suspect archaeological excavations, by
building a network of tunnels below the holy Al-Aqsa
mosque on empty pretexts and by preventing
worshippers from safely entering places of worship.
Over the past three months, we have followed
with grave concern the increasing pace of land seizures
in Jerusalem. Many statistics and documented reports
are available, stating the number of Jerusalem
inhabitants whose identity cards were withdrawn in
2008. During the same period, the Israeli authorities
continued to issue permits to build new housing units
in the illegal settlements in Jerusalem. Those unilateral
and provocative acts seek to change the legal and
demographic status of the holy city and obliterate its
identity, violate international law and add to the
tensions in the area, thus creating an explosive
situation that could obstruct any progress towards the
two-State solution advanced and advocated by the
international community.
The Kingdom of Morocco draws the international
community’s attention to the dangerous situation in
Jerusalem and the other occupied Palestinian
territories. At the same time and based on the same
responsibilities, commitments, international legal
instruments and resolutions, it calls for wisdom and
logic in addressing every aspect of the question of
Jerusalem, which is of interest not only to Muslims,
but to all those who follow monotheistic religions and
are actively engaged in this world.
On that basis, we are concerned about the
dangerous developments in the issue of Palestine and
their impact on security and stability in the Middle
East. Those concerns are counterbalanced only by our
firm belief that the peace process is an inevitable
choice and that its success is in the common interests
of all the peoples of the region who wish to live in
peace, harmony, cooperation. On the basis of that
commitment, the Kingdom of Morocco will continue to
work for peace in the Middle East. As a member of the
committee to follow up the Arab Peace Initiative, it

9

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

takes part in all international negotiations towards a
permanent and comprehensive peace that would
include the final status issues, especially Jerusalem, as
a major focal point of any possible solution.
The Kingdom also follows with great appreciation
the efforts of United States President Barack Obama
and his Special Envoy Senator Mitchell to overcome
difficulties in the Middle East peace process. We look
forward to these and other efforts to achieve the
desired objective of restarting negotiations.
It is high time that the international community,
the Security Council and the leading influential
countries assume their responsibilities and prevail upon
Israel to remove the obstacles to the negotiations and
respond to efforts to resume the peace process, which
must lead to a just and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East and transform Jerusalem from a centre of
conflict into a centre where the two States of Israel and
Palestine can coexist side by side in peace and security.
Such a just and comprehensive solution can be
achieved only through Israel’s withdrawal from the
occupied Arab territories, including the Golan Heights
and the rest of the occupied Lebanese territory.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank you, Sir, for having organized this open
debate at a time when the situation in the Middle East
is of the greatest concern to my delegation and to the
international community, due to both the ongoing
tragic situation in the occupied Palestinian territory and
the lack of progress towards resuming the peace process.
My delegation associates itself with the statements
made by the representatives of the Sultanate of Oman
on behalf of the Group of Arab States and of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, as well as that
to be made by the representative of Syria on behalf of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference.
Since the debate held by the Council in October
2009, (S/PV.6201) the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, has
continued to deteriorate. Israel’s unremitting resolve to
create faits accomplis in the occupied West Bank and
the Gaza Strip appears increasingly to resemble a
comprehensive and deliberate policy aimed at making
the colonization project permanent and thus casts
serious doubt on the true intentions of Israel’s leaders,

10

in contrast to their stated intention to resume
negotiations with a view to achieving a sustainable
peace agreement.
Precisely one year after the Israeli withdrawal,
the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip has
continued to worsen despite the Council’s adoption of
resolution 1860 (2009) and the remarkable international
mobilization in favour of its reconstruction. Yet Gaza’s
return to the status quo ante, characterized by the
entrenchment of the blockade, has in fact prevented
reconstruction work from getting off the ground and
Israel continues to hinder the movement of people and
the delivery of humanitarian aid and construction
materials, thus preventing the resumption of normal
life and increasing the already high levels of poverty
and unemployment.
United with the Palestinian people and faithful to
its approach to their just cause, Algeria has continued
to call for an end to Israel’s sinister plan, which seeks
to impoverish and starve an entire sector of the
Palestinian population and to cut it off from the rest of
the occupied Palestinian territory and from the
international community.
With equal urgency, Algeria condemns the illegal
and provocative measures taken by Israel in East
Jerusalem in an unacceptable attempt to violate the
city’s age-old identity as a symbol of tolerance and
dialogue and its status as the crossroads of the three
revealed religions. It is particularly alarmed by the
pursuit and development of a methodical policy of
expropriation, intimidation and colonization aimed at
strengthening Israel’s control over that Palestinian city
by altering its Arab nature and establishing a fait
accompli on an issue related to the final status
negotiations.
With the exception of Israel, the occupying
Power, the international community in its entirety does
not acknowledge the legitimacy of Israel’s unilateral
claims to the holy city, which remains an integral part
of the Palestinian territory occupied by Israel and
whose fate is necessarily linked to the entire question
of Palestine. The Security Council must reaffirm that
the illegal unilateral measures taken by Israel to
modify or attempt to modify the demographic
composition, nature and status of the city are null and
void under international law and must be condemned
as such.

10-22138

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

Because of Israel’s obstinacy, the peace process is
deadlocked and the objective of a two-State solution
appears more elusive than ever. No significant progress
has been made towards guaranteeing the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to establish a viable,
independent State based on relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet Road Map. The international
community, which has continually shown signs of
exasperation in the light of Israel’s deceitfulness and
evasive responses, must find the means necessary to
extricate the process from its current stalemate.
Without minimizing the importance of resuming the
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations called for by all, we
note that no one desires meaningless negotiations to
serve as a smokescreen for certain undeclared
intentions aimed at perpetuating the status quo.
In our view, successful negotiations require three
conditions to be met. First, the Israeli Government must
commit itself sincerely and unequivocally to a twoState solution, underpinned by concrete improvements
in the situation on the ground, beginning with the
cessation of all illegal activities. Secondly, we must
ensure respect for the terms of reference echoed and
validated by United Nations resolutions, and which
make up the indisputable elements of any settlement
framework. All efforts must therefore seek to eliminate
the remaining obstacles on the road to peace. Lastly
and thirdly, we must define a clearer role for the
Quartet, whose main task is to give positive
momentum to the process by protecting it from the ups
and downs of power struggles.
Algeria remains committed to any initiative that
would put an end to Israel’s occupation of the
Palestinian territory and other Arab territories, and the
establishment of a sovereign and independent
Palestinian State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
living in peace with its neighbours within the
parameters laid out by a settlement with a view to a
just and lasting peace in the Middle East, established
by resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002)
and on the basis of the principles of the Arab Peace
Initiative, in particular the principle of land-for-peace.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): Thank you, Mr. President,
for allowing us to speak. In his briefing to the Security
Council on 24 November 2009 (see S/PV.6223),

10-22138

Assistant Secretary-General Haile Menkerios stated
that Israeli-Palestinian negotiations had reached “a
deep and worrying impasse” and that without a
political horizon, destructive forces would gain ground,
putting both the Palestinian Authority and the twoState solution in peril.
This morning, Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco delivered what was, in fact, the
same message. Consequently, two months have passed
and little has changed in reality, notwithstanding partial
measures on the ground, of which we have taken
positive note. Unfortunately, we have to acknowledge
that the current conditions do not yet allow for the
resumption of final status negotiations.
This is not to say that we can simply give in to
the seemingly insurmountable obstacles to getting the
negotiations restarted. Inaction is clearly not an option.
Other efforts must still be made to drive the process
forward towards a two-State solution. We hope that the
parties will respond positively and proactively to
parallel endeavours by the international community to
overcome the current political impasse in the peace
process.
All along, steps in the right direction in some
areas of the occupied Palestinian territories should not
be reversed by detrimental action in others, including
East Jerusalem. As for Gaza, the unacceptable and
counterproductive grip holding the civilian population
down must urgently come to an end.
As Chair of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians, Norway has repeatedly stressed the need
for a clear political horizon in order to justify the high
levels of international donor support to the Palestinian
State-building project.
On the economic track, the donor community
remains committed to the effort to build a Palestinian
State from the bottom-up. The Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee has given its strong and unanimous support
to Prime Minister Fayyad’s plan for preparing for
Palestinian statehood within two years. The
implementation of this work is ongoing, in close
contact with and coordination between the Palestinian
Authority and the donor community. The plan thus
forms an important platform for continued international
support, notably within a set time frame. To keep the
two-State solution clearly in sight, it cannot simply be

11

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

relegated to some distant and uncertain future, and the
momentum must be upheld.
Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Mr President, for convening this open debate during this
very first month of the year. I also thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. FernandezTaranco, for his important briefing.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by Ambassador Abdelaziz of Egypt on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
This month last year saw the adoption by this
Council of resolution 1860 (2009) as a result of
intensive negotiations among concerned parties
following Israel’s offensive on 27 December 2008 in
Gaza. A year later, assessments of the situation in the
Middle East once again attest to its severity on
multiple fronts. No substantive progress has been made
towards a durable ceasefire between the parties
concerned, the required resumption of peaceful
negotiations on final status or the sustained opening of
border crossings. Israel has yet to cease its unilateral
and provocative construction and expansion of
settlements and the separation wall, its demolition of
Palestinian homes and eviction of their families, and its
revocation of residency permits, thus directly
endangering and altering the demographic composition,
character, nature and status of the occupied Palestinian
territory. The humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip
remains shocking and is a causal effect of the
restrictions and blockade imposed on the local
population. The recent resurgence of sporadic rocket
attacks against civilians in southern Israel again stirs
up deep worries.
The vicious cycle of violence and counterviolence has sowed the seeds of confrontation,
animosity and incitement for too long. In order to
achieve a breakthrough into a new period in which an
independent State of Palestine can thrive and all
peoples in the region can co-exist in peace and
security, all parties concerned should uphold their
mutual obligations under the Road Map, the Madrid
terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Constructive
dialogue and political negotiations must be put first,
whereas the military option should be excluded.
Israel must immediately freeze illegal settlement
activity, dismantle outposts erected since March 2001,
open all border crossings, release all Palestinian

12

prisoners and facilitate humanitarian assistance and
reconstruction efforts in Gaza. That State must do so
with the utmost urgency and responsibility.
Palestinian factions must make sincere efforts to
resolve their differences within the framework of
intra-Palestinian reconciliation and jointly work
towards the establishment of a Government of national
unity. In the interest of long-term regional peace and
justice, we reiterate our calls for all the parties
concerned to strictly comply with international
humanitarian and human rights law and conduct,
without delay, credible domestic investigations into
the many reported allegations of violations, as
recommended by the Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48).
In this overall situation, my delegation again
acknowledges the intensified efforts of the Quartet, the
League of Arab States, regional countries and the
international community at large in helping to achieve
a two-State solution to the Israel-Palestine conflict and
to revitalize the Middle East peace process on all
tracks.
We recognize the Palestinian National Authority’s
determination, under difficult circumstances, to embark
on practical policies and measures to strengthen
socioeconomic foundations, security sector reform and
functional institutions for a future State. We join the
repeated calls from the wider membership of the
United Nations and from many different parts of the
world for peace, reconciliation and mediation in the
Middle East.
Turning to Lebanon, we welcome and support the
efforts undertaken by the Lebanese Government to
strengthen the national course of peace consolidation,
socio-economic reconstruction and the normalization
of external relations, and encourage the parties in
Lebanon to jointly contribute to these endeavours. We
demand that Israel immediately and unconditionally
cease all violations of Lebanese independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, including by
ceasing flights over Lebanese territory and withdrawing
from the northern part of Al-Ghajar village and an
adjacent area north of the Blue Line. We reiterate our
support for the full implementation of resolution 1701
(2006).
Finally, as it always has, Viet Nam continues to
commit itself to joining the international community’s
collective efforts towards the peaceful settlement of the
Israel-Palestine and Arab-Israeli conflicts and the

10-22138

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

ultimate attainment of a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Mr. Paul Badji, Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.
Mr. Badji (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, I congratulate you, Mr. President,
on the exemplary and effective manner in which you
are steering the work of the Council during this first
month of the year. I also thank Mr. Oscar FernandezTaranco, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his comprehensive and objective briefing
on the situation in the Middle East, and on Palestine in
particular.
Last week, at the first meeting of the Committee
in 2010, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon drew the
Committee’s attention to the current state of peace
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians. In
particular, he emphasized that “if we do not move
forward on the political process soon, we risk sliding
backwards”. The Committee fully shares that concern.
We very much fear that the prospects for a resumption
of negotiations are slipping away. Israel is determined
to establish a state of affairs on the ground that appears
to be irreversible, even on the very land where
Palestinians are to establish their future State.
Today, it would seem that the Israeli Government’s
announcement on 25 November concerning what Prime
Minister Netanyahu referred to as a policy of restraint
for a period of 10 months was not made in good faith.
Construction has continued apace in spite of that
announcement. In addition, the Israeli Government
continues to give financial support to established
settlements. That temporary moratorium on the
establishment of settlements moratorium explicitly
excluded East Jerusalem, where settlement infrastructure
is being expanded and consolidated while Palestinian
residents are dispossessed, discriminated against and
evicted.
I take this opportunity to remind Israel that the
international community as a whole does not recognize
its annexation of East Jerusalem. Resolution 252
(1968), which the Security Council adopted 42 years
ago, clearly states that

“all legislative and administrative measures and
actions taken by Israel, including expropriation of
land and properties thereon, which tend to change
the legal status of Jerusalem are invalid and cannot
change that status”. (resolution 252 (1968), para. 2)
The Committee welcomes the fact that major
international stakeholders have recently reaffirmed that
position of principle of the Council.
Unfortunately, one year after the end of Israel’s
Operation Cast Lead — whose violence and brutality
are still fresh in our minds — Palestinians in Gaza
continue to suffer the disastrous consequences of a war
that was imposed on them by Israel. The nearly airtight
blockade of the Gaza Strip continues. Israel allows the
occasional entry of certain essential goods to pass
crossings that it established and controls. The funds
generously pledged by the international community at
Sharm el-Sheikh for the reconstruction of Gaza have
not yet reached the Palestinians for whom they were
intended. The initiative of the Secretary-General to put
United Nations agencies on the ground in charge of the
most pressing reconstruction projects continues to be
ignored by the occupying Power.
Various United Nations bodies, with the General
Assembly in the lead, have raised the issue of
responsibility for certain acts committed during the war
in Gaza. First and foremost, the report of the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict
(A/HRC/12/48), which was established by the Human
Rights Council and led by Justice Richard Goldstone,
presented a comprehensive and balanced account of the
events in Gaza. The Mission submitted ample and
unbiased evidence that both Israel, the occupying
Power, and Palestinian armed groups had committed
serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law during the fighting, including some
that should be prosecuted as war crimes.
The Committee supported the Mission’s main
recommendation that Israel and the Palestinians
conduct impartial and credible investigations and
prosecute those found responsible, as called for by the
General Assembly in its resolution 64/10. We look
forward to receiving the Secretary-General’s report on
the implementation of that resolution. The Committee
calls on the Security Council to remain seized of this
matter.
The Committee also encourages principled action
by the international community aimed at ensuring

10-22138

13

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

respect for the norms of international humanitarian
law. In particular, the Committee calls on the high
contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention to
fulfil their obligations under article 1 of the
Convention, which requires them to respect and ensure
respect for the Convention in all circumstances. In that
regard, we welcome the efforts of the Swiss
Government acting as depositary of the Conventions.
The main elements for resolving the problem that
lies at the core of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict — the
Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory — are
contained in Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008).
The continuing lack of political will to implement
those resolutions has devastating consequences for the
Palestinians in the occupied territories, for the Israeli
people and for the region as a whole. The active
involvement of the Security Council in bringing about
a peaceful resolution of the conflict in accordance with
the norms of international law is crucial. On behalf of
the Committee, I urge the members of the Council to
live up to the responsibility entrusted to them by the
Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council this
month. I also thank your predecessor for having wisely
guided the work of the Council last month. We further
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Fernandez-Taranco, for his comprehensive
and detailed briefing.
Jordan aligns itself with the statements made by
the representatives of the Sultanate of Oman on behalf
of the Group of Arab States and of Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement, as well as with the
statement to be made by the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic on behalf of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference.
The peace process in the Middle East is at a
critical phase and facing serious obstacles. Nevertheless,
Jordan, under the leadership of His Majesty King
Abdullah Bin Al Hussein, remains committed to
working with the various international and regional
actors to ensure peace and stability in the region on the
basis of the two-State solution, which enjoys the
unanimous support of the international community and

14

has been reaffirmed in the many resolutions adopted by
the Security Council.
The road to peace is very clear. It requires the
international community to intensify its efforts to
launch serious and effective talks between the
Palestinians and the Israelis. The negotiations must
address the various issues related to final status,
including borders, Jerusalem, refugees, security and
water. They must take place as soon as possible; begin
at the point where previous negotiations ended and on
the basis of a monitoring and verification system with
a clear calendar; and lead to the creation of an
independent, viable and contiguous Palestinian State
on Palestinian national territory, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, within the 1967 borders and living side by
side in peace and security with Israel.
In that respect, Jordan reaffirms the important
and ongoing leadership role being played by the United
States of America and the efforts undertaken by the
Quartet to ensure that the talks are relaunched in an
effective manner, lead to the two-State solution, and
establish a comprehensive regional peace based on the
mandates and terms of reference of the international
community and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Despite the upsurge in diplomatic and political
activity in the region and world capitals to promote the
relaunching of the talks, Israel is pursuing its unilateral
policies in the occupied Palestinian territories. These
policies in no way indicate any desire for peace on its
part, are manifestly ineffective and have proven to be a
failure in settling the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. If
Israel wants to convey a genuine desire for peace, it
must immediately end practices that contradict its
stated positions. These are the actions of an occupying
Power and thereby contradict international law.
International law, international humanitarian law and
human rights law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Times of War, must all be respected.
The Assistant Secretary-General’s briefing stressed
Israel’s ongoing settlement activity and expansion in
the occupied Palestinian territories, particularly East
Jerusalem. Such activity reflects the will to create a
new reality on the ground, in clear contravention of
international humanitarian law and of Israel’s
commitments under the Road Map. The Israeli
settlements are a burden on and obstacle to the
movement of Palestinians and economic development

10-22138

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

and growth in the Palestinian territories. They give rise
to increased tension and exacerbate a situation in
which trust is already sorely lacking. They also
represent a major obstacle to international and regional
efforts to relaunch the negotiations, and even jeopardize
the possibility of a peaceful solution and the future of a
contiguous, independent and viable Palestinian State.
We therefore demand that Israel put a complete and
immediate halt to all its settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territories, in particular East
Jerusalem and including so-called natural growth.
Today’s meeting is an opportunity to draw the
international community’s attention to one of the most
serious issues facing the region: illegal Israeli practices
in East Jerusalem. These practices have endured
throughout the decades of occupation, during which
Israel has refused to live up to its legal commitments.
As the occupying Power, Israel has refused to respond
to the repeated appeals of the international community
and imposed its own rules and settlement policies. It
has clearly violated the relevant United Nations
resolutions, in particular the resolutions of the Security
Council, often creating a vicious and sanguinary circle.
Israel has continued its illegal practices in East
Jerusalem, including its archaeological excavations at
Muslim and Christian holy sites, particularly in and
around Al-Haram Al-Sharif. It has also continued under
various pretexts to destroy houses, expel Arab
inhabitants, close Palestinian institutions and deprive
Palestinians of their right to remain in the holy city by
confiscating their identity cards. These measures are all
part and parcel of a broader policy to enhance Israeli
control over the city, create a new reality on the
ground, and alter the demographic profile of occupied
East Jerusalem.
The influential international actors must stop
these Israeli practices. It is of great importance that the
international and regional protagonists understand the
negative impact of these Israeli activities on the
Islamic world. Israel must cease forthwith its violations
of the status of East Jerusalem, in particular by
abandoning its practice of increasing the Jewish
population there and of seeking to weaken the city’s
Islamic character. Such activities, which violate
international law — especially the Fourth Geneva
Convention — threaten the future of the holy city and
jeopardize the possibility of a peaceful settlement,
must end.

10-22138

For the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and His
Majesty King Abdullah Bin Al Hussein, the status of
the city is a red line that must not be crossed. The
protection of Jerusalem, and Jerusalem itself, are top
priorities for Jordan. We will take every step necessary
to protect Islamic and Christian holy sites there. The
restoration and maintenance of those sites and the
protection of the city’s Arab identity are crucial, and
any attempt to make it a Jewish city will be opposed.
Jerusalem must remain a symbol of peace and peaceful
cohabitation. It plays a role of singular importance in
the lives of millions of Muslims and Christians
throughout the world. The repeated provocations and
illegal acts could lead to a situation that would threaten
the foundations of international peace and security, the
maintenance of which is of course the main task of the
Security Council.
It has been a year since the Israeli aggression
against the Gaza Strip. The repercussions of that
aggression continue to be tangible for our brothers in
the Gaza Strip, where they live in despair, poverty,
hunger and privation in many forms. The situation in
the Gaza Strip has now reached the level of a
humanitarian catastrophe. Our brothers there are
suffering on a daily basis, lacking even the basic means
for survival. Any progress in the peace efforts requires
a radical change in the tragic situation of the
Palestinian people in the occupied territories,
particularly in the Gaza Strip. The international
community must take immediate and effective steps to
guarantee that Israel implement resolution 1860
(2009), that it lift the blockade of the Gaza Strip,
authorize the launching of reconstruction and economic
recovery projects, allow the entry of medical supplies,
food, agricultural products, fuel and construction
materials, permit the sick to reach hospitals and allow
civilians their freedom of movement.
Jordan and His Majesty the King continue their
numerous efforts to engage with the international
community and urge it to put an end to the dreadful
suffering of the Palestinian people. We call upon the
international community to provide the assistance
required to improve living conditions there and ensure
that they do not deteriorate even further. We appeal to
the international community to shoulder its humanitarian
and legal responsibility to guarantee the human rights
of the Palestinian people in the Palestinian territories,
and to provide urgent humanitarian assistance to put an
end to their suffering.

15

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

The Security Council plays an essential role in
providing assistance and political support to regional
and international efforts to relaunch negotiations
leading to a just, lasting and comprehensive solution to
the Palestinian question, which is at the heart of the
situation in the Middle East. A resolution of the
Palestinian question is the key to all the conflicts in the
region. If the efforts towards peace fail, there will be
catastrophic consequences for the region and its
peoples. Any failure in establishing peace and putting
an end to this conflict will exacerbate extremism and
pose a threat to the peace and security of the
Palestinians and Israelis and indeed of all peoples in
the region, as well as to broader international peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation
would like, Sir, to congratulate you on the successful
Chinese presidency of the Security Council for this
month and on your having convened this important
meeting. We would also like to congratulate the new
non-permanent members of the Security Council:
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon, Lebanon and
Nigeria. We wish them success.
The Middle East is the sacred birthplace of great
religions of our world. It resonates with the kinder
nature of the relationship of eternal God with mortal
beings. It is wrapped in overarching spirituality and
religious good. Its symbols are blessed decorations in
millions of homes around the globe. Its divinity
demands that it be a land of peace and love, in contrast
to the reality of its being the abode of unending
conflicts and the epitome of human political failure.
That failure has given birth to difficult religious,
philosophical and political questions. It has called into
question the notion of limitless human ingenuity. The
very concept of intrinsic human good has been torn
apart by the brutalities committed in this land. In the
turmoil of the Middle East we mortal beings have been
exposed at our worst, in all our callousness, cruelty and
brutality.
The consequences of our collective failure in the
Middle East are disastrous for the region and beyond.
Adding to pessimism about our humanity is the
continuing gravity of the situation on the ground in
terms of the humanitarian plight of the Palestinian
people. Amidst this human tragedy, the ongoing

16

provocative and aggressive actions of Israel in East
Jerusalem have compounded the plight of the
Palestinian people and made a political settlement all
the more difficult.
There is recognition of the fact that a just
settlement of the Palestinian question is central to
ending the cycle of suspicion and discord that has
undermined peace and security in the Middle East and
has also strained the relations between neighbours in
the region. The question is how to convert this growing
international consensus into credible action that would
bring to fruition this arduous search for peace. An
immediate end to the illegal practices affecting the
human rights of the Palestinian people is the most
important prerequisite for building an environment of
trust and confidence. Trust and confidence, together
with active engagement of the international
community, represent the only way forward for the
peace process and progress towards a two-State
solution in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
There is no option but to return to the negotiating
table. Efforts to create new facts on the ground that
prejudice the outcome of negotiations are neither
recognized by nor acceptable to the international
community. We should also learn from the half-hearted
attempts, unfulfilled promises and aborted peace
processes of the past. Greater political will is required
to bring the parties together and help them engage in a
sustained negotiation process, in good faith and
without preconditions, aimed at achieving within a
reasonable time frame a comprehensive agreement.
In accordance with its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council has a significant and crucial role in
supporting the efforts for renewed negotiations and
their successful conclusion. I wish to conclude by
reiterating Pakistan’s full support for this objective and
our strong commitment to the realization of an
independent, sovereign and viable State of Palestine
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, Sir, I would like to thank you for this
opportunity for non-members of the Security Council
to express their viewpoints on the situation in the
Middle East and the Palestinian question. I would also

10-22138

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

like to congratulate you on your work as President of
the Council for the month of January. Allow me as well
to thank in particular the Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, for his
thorough briefing this morning. We would also like to
thank the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of Palestine for their statements.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict has been in the
agenda of the Security Council for more than 60 years.
Taking into account the time that has passed and the
situation of instability that it provokes, it is of high
priority to achieve a lasting peace in that region, which
would lead to the establishment of a viable, democratic
and contiguous Palestinian State, living side by side
with Israel, in peace and security, in conformity with
Security Council resolutions, the principle of land for
peace and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Argentina recognizes the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and to build a viable and
independent State. In this regard, we insist that Israel
must cease its military operations in the occupied
territories, as well as all practices that contravene
international law, ending its policy of illegal
settlements and the construction of the wall. We also
recognize the right of the State of Israel to live in peace
with its neighbours, within safe and internationally
recognized borders, and, at the same time, we condemn
terrorist actions of Palestinian armed groups against
the Israeli civilian population.
Argentina believes that restarting the peace
process will require the support of the international
community, as well as the active mediation of the
United States, with a view to putting an end to illegal
settlements, finding a solution to the Jerusalem issue
and promoting international support for addressing the
question of possible compensation for Palestinian
refugees. In this context, Argentina values the efforts
of the United States Middle East Envoy, George
Mitchell, to restart the peace talks with a view to
making effective progress towards the establishment of
two States as a solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. We also believe that the Arab League’s land
for peace proposal contains a core of initiatives that
could help the peace process move forward, and we
hope Israel will take them into consideration.
We also express our disappointment at the
difficulties that appear as we try to move ahead with
the peace process and resolve all the final status issues,

10-22138

including Jerusalem. In this regard, Argentina is
concerned about high-level Israeli authorities’ expressed
refusal to freeze the building of settlements and
proclamation of Israel’s presence in the Jordan Valley.
On another issue, my country has repeatedly expressed
its concern with the deepening humanitarian crisis
affecting the Palestinian people and by the failure to
implement resolution 1860 (2009); because of this, we
participated actively in the donor conferences in Paris
in December 2007 and Sharm el-Sheikh in March.
After the Israeli attack on Gaza between
27 December 2008 and 18 January 2009, the Human
Rights Council decided to set up a Fact-Finding Mission
for Gaza, which produced the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/12/48). At its sixty-fourth session, the General
Assembly, with the positive votes of 114 members,
among them Argentina, adopted its resolution 64/10,
endorsing the report of the Human Rights Council,
which approved the Goldstone report and called on the
parties to carry out credible investigations into the
events that led to the convening of the twelfth special
session of the Council and the subsequent report.
Argentina’s vote in this regard must be
considered in the context of our own recent history,
which prompts Argentina, in every appropriate forum,
to support objective and complete investigations when
violations of international law and international
humanitarian law are in question. In accordance with
our principles and convictions, we could not refuse to
support the request that the United Nations investigate
accusations of war crimes on both sides during
Operation Cast Lead.
We hope that this open debate of the Security
Council will provide a new impetus for restarting the
Middle East peace process, which requires the strong
and determined support and commitment of the
international community.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that
Argentina’s commitment to human rights and the fight
against impunity has led it to become a member of the
Task Force for International Cooperation on Holocaust
Education, Remembrance and Research. On this
International Day of Commemoration in Memory of
the Victims of the Holocaust, we would like in this
forum to pay tribute to the victims, as we do every year
in our country.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

17

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic): I have the
honour to make this statement on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC). Allow
me at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you warmly on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would also like to extend the
warm congratulations of the OIC to the new members
of the Security Council: Lebanon, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon and Nigeria. I would also
like to express the OIC’s appreciation to the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco, for the decent, sober and genuine
briefing he gave this morning.
The OIC expresses its serious concerns about the
grave situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, in
particular the continuing inhumane Israeli blockade
and dire humanitarian crisis being imposed on the
Palestinian civilian population in the Gaza Strip, and
the ongoing illegal and still unpunished colonization
campaign being carried out by Israel, the occupying
Power, in the West Bank, particularly in and around
Al-Quds Al-Sharif.
The international community has repeatedly
witnessed and condemned Israel’s illegal measures in
the occupied Palestinian territory, at the forefront of
which is Israel’s untrammelled, deliberate campaign to
change the Palestinian Arab identity and character of
the holy city of Al-Quds. These activities, deemed null
and void by the international community, include, but
are not limited to: the ongoing settlement activities; the
persistent aggression against Islamic and Christian
holy places in Al-Quds Al-Sharif; the continued
construction of the separation wall; the revocation of
Palestinian residency rights in the city; the eviction of
Palestinian families from the city; the demolition of
Palestinian houses; the imposition of severe restrictions
on movement, which has already isolated the city from
the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory; and
continued dangerous and provocative digging and
excavation work in and around the Al-Agsa mosque
and its vicinity.
The OIC strongly condemns these Israeli
violations and calls for the immediate cessation of all
such illegal Israeli activities in accordance with the
occupying Power’s obligations under international law,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and
the many relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions, of which, as members know,
there are hundreds, including 37 Security Council

18

resolutions. In this regard, the OIC recalls, inter alia,
Security Council resolutions 446 (1979), 465 (1980)
and 478 (1980), which all remain valid and must be
implemented.
The OIC recalls paragraph 4 of resolution 2/36PAL, adopted at the thirty-sixth ministerial meeting of
the OIC in Damascus, in which the members
reaffirmed that all the Israeli colonial settlement
measures and practices in Al-Quds and the rest of the
occupied Palestinian territory are null and void, in line
with the resolutions of international legitimacy, as well
as international covenants and conventions that
consider all Israeli legislative, administrative and
colonial settlement procedures and measures aimed at
altering the legal, demographic, architectural, cultural
and heritage-related status of the holy city to be
illegitimate. The resolution urgently requests the
Security Council to revive the International Supervision
and Monitoring Committee to prevent and prohibit
colonial settlement in Al-Quds and the occupied Arab
territories.
We also strongly condemn the attacks by the
Israeli occupying forces, including extremist aggressive
settlers under the supervision of the occupying Power,
perpetrated against Palestinian civilians and worshippers
at Al-Aqsa mosque and the Al-Haram Al-Sharif
compound in Al-Quds Al-Sharif. The OIC emphasizes
that the question of the holy Haram in Al-Quds is a red
line that cannot be addressed with laxity or the subject
of any debate, and that any provocative or illegal
unilateral actions against the holy Al-Aqsa mosque will
have very serious repercussions for the Islamic world
and be likely to destabilize the region.
The OIC calls upon the international community,
particularly the Security Council, to shoulder its
responsibilities, especially towards occupied Al-Quds
Al-Sharif, and to take urgent action to bring a complete
halt to all illegal Israeli measures and actions aimed at
changing the demographic composition, character,
geographic nature and legal status of the holy city.
One year ago, the international community
witnessed with horror the Israeli military aggression
against the Gaza Strip that killed and injured thousands
of besieged unarmed Palestinian civilians, including
children, and caused vast destruction to property,
infrastructure and agricultural land. The OIC welcomes
the adoption of resolution 64/10 of 5 November 2009
by the General Assembly on the follow-up to the report

10-22138

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the
Gaza Conflict. The group is of the view that that
resolution constitutes an important first step in pursuing
accountability for those Israeli violations, which were
authenticated and confirmed by evidence in the
Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48). Thus, further action
should be taken by the relevant United Nations organs
and bodies, including the Security Council, in order to
bring the Israeli perpetrators of those crimes to justice
and to put an end to Israel’s impunity and above-thelaw attitude.
The OIC condemns Israel’s inhumane and
unlawful blockade of the Gaza Strip and expresses
serious concern about the grave deterioration of the
socio-economic conditions and the deepening of the
humanitarian crisis of the Palestinian civilians due to
the blockade. The OIC calls on Israel, the occupying
Power, to end its collective punitive measures imposed
on the civilian population in Gaza. It calls for the
immediate lifting of Israel’s unjust blockade and the
opening of all crossing points with Gaza, in accordance
with international law and all United Nations
resolutions, in order to ensure the free access of
humanitarian aid and other essential supplies and
goods, including commercial supplies and necessary
reconstruction materials, and to facilitate the crossing
of persons to and from Gaza.
The OIC remains deeply concerned by Israel’s
ongoing air and land violations of Lebanon’s
sovereignty, in breach of resolution 1701 (2006), and
calls on Israel to withdraw fully from the remaining
Lebanese occupied land in the Shab’a farms, the Kfar
Shuba hills and the northern part of Al-Ghajar village.
The OIC also reaffirms that all measures and
actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the occupying
Power, to alter the legal, physical and demographic
status of the occupied Syrian Golan and its institutional
structure, as well as Israeli measures to impose
jurisdiction and administration there, are null and void
and have no legal effect. The OIC demands that Israel
abide fully and immediately by Security Council
resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the lines of 4 June 1967, also
in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).
The OIC calls for an intensification of efforts by
the international community, including this Security
Council in line with its Charter responsibilities, aimed

10-22138

at accelerating the process of achieving a just and
comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle East on
the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid terms of reference, including the principle of
land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Road
Map.
In that regard, the OIC reiterates its firm and
unwavering support for the establishment of the State
of Palestine based on commitment to the right of
sovereignty over the Palestinian territory occupied in
1967, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, and for a
just solution to the plight of the Palestine refugees on
the basis of General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Shafi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your successful presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I thank you for convening this meeting on
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, in the form of an open debate,
which affords us the opportunity to participate. I would
also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing. Allow me to
associate my delegation with the statements made by
the representatives of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, of Syria on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, and of Oman
on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
We meet today a year after the Israeli military
assault on the Gaza Strip, the so-called Operation Cast
Lead, and the adoption of resolution 1860 (2009). The
fact that one year has passed since that criminal
operation does not mean that it has been forgotten. The
crimes that have been and continue to be committed in
Gaza and throughout the occupied Palestinian
territories are violations of international law. They are
subject to no statute of limitations and should not be
forgotten, even with the passage of time. How can such
violations be forgotten when they continue to be
committed in various forms, in particular the unjust
siege imposed on an entire people?
Israel’s military forces have caused massive
destruction and damage to various infrastructures in the
Gaza Strip, whose population of over 1.5 million was
already suffering from shortages of food and health
supplies. The siege imposed on the Strip continues to

19

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

hinder the access of humanitarian supplies and basic
building materials to the Strip.
The State of Qatar was one of the first countries
to take the initiative to help our Palestinian brothers in
the Gaza Strip to overcome that humanitarian disaster.
However, financial support is useless unless it can
reach its beneficiaries.
Although the Human Rights Council has acted in
response to the events that occurred in the Gaza Strip
last year and is still considering the issue, it is more
incumbent on this Council to act, because the question
of Palestinian lies at the heart of its mandate and is one
of its main agenda items. The report of the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict
(A/HRC/12/48), mandated by the Human Rights
Council to investigate war events in Gaza, has clearly
shown the gravity of the violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law committed in Gaza. Our
humanitarian conscience requires us to ensure that the
perpetrators of such crimes do not go unpunished. For
its part, the Security Council has taken no concrete
action on the recommendations in the report of the
Board of Inquiry established to investigate the
targeting of United Nations premises and facilities
during that act of aggression (see S/2009/250).
It seems clear to all that the continued military
occupation is the root of the problem and that that
occupation will not provide security for Israel. It
causes the worst violations of human rights perpetrated
against an unarmed and oppressed people under the
pretext of combating violence and terrorism, when in
fact it is one of the root causes of terrorism. The claim
that excessive military force can serve to protect the
security of Israel is false, because the right to struggle
for liberation from foreign occupation is a legitimate
right that cannot be equated with military aggression
by occupation forces.
We stress our firm rejection of Israel’s illegal
measures in occupied East Jerusalem and its attempts
to change the city’s Arab identity, demographic
composition, legal status and religious character. We
stress that all such attempts remain null, void and
without any legal effect. The international community
must reject the attempts by the Israeli Government to
desecrate Islamic and Christian Holy Sites, demolish
houses in the city, expel its Arab residents and
confiscate their identity cards in order to Judaize the
city. Those attempts violate Israel’s obligations, as the

20

occupying Power, under international law, are contrary
to relevant United Nations resolutions and undermine
the foundations of a peaceful solution to the question
of Palestine and the Arab-Israeli conflict. Furthermore,
such measures disrupt international efforts for an
alliance of civilizations.
Israeli authorities continue to commit numerous
human rights violations against Arab populations
within the so-called Green Line and to defy the
international consensus on the need to cease building
and expanding the illegal settlements in an effort to
annex more Palestinian land, de facto. Those actions
undermine international mediation efforts, in particular
those of the Quartet.
The State of Qatar believes that resolution of the
Palestinian issue can come only through the
establishment of two States living side by side in peace
and security. We believe that the Israeli Government’s
attempts to expand settlements, particularly in and
around East Jerusalem, undermine efforts for a twoState solution based on the 1967 borders because they
threaten the contiguity of the Palestinian territory,
which is an essential component of a viable Palestinian
State.
The Israeli Government seeks to justify the
expansion of settlements with what it calls natural
growth. However, let me emphasize Qatar’s rejection
of such a concept altogether, because such settlement
activity is fundamentally illegal and that growth is not
natural, since Israeli public policy encourages the
colonization of the occupied Palestinian territory,
particularly East Jerusalem, by offering Government
subsidies and incentives to encourage the transfer of its
civilian population to the Palestinian territory, in
contravention of international law.
We must also note the continued Israeli violations
of Lebanon’s sovereignty, in contravention of Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006), and the ongoing
Israeli occupation of Lebanese territory and the Syrian
Golan. We reiterate that the Israeli decision to annex
the Golan is null and void. The Golan must be returned
to Syria, just as the remaining occupied Lebanese
territories must be returned to Lebanon.
The establishment of a lasting, comprehensive
and just peace in the Middle East can be based only on
the principle of land for peace, the Madrid terms of
reference, relevant United Nations resolutions and the
Arab Peace Initiative. The Arab Peace Initiative was

10-22138

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

reaffirmed at the Doha summit in March 2009, with a
reference indicating that the Arab side will continue to
bring it forward conditioned on its acceptance by the
Israeli side. Therefore, the new Israeli Government
must refrain from taking extreme positions. It must
take advantage of the goodwill on the Arab side in
order to end the crisis in the Middle East.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the need
to involve all of the Palestinian people in the peace
process to ensure its success. The Palestinians must
seriously pursue everything that will help to foster
national unity in their own interest and guarantee a
unified Palestinian territory, both geographically and
politically. We would be remiss not to salute and
express our pride in our brothers and sisters, the
Palestinians, who remain steadfast in the face of
occupation, injustice and oppression.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): My delegation
welcomes the opportunity to participate once again in
the Security Council debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. Allow
me to extend our congratulations to you, Mr. President,
for the able manner in which you have steered the
Council’s work during this month. We also wish to
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs for his briefing today.
At the outset my delegation aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the Permanent Representative
of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
For over 60 years the question of Palestine has
been on the agenda of the Security Council. During
that period a number of important resolutions have
been passed and many peace processes initiated.
However, as reported here today and as evidenced by
the recent Israeli air strikes in Gaza, peace still eludes
the Middle East. My Government has noted with
concern the latest round of Israeli air strikes in the
Gaza Strip and has registered its condemnation in the
strongest possible terms. Those obstructionist actions
on the part of Israel are hostile to the concerted efforts
to achieve a negotiated solution to the conflict in the
Middle East. We therefore maintain that there can be
no military solution to the conflict.
Those actions are yet again proof of Israel’s
disregard for international law, and they fuel the

10-22138

growing international frustration. They also come in
the wake of the report of the United Nations FactFinding Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48)
and the subsequent resolutions adopted by the Human
Rights Council and the General Assembly that indicate
that impunity for violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
cannot and will not be tolerated. We therefore reiterate
our call on all parties concerned to implement the
recommendations of the Fact-Finding Mission.
These hostile activities and disproportionate use
of force pose a serious obstacle to achieving a peaceful
and negotiated settlement of the Palestinian question.
South Africa maintains that the creation of a viable and
independent Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, existing alongside the State of Israel within
secure and internationally recognized borders, as well
as the complete withdrawal of Israel from all occupied
Arab territories, including the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, are the only means of finding a just, lasting
and comprehensive solution to the Middle East
conflict. This is in line with international agreements,
including a number of Security Council resolutions, the
terms of reference of the Madrid conference, the Road
Map and the Arab Peace Initiative.
To realize this objective, the Governments and
peoples of Israel and Palestine have to refrain from
activities that could jeopardize or derail the peace
process. We are concerned about the continuing
impasse in negotiations between the Palestinian and
Israeli leadership, and therefore call on the parties to
create conditions conducive to the resumption of
negotiations.
The ongoing military occupation of the
Palestinian territory and Arab territories and the denial
of self-determination to the Palestinian people are the
primary sources of insecurity and instability in the
Middle East. South Africa reaffirms its support for
Palestine’s right to self-determination and independence
and will continue to pledge our support for the
implementation of international initiatives, including
the Arab Peace Initiative, the relevant Security Council
resolutions and the principle of land for peace.
Is it not about time that this body, the Council, in
accordance with its mandate, consider concrete and
practical steps towards the resolution of the Middle
East situation, in particular the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict? Debates have been conducted, statements

21

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

made and resolutions adopted on the situation in the
Middle East, but no meaningful progress has been
made thus far.
South Africa condemns the continued illegal
Israeli settlement activities in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem and the facts being created on the ground,
which could prejudice the final status negotiations and
present an obstacle to the peace process. It is therefore
the view of South Africa that the continuing illegal
Israeli settlement activities in Gaza and East Jerusalem
do not help the situation insofar as the negotiations on
the final status are concerned.
To this end, the continued blockade imposed on
Gaza has dire humanitarian consequences for ordinary
Palestinians, their economic livelihood and the
reconstruction of Gaza. We call on Israel to
immediately lift this blockade and open the border
crossings to alleviate the humanitarian crisis.
With regard to the separation wall, we have
always been of the view that its existence does not
constitute a legitimate security measure, and we wish
to express our disappointment that the Government of
Israel has yet to comply with the findings of the
International Court of Justice on the legal consequences
of the construction of a wall in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Equally, the ongoing home
demolition programme constitutes a serious violation
of international law.
In conclusion, the international community, and
the Security Council in particular, have an obligation to
protect the weak, promote peace and seek a lasting
solution to this long-standing conflict. The absence of
long-lasting peace therefore demands that we redouble
our efforts to achieve this goal.
Likewise, the Palestinian and Israeli people and
Governments have the responsibility and duty to create
a climate conducive to resuming negotiations without
delay. It remains our view that the crisis in the Middle
East region cannot be resolved outside of the resolution
of the Palestinian question. Therefore, it is critical that
all efforts be geared towards a lasting solution to the
unwavering struggle of the Palestinian people for selfdetermination, peace, human rights and prosperity.
For its part, South Africa will continue to support
all efforts of the concerned parties and the international
community. South Africa can only hope that, as we
begin the second decade of the twenty-first century, the

22

international community, including the Security
Council, will do its best to assist the people of
Palestine to achieve their long-held aspiration to selfdetermination, independence and freedom.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Ali (Malaysia): Mr. President, let me, at the
outset, congratulate you on your leadership of this
Council and express how pleased we are to see you
presiding over this meeting today.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by the representatives of Egypt and Syria on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, respectively.
Since the most recent debate on this item, held in
October 2009 (see S/PV.6201), and despite the socalled 10-month moratorium, Israeli authorities continue
to announce plans to build hundreds upon hundreds of
settlement units in the West Bank, particularly in East
Jerusalem. The construction of the separation wall in
and around occupied East Jerusalem has continued
unabated despite the Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice of 9 July 2004.
Concomitantly, illegal land confiscations and countless
other unlawful measures continue, including home
demolitions and the eviction of Palestinian families.
Furthermore, the ongoing revocation of the
residency rights of Palestinian inhabitants of East
Jerusalem has further worsened the situation. In 2008
alone, Israel revoked the residency rights of nearly
5,000 Palestinians, forbidding them from living in the
very city of their birth. This figure represents the
highest number of residency revocations in a one-year
period since the occupation began in 1967. Tens of
thousands more Palestinian Jerusalemites are under the
threat of having their residency rights revoked.
All these illegal policies and the affirmation by
the Israeli Prime Minister that Israel will retain parts of
the occupied West Bank will definitely change the
demographic composition, character and status of the
occupied Palestinian territory and seriously undermine
the two-State solution. Such actions are in grave
violation of international law, the Fourth Geneva
Convention and relevant United Nations resolutions. In
this regard, Israel must be held accountable.
With regard to Gaza, the humanitarian situation
there remains dire. The blockade effectively imprisons

10-22138

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

the people of Gaza, deprives them of essential needs,
including the construction materials that are necessary
to rebuild their homes and other vital infrastructure
destroyed during the Israeli military aggression of
more than a year ago. This illegal blockade, which is a
form of collective punishment forbidden by international
law, must be brought to an end. In this regard, we again
urge the Security Council to take action to end the
siege, in accordance with resolution 1860 (2009).
Resolving these issues requires us to focus our
energies and efforts on restoring to the Palestinians
their inalienable rights, including their right to an
independent State of their very own. This in turn
requires all parties to act sincerely to achieve the
objective of a just and lasting solution and action to be
taken by the Security Council to restore peace and
stability in the Middle East. Needless to say, this
requires the political will of this Council to implement
its very own resolutions on this issue.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Algahrah (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, we would like to thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs for his
important briefing this morning and for the information
he provided. The briefing highlighted the gravity of the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories at all
levels and the suffering of the Palestinian people,
which has become clear to this Council and every
member of the international community.
We would also like to associate ourselves with
the statements made by the representatives of the
Sultanate of Oman on behalf of the League of Arab
States, of Syria on behalf of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, and of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
A full year has elapsed since the start of the war
launched by the Israeli occupation forces on Gaza and
the adoption of resolution 1860 (2009). Despite all the
assistance extended to reconstruct Gaza, which has
been blocked by the occupation forces, the widespread
and brutal destruction is still visible to all. Israel
continues its policy of collective punishment against
the population of the Gaza Strip. It continues to block
the reconstruction of Gaza in the wake of the
destruction caused by the war unleashed by Israel. It
continues to close crossing points, erect new
checkpoints and build the separation wall. All those

10-22138

practices by the Israeli occupiers clearly reflect
continued Israeli aggression against the Palestinian
people.
Decades of Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territory have created a tragic situation for the
Palestinian people, in which, for many, life and death
have amounted to the same thing and in which hope for
a better future has dissipated. Those decades of
occupation have engendered a climate of frustration
and injustice and an environment marked by the worst
human suffering imaginable and by a lack of dignity
and the rule of law. In that environment, killing,
depopulation and the plundering of wealth have
become the norm.
Ever since when Israel announced its annexation
of Jerusalem in 1967, a bitter sequence of events began
to change the demographics and the character of the
Holy City, with the Judaization of the city and its
depopulation of Arab residents. In 2008, Israel
confiscated the identity cards of 5,000 Palestinians, on
the pretext that they reside beyond the municipal limits
of Jerusalem. It intends to do the same to between
50,000 and 100,000 Palestinians in the near future.
This Judaization, depopulation and confiscation of
residency permits can only be described as ethnic
cleansing.
Israel has long operated beyond the framework of
international law, the principles of the United Nations
and international humanitarian law, including by
enshrining the concept of “natural growth” — which
amounts to natural extermination. The situation in East
Jerusalem is deteriorating day by day. The demolition
of houses, depopulation and the confiscation of identity
cards are intended to change the natural features,
demographic character and legal status of the city.
Whenever we consider the Palestinian question,
we condemn the continued settlement activities and
call for an immediate end to them, including so-called
natural growth, and for the removal of all settlement
outposts established since 2001. Today we reaffirm that
the establishment and construction of settlements is
illegal under international law. This represents an
obstacle to peace — indeed, to the first step towards
peace, which is negotiations. There can be no
negotiations while settlements are being built at a
feverish pace, thereby imposing a new reality that will
make any future resolution of the Palestinian question
impossible. If we understand the facts about the

23

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

settlements and why they are being built, and if we
understand the policy of Israel, then a condition for a
return to negotiations is a complete halt to settlement
activity, especially in East Jerusalem. If Israel
continues to claim that it wishes to resume negotiations
and that it is committed to peace, its first gesture
should be an immediate halt to all settlement activity in
the occupied Palestinian territories, along with the
dismantlement of existing settlements.
In an earlier statement, the Secretary-General
declared the settlements to be illegal and called upon
Israel to fulfil its Road Map obligation to freeze all
settlement activity, including so-called natural growth,
and to eliminate all outposts established since March
2001. The Quartet has called upon Israel to halt the
settlements and has requested the countries sponsoring
the peace process to work to put a stop to the
settlements. Also, we have called upon all countries of
the world to help put a stop to them.
Has the Security Council translated these appeals
into actions? Will the Council not heed the concerns
and positions stated by so many countries by
compelling Israel to stop settlement activity and
remove existing settlements? Saudi Arabia is
concerned by the complete inaction by the Security
Council in the face of Israel’s policy of State terrorism.
This reflects duplicity and double standards — at the
expense of the rule of law and respect for international
legality in relations among countries. The Security
Council faces a deadlock, as its resolutions cannot be
implemented. This is another outcome of double
standards in relations among countries and of the use
of the veto to paralyse the Council and render it unable
to serve the interests of those countries affected by this
situation.
If the Council breaks this deadlock, then all States
Members of the United Nations will respect its
resolutions. That would restore the Council’s credibility
and its role in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Ms. Medina-Carrasco (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We wish, Mr. President,
to express our satisfaction at the way in which you, the
representative of the People’s Republic of China, are
guiding the work of the Security Council during the

24

month of January. We thank you for having organized
this meeting to consider the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.
The Permanent Mission of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to the United Nations fully
supports the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We consider that the report by the Secretariat on
the critical situation in the Middle East, in particular in
Palestine, is most timely. This situation is a result of
the systematic refusal by the Israeli governing class to
respect international law or the Palestinian people’s
right to peace and territorial integrity, or to respect the
rights of Syria and Lebanon. The Government of Israel
does not seem to realize that by practicing its malicious
policies it is ignoring its own history and showing
disrespect for it.
We believe in peace built by peoples. Peace is not
imposed by force, by threats or by war. In our capital,
two major houses of worship are separated by a few
metres: a mosque and a synagogue. There, the faithful
gather to practice their religion. That scene is
duplicated in many countries around the world. But it
does not seem to be the case in the Middle East. We
have to ask ourselves why.
We wish to stress before the Security Council that
Governments of goodwill are demanding the
achievement of a lasting peace in the region. Within its
mandate under the Charter, the Security Council must
demand that Israel, the occupying Power, comply with
General Assembly resolutions on the Middle East and
withdraw from all the occupied territories. It is crucial
that Israel put a permanent end to the policy of
extermination against the Palestinian people that it has
been carrying out. It must also put an end once and for
all to settlements, blockades, the detention of
Palestinians, the demolition of homes and evictions.
This policy of genocide has been heightened in East
Jerusalem, including through the revocation of identity
cards for Palestinian residents, who have been forcibly
removed.
As the Council knows very well, it is a crime
under international law to force the relocation of
thousands of Palestinians from their own city. In that
context, it is scandalous, to say the least, that some are
trying to ignore the legitimate right of Palestinians to
defend themselves in the face of brutal aggression by

10-22138

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

Israel — a regime that even possesses weapons of mass
destruction.
It is important to reiterate that the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela does not recognize Israel’s
annexation of East Jerusalem or its effort to have
Jerusalem considered as a unified whole by declaring it
eternal and indivisible.
Also of great concern are the letters from the
Permanent Representatives of Lebanon and Syria to the
Secretary-General in December 2009 and January of
this year (S/2009/686 and S/2010/4 respectively)
informing him of the ongoing violations committed by
Israel on their respective territories. Syria has even
condemned an Israeli plan to occupy additional Syrian
territory in the Arab Golan and to Judaize its population.
It is right to ask why, in other conflict situations
and even in those outside its purview, this body acts
with such speed, and even disproportionately. Why is
there this complicit silence, this inaction when Israel’s
failure to observe all norms of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations is so obvious? We
should ask the Council what importance it attaches to
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on the wall, or to the conclusions and
recommendations of the Human Rights Council’s FactFinding Mission on Israel’s terrible and aggressive
policies of extermination against an innocent people, or
even to the Security Council’s own report on Israel’s
responsibility in that horrendous situation.
Some of the victors of the Second World War
sacrificed the Palestinian people without a second
thought. Without consulting them, they decided that the
Palestinians had to share their land with people of
various nationalities who had only their religion in
common. The United Nations owes an historic debt to
the Palestinian people. As a Member State of the
United Nations, we demand that the Security Council
consider the implementation of Chapter II of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Given the record — which has been thoroughly
considered over the decades in meetings of this
Council as well as of the General Assembly — of grave
violations of international law in general, to the
detriment of the Palestinian people and of the countries
of the region, like Syria and Lebanon, we should ask
whether, if the State of Israel is motu propio capable of
complying with the obligations of the Charter of the
United Nations, it is prepared to do so. We should also

10-22138

ask whether the Security Council has taken the
necessary preventive or coercive steps to limit the
privileges of the State of Israel as provided for under
Article 5.
We ask the Security Council to look into the
implementation of Chapter II of the Charter and to
recommend to the General Assembly some of the
actions provided for under it. This body’s silence in the
face of the Israeli Government’s daily massacre of
innocent Palestinians has cast doubt on its role as
guarantor of international peace and security. We urge
the Security Council to regain its legitimacy in dealing
with the issue before us today, to carry out its functions
and to adopt the decisions that, under the Charter of the
United Nations, are necessary to definitively restore
peace to the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Al-Barout (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): On behalf of the United Arab Emirates, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on the outstanding
manner in which you have presided over the Security
Council this month. I would also like to congratulate
the five new non-permanent members of the Council. I
wish them every success in their term of office.
The Secretariat’s regular monthly briefings of the
Council on developments in Palestinian and Arab
territories occupied since 1967, including East
Jerusalem, have given us a full picture of the serious
humanitarian and other violations of the rights of the
Palestinian and other Arab populations of those
territories by Israel, the occupying Power.
The Israeli Government has continued its policy
of aggression and its blockade of the Gaza Strip,
depriving Palestinians of their basic rights and of food,
fuel, medicine and construction materials to rebuild
after the destruction caused by the Israeli military
machine in Gaza last year.
Israel has also continued to take a number of
unilateral and illegal steps, including expanding the
already illegal settlements in the West Bank and, in
particular, East Jerusalem and its environs. The
systematic policy of confiscating Palestinian territory
and wealth, depopulating that land and replacing its
inhabitants with Israeli settlers, along with the closure
of Palestinian institutions and the provocative acts
against Muslim and Christian Holy Sites in the Old

25

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

City, including attacks on Al-Aqsa Mosque, have
produced bitterness and great rancour in the Arab and
Islamic worlds.

starving the Palestinians, and allow international
assistance to reach the affected Palestinian areas,
especially the Gaza Strip.

The United Arab Emirates would like to warn that
all those Israeli policies in East Jerusalem are very
dangerous. They are intended to compel as many
Palestinians as possible to leave the Holy City in order
to make it easier for Israel to illegally Judaize it,
change its political and demographic character and
impose a de facto order that rides roughshod over
international resolutions and over commitments made
by Israel in peace agreements with the Palestinians.

In this context, while we note the compensation
paid by Israel for deliberately destroying United Nations
installations in the Strip, our delegation calls on Israel
to provide the necessary financial compensation to the
Palestinians in the Strip for its crimes and aggression
against them, in accordance with the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/12/48).

How else can we interpret the stepped-up efforts
to confiscate thousands of Palestinian identity cards in
order to prevent Palestinians from living in the Holy
City? Reports indicate that last year alone, Israel
revoked the residency rights of about 14,000
Palestinians in the Holy City and confiscated the
identity cards of 5,000 of them. That is the largest
number of permit cancellations in East Jerusalem in a
single year since the city was occupied in 1967.
As has recently been reported, Israel has used
various pretexts for doing that. Tens of thousands of
Palestinians face the same fate of losing their property
and the right to reside in the city. That illustrates
Israel’s ongoing efforts to ethnically cleanse East
Jerusalem of Palestinians and to illegally impose a de
facto situation on the city.
The United Arab Emirates strongly deplores all
unilateral illegal measures by Israel intended to
prejudice final status negotiations. They do not serve
the cause of peace and peaceful coexistence. We call
on the Security Council and the Quartet to assume their
responsibilities and take every necessary step to put an
immediate end to those Israeli acts.
We call upon the international community to
condemn Israel’s unilateral measures in Palestinian
territory and to require it to dismantle its separation
wall and settlements.
We also call on the international community to
force Israel to stop confiscating land and violating the
Road Map, the provisions of international law, the
Fourth Geneva Convention, all relevant resolutions of
international legitimacy — including those of the tenth
special session of the General Assembly — and the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.
We demand that Israel end its siege and its policy of

26

We have to provide international protection for
the Palestinians against repeated Israeli aggressions.
We call on Israel, the occupying Power, not to commit
aggression against defenceless Palestinians, in
accordance with its commitments and responsibilities
under the Geneva Conventions of 1949, which apply to
all occupied territories under Israel’s authority. We call
on the international community to double its financial
and economic assistance to Palestinians in order to help
them deal with this extremely serious humanitarian
crisis.
As for sisterly Lebanon, the United Arab Emirates
deplores the daily Israeli violations of Lebanese air
space. We reaffirm our position that the occupying
Power must withdraw from all Lebanese territory,
including the Shab’a farms, Al-Ghajar village and the
Kfar Shuba hills. The United Arab Emirates stands
with our brothers in Syria, and we deem all measures
taken by Israel, the occupying Power, in the occupied
Syrian Golan null and void and illegal. In this context,
we call for the full withdrawal by Israel from the
occupied Golan to the lines of 4 June 1967, in
accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
In conclusion, we reaffirm that any delay by the
international community in compelling Israel to end its
illegal measures would send the wrong message to
Israel and only encourage it to pursue them. That
would push the area towards more conflict and
violence, and obstruct regional and international efforts
to establish a political climate conducive to peace
negotiations and a comprehensive and just resolution to
the Palestinian question through the two-State solution,
which would allow the States to live in mutual respect,
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nicaragua.

10-22138

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): Mr. President, allow me to begin by
congratulating you on having assumed the presidency
of the Council and to thank you for having convened
this debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. We are called once
again to discuss the need for a peace process that
would lead us to the realization of a Palestinian State
living side by side with the State of Israel, and to bring
an end to Israel’s illegal military occupation of
Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese territories.
I welcome the new members of the Council:
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon, Lebanon and
Nigeria. We know that they will always act in defence
of the principles of the Charter of our Organization. I
would also like to thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing.
This year marks the sixty-second year of the
looting of the Palestinian people of their homes, their
ancestral lands and of their most fundamental and
inalienable human rights. It is also the forty-third year
of brutal military occupation by Israel, marked by
death, physical and psychological aggression, blockades,
ethnic cleansing, imprisonment and humiliation. It has
also been a year since the brutal Israeli invasion and
occupation of Gaza, the damage to which, exacerbated
by the continued blockade, has been amply
documented and will have harmful effects on the
Palestinian population for decades. The international
community demands that those responsible for this
massacre be tried before impartial tribunals.
We cannot allow Israel to continue to play with
human lives and with the rights of Palestinians,
Syrians, Lebanese and those in neighbouring countries.
How long are we going to meet in the Security
Council, calling for open debates and consultations,
adopting resolutions, and discussing an issue
concerning which our Organization has already decided
what must be done? The United Nations must meet its
historic responsibility.
Or is it perhaps possible that some Member State
still has doubts about the content of General Assembly
resolution 181 (II), which called for the creation of two
States in Palestine, one Arab and one Jewish. Also
clear and transparent are Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1701 (2006) on Lebanon and
497 (1981) on the Syrian Golan Heights. The
fundamental problem does not lie in the content of

10-22138

these resolutions, but rather in the fact that Israel, the
occupying Power, has not been required to comply
with them. Those who are responsible for enforcing
compliance are the permanent members of this
Council, in particular one of them, the primary
accomplice and ally of Israel.
The reality is that the issue of the Israeli
occupation of Arab and Palestinian territories has not
been resolved because Israel and its primary ally do not
want to resolve it. From its beginnings, Israel has had
its own clearly defined road map: the absorption of the
entire Palestinian territory, the exile of that people
along with the corresponding Judaization of the
territory, and the expansion of its own State — all in
full sight and with the consent of the members of this
Council.
Illegal settlements throughout the Palestinian
territory, walls that divide houses and neighbourhoods,
ethnic cleansing that is being carried out, and the
usurpation of East Jerusalem all point to a policy of
absorption. The solution based on two States living
together side by side is something that Israel has never
contemplated.
As a member of the Non-Aligned Movement,
Nicaragua fully associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Egypt as
Chairman of our Movement. We condemn Israel’s
illegal occupation of all of the Palestinian, Syrian and
Lebanese territories, and we demand its immediate
withdrawal. We condemn the Israeli policy and practice
of building and/or not dismantling settlements, the
inhuman blockade of Gaza and the bantustanization of
the West Bank and other Palestinian territories.
It is high time for the international community to
move from declarations and resolutions to action.
Recognition by the entire international community of
the Palestinian State would send a clear message that
all the resolutions we have adopted must begin to be
implemented. We do not understand why there some
still who refuse to acknowledge that at this point. Thus
far, only the Palestinian side has made commitments,
whereby it has demonstrated its desire for peace. It is
time now for the permanent members of the Council to
demand that Israel make a commitment to peace and to
a solution to this question in conformity with United
Nations resolutions.
There is a manifest universal consensus in favour
of speeding up the peace process; only Israel opposes

27

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

it. Thus, in order to get the job done, it is crucial that
those who support Israel take appropriate action to
ensure that Israel commits to the peace process. If
Israel will not commit to an acceptable timetable, the
Security Council must take appropriate measures as
outlined in the Charter of the United Nations. The
Palestinians, strengthening their unity with the support
of the Arab nation, the Non-Aligned Movement and the
rest of the international community, must prepare for
their own declaration of independence, for their free
and sovereign State, and for their admission as a full
Member of this Organization.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset, Sir, to express to you and the entire
Chinese delegation our sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We have noted the excellent manner in
which you have conducted the work of the Council,
ensuring the success of its deliberations on a broad
range of problems, notably the tragic impact of the
earthquake in Haiti and the resulting enormous
destruction and loss of life. Among the dead or injured
were members of the staff of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, who were carrying out
their duties in defence of the principles and ideals of the
Organization, and including the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and head of mission, the late
Hédi Annabi of Tunisia. May God have mercy on their
souls.
I also wish to congratulate the five new
non-permanent members of the Security Council. We
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for his excellent
briefing this morning.
Today we are discussing once more the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
in the context of the deadlock to which the peace
process has regressed since the negotiations stopped,
and amid all the events that have increased tensions
and escalated the situation in the region, despite the
efforts of many international parties to reconvene the
peace negotiations.
The excesses of Israel and its practices in the
occupied Palestinian territory have further complicated
the situation and placed obstacles in the way of the
revival of the peace process. The continued settlement
activity; the demolition of houses; the evictions of

28

Palestinians in East Jerusalem; the excavations around
the Al-Aqsa mosque and other holy places in the city;
and the plans to change its geographic and demographic
character: all of these constitute grave violations of
international instruments and resolutions of international
legitimacy, in particular General Assembly resolutions
on Jerusalem, as well as exacerbating tension
throughout the region.
The continued blockade unjustly imposed on the
Gaza Strip and the policies of closures in Palestinian
areas and of restricting Palestinians’ movements have
contributed greatly to increased tensions in the region.
This is despite repeated calls from the international
community, notably from the Secretary-General in
numerous reports and through his efforts to urge the
Israeli authorities to lift the blockade and enable the
international bodies and organizations working in this
area to make progress in their reconstruction efforts
and in providing for the basic needs of the civilian
population in Gaza.
Tunisia has been consistently committed to the
principles of justice and peace; it is eager to achieve a
solution to the problem and alleviate the suffering of
the brotherly people of Palestine and favours the path
of peace. It therefore calls on international actors,
especially the Quartet, to step up their efforts to
pressure Israel to put an end to its provocative actions
and seriously engage in the peace process. This means,
essentially, halting settlement activities, lifting the
blockade on Gaza and all the restrictions on other
Palestinian territories and immediately ending all
activities that can alter Jerusalem’s character or deprive
the Palestinian people of their rights.
In that context, Tunisia believes that the current
deadlock and the return of tensions to the region, as a
result of the total lack of progress in reconvening
negotiations, pose a grave threat to the situation in a
region that simply cannot take any more tension or
escalation. We therefore call on the international
community to redouble its efforts to surmount the
obstacles blocking the way to a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace. Such a peace can be achieved
only through negotiations, and that requires trust and a
commitment by all parties concerned to existing
agreements and to the terms of reference of the peace
process.
In regard to the sister republics of Lebanon and
Syria, I reiterate our call for Israel’s withdrawal from

10-22138

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

Syrian and Lebanese occupied territories, based on the
option of a comprehensive settlement of all aspects of
the Middle East crisis, in a way that will strengthen
peace and stability for all the peoples of the region.
Tunisia, under the leadership of President Zine
El Abidine Ben Ali, puts the Palestinian question at the
top of its priorities and concerns. This steadfast,
principled attitude affirms my country’s position vis-àvis the Palestinian people in their just struggle to
regain their national rights and establish an independent
State on their own land. We reiterate our support for all
efforts that seek a just and lasting settlement of the
Arab-Israeli conflict in a manner that can guarantee the
return of the occupied Arab territories, in accordance
with the resolutions of international legitimacy and the
terms of reference of the peace process, including the
Arab Peace Initiative.
Tunisia therefore reiterates its commitment, as a
peace-loving country that respects international law
and believes in humanity’s values and ideals, to
pursuing all efforts to put an end to this long-standing
crisis and to the suffering of a people deprived for
decades of the exercise of their basic rights. We hope
to achieve concrete measures that can realize the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people to attain
freedom and sovereignty on their national soil, to
regain all occupied Arab territories and to achieve
peace for all peoples of the region. That alone will
eliminate all tensions and initiate a new era of stability
and peace.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
congratulate you warmly, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council this month. I
also take this opportunity to extend my delegation’s
sincere congratulations to the new members of the
Council — Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon,
Lebanon and Nigeria — and to wish them every
success in upholding their responsibility to fulfil their
duties over the next two years. Likewise, my warm
appreciation goes to the outgoing members of the
Council: Burkina Faso, Costa Rica, Croatia, Libya and
Viet Nam.
One year ago, Gaza faced an all-out attack, the
so-called Operation Cast Lead. During that barbaric
operation, the Israeli regime killed or maimed thousands

10-22138

of besieged innocent Palestinians, including women
and children, and wilfully and systematically targeted
civilian infrastructure and facilities. Even the United
Nations was not spared the Israeli atrocities, as the
compound of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East was
deliberately shelled by the Israeli army. There is no
doubt that the Israeli acts in Gaza amounted to war
crimes and crimes against humanity.
Almost one year has passed since then but,
despite all efforts on the part of the United Nations,
there is still no prospect of justice for the victims. The
Israeli regime continues to defy the will of the
international community and persists in the Palestinian
blockade, causing an unprecedented humanitarian crisis
in Gaza.
These violations of international norms and
principles are not limited only to Gaza. The persistent
assault against the Islamic and Christian holy places in
Jerusalem, the continued construction of the separation
wall, the excavation work in and around the holy
mosque, the revocation of Palestinian residency rights
in the city, the forced eviction of Palestinian families
from the city and the imposition of severe restrictions
on movement are but some of the illegal acts carried
out by the Israeli regime in the West Bank. Despite
strong international condemnation, illegal settlements
are being expanded much faster than in the past, and
more and more Palestinian houses are being
demolished. The illegal decision to build new housing
units is a move undoubtedly geared at altering the
demographic composition and architectural, cultural
and religious character of the Palestinian territories,
particularly in Jerusalem and its surrounding areas.
On 5 November 2009, the General Assembly
adopted its resolution 64/10 on the follow-up to the
report of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on
the Gaza Conflict. That resolution constitutes an
important step forward in remedying the violations of
the Israeli regime in Gaza, so vividly authenticated in
the Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48). We expect the
necessary action to be taken by the relevant bodies of
the United Nations, including the Security Council, in
order to put an end to the culture of impunity for Israeli
war crimes and crimes against humanity. If criminals
were brought to justice, room for criminal acts by those
who possess the motives and the madness to commit
them would be restricted. Impunity for perpetrators of

29

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

crimes of a grave nature is, in itself, a cause of and an
incentive for further atrocities.
Unfortunately, it seems that, for certain members
of this Council, the lives of the Palestinians and their
long suffering under the occupation and suppression do
not count, as the massacre of hundreds of Palestinians,
including dozens of women and children, is not worthy
of the least consideration, let alone meaningful firm
action. That is true with regard to the illegal detention
of more than 11,000 Palestinians, including hundreds
of women and children. Certain members of the
Council are used to giving long speeches on human
rights, and yet their true stance was revealed by the
result of the voting in the General Assembly on
resolution 64/10 on the war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed by Israel in Gaza. That is a clear
example of double standards, which is detrimental to
the cause of justice and human rights.
We hope that in the next few months, when
United Nations bodies endeavour to follow up on the
Goldstone report on the atrocities committed by the
Israeli regime in Gaza, we will see them revisit their
unwavering and unconditional support for the Israeli
regime.
The Israeli regime has persisted in its aggressive
and expansionist policies towards Lebanon by
constantly violating its land, sea and airspace and by
refusing to withdraw from Lebanese occupied land in
Shab’a, the Kafr Shuba hills and the northern part of
Ghajar village. It also continues its occupation of the
occupied Syrian Golan. That regime should
immediately and fully withdraw from those occupied
territories, in compliance with the most basic principles
of international law and the United Nations Charter.
The question of Palestine is the most urgent issue
that the international community continues to face, and
it needs swift and comprehensive attention.
Undoubtedly, attaining a peaceful and just settlement
of the question of Palestine is imperative for the
realization of comprehensive and lasting peace and
stability in the Middle East and beyond. Occupation,
aggression, State terrorism, expulsion, intimidation, the
setting up of new settlements, the construction of the
separation wall and attempts to change the
demographic and cultural identity of the occupied land
will not bring peace in the Middle East. Those are
undoubtedly most serious and gross violations of
United Nations resolutions, especially Security Council

30

resolutions, and must therefore be dealt with urgently
and appropriately by the Council and other United
Nations bodies in a resolute and decisive manner.
In conclusion, in our view, a lasting peace in
Palestine and the region will be possible through
justice and by ending discrimination and the occupation
of Palestine and other occupied territories. Today,
which coincides with the first anniversary of the tragic
events in Gaza, we need to act collectively to
demonstrate our unqualified support for the cause of
Palestine and to rally to the assistance of those who
have been deprived of their rights. Lifting the blockade,
starting the reconstruction of Gaza and putting an end
to the illegal acts in the West Bank are among the most
urgent Palestinian issues. We have a common duty and
responsibility to offer multifaceted support to the
Palestinians, whether in Gaza or in the West Bank. Let
us hope that oppression and occupation will end and
that justice and freedom will prevail in the Palestinian
occupied territories.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer for the League of Arab
States to the United Nations.
Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): First of all, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
allowed us to participate in today’s Security Council
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, given the serious deterioration
of the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories. I
also thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
invaluable briefing.
There has been dangerous and unprecedented
settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territories. At the end of 2009, there were more than
500,000 settlers, and that number is increasing. The
Israeli occupation of the occupied Palestinian territories,
the invasion of Palestinian territory by Jewish settlers
and their entrenchment within that territory run counter
to putting an end to the Israeli occupation and to the
establishment of an independent, viable and contiguous
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Israeli policies and practices seek to alter the physical
nature and demographic composition of the Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. This represents a
flagrant violation of international law and endangers
the situation in the region.

10-22138

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

We are deeply concerned about Israeli policies
and actions in East Jerusalem. There were no Jews
there in 1967, when Israel occupied the area, but as of
the end of 2009 there were 190,000 Israeli settlers in
12 settlements, and Israel had confiscated 30 per cent
of the land in East Jerusalem for building settlements.
As stated by Israel, 250,000 Palestinians make up
only 35 per cent of Jerusalem’s population while
650,000 Israelis make up 65 per cent. Despite this,
documents of the Jerusalem municipal authorities
indicate that plans to double the number of Jewish
inhabitants continue. In this demographic attack Israel
is using population policy to ensure its control over
East Jerusalem.
East Jerusalem is an integral part of the occupied
Palestinian territories. Since the beginning of the
occupation, in 1967, dozens of resolutions have been
adopted by the Security Council and the General
Assembly, all of which refer to the illegality of the
annexation of East Jerusalem. Israel continues with
impunity to destroy the houses of Arab inhabitants,
revoke their residence permits and expropriate their
property in order to Judaize the city and expel its Arab
inhabitants and establish more Jewish settlements in
and around East Jerusalem, in flagrant violation of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, international humanitarian
law and Security Council resolutions.
Jerusalem and the Al-Aqsa mosque are in grave
danger. The international community must not remain
silent in the face of Israel’s practices which violate the
city’s heritage, its attempts at manipulation and
Judaization, and its violation of Christian and Muslim
holy places. The excavations and archaeological work
under and around the Al-Aqsa mosque and in the
Silwan area could damage invaluable cultural and
religious heritage and the Al-Aqsa mosque itself, as
well as other sites. This could have very serious
repercussions in the Arab and Muslim world and could
result in endless conflict.

result of Israel’s aggression and siege against the Gaza
Strip. Israel is preventing the flow of humanitarian
assistance to the inhabitants and hindering the delivery
of fuel and building materials for Gaza’s reconstruction.
Ensuring stability and a return to normalcy requires the
international community to make Israel open the
border crossings immediately and permanently and
permit access for all essential goods, including
medicines, food, fuel and commercial goods, in order
to prevent an increase in poverty in the Gaza Strip.
Israel’s occupation of the Arab territories is at the
core of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. For the sake of
establishing peace and security, the countries of the
region call for an end to Israel’s culture of occupation
in the Arab territories and the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State within the pre-1967
borders with East Jerusalem as its capital, in
conformity with international resolutions, international
law, the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Road Map. This must be achieved
through negotiations with a clear mandate that would
begin with an immediate halt to settlement activity,
including natural growth, in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, and fruitful
negotiations leading to a just and lasting solution to the
Palestinian question and the Israeli-Arab conflict.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Keegel (Sri Lanka): Permit me at the outset
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. We also extend our
felicitations to Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon,
Lebanon and Nigeria on their election to the Council.
We thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs for his briefing. My delegation appreciates the
opportunity given to us to once again to focus on the
situation in the Middle East, particularly the Palestinian
question.

We call on the Council to shoulder its
responsibility and use means at its disposal to compel
Israel to respect international law and United Nations
resolutions, end its illegal plans to Judaize Jerusalem
and abide by the Fourth Geneva Convention in
Jerusalem and throughout the occupied Palestinian
territories.

Sri Lanka has consistently supported a peaceful
settlement to the Palestinian issue and has called on all
sides to fully implement the resolutions adopted by the
Security Council and the General Assembly on the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and on the
realization of the two-State solution. Our hope is that
the day will soon come when Israel, Palestine and their
neighbours can coexist in peace and harmony.

We are concerned by the serious humanitarian
crisis affecting the Palestinian people in Gaza as a

We remain deeply concerned about the daily
widespread suffering and hardships the Palestinian

10-22138

31

S/PV.6265 (Resumption 1)

people continue to endure due to the economic blockade
and the ensuing grave situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory. While we note the relaxation of
some restrictions by the Israeli Government and the
intention to suspend new settlement construction, we
call for the removal of all restrictions. The Palestinian
people have suffered for too long and continue to live
under occupation.
The denial of their fundamental right to statehood
due to continued Israeli occupation has seriously
affected the socio-economic well-being of the
population in Gaza and the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. In this context, my delegation believes that
for peace to be viable and sustainable in the Palestinian
territory, Israel must withdraw from all of the
Palestinian territories back to the 1967 borders. It must
end the economic blockade. The illegal expansion of
settlements, construction of the separation wall and
changes to the demographic character of the Palestinian
territory will only increase tension and animosity
throughout the Middle East region.
The Palestinian Authority needs to continue the
implementation of its security plan and make every
effort at its disposal to improve law and order and to
ensure that its territory is not used for illegal attacks on
Israeli civilians. Both sides must do everything
possible to ensure the safety and security of civilians.

32

Sri Lanka reiterates its support for the Palestinian
National Authority under the leadership of President
Mahmoud Abbas. We stress the need to preserve and
protect the national and democratic institutions which
are vital for a future independent Palestinian State. We
therefore urge the Palestinian groups to act speedily to
reconcile and reunite within the framework of the
legitimate Palestinian National Authority. Unity among
the Palestinian people is their strength.
My delegation supports international efforts for
the early resumption of negotiations and believes that
unity of the Palestinian people is essential to ensure
proper conditions for the resumption of dialogue by
Israel and Palestine at an early stage. We also urge both
sides to ensure a climate conducive to the resumption
of negotiations. We also hope that the Egyptian and
regional initiatives will be supported by all groups in
Palestine to enable elections to be held early.
In conclusion, Sri Lanka reiterates its support for
a lasting peace in the Middle East, including the
peaceful settlement of the Palestinian issue.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

10-22138
