A /71/PV.58

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

58th plenary meeting

Friday, 9 December 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 31
Prevention of armed conflict
Draft resolution (A/71/L.39)
The President: Members will recall that I convened
an informal meeting of the plenary on 20 October
to hear a briefing by the Secretary-General and his
Special Envoy for Syria on the humanitarian situation
in the Syrian Arab Republic. I should also like to recall
my letter dated 8 December, which was circulated to all
Permanent Representatives and Permanent Observers,
in which I forwarded a request addressed to me by a
group of Member States to convene a formal plenary
meeting under agenda item 31 with reference to the
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic. I would like to
further acknowledge a letter that was conveyed to me
by the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic dated 22 November, which I understand has
been sent to a wide group of Member States.
I now give the floor to the representative of Canada
to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.39.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): Before I begin my
introduction of draft resolution A/71/L.39, I would like to
make three technical revisions to the text. The revisions
are to the fifth and fifteenth preambular paragraphs.
There is one revision in the fifth preambular paragraph
and two in the fifteenth preambular paragraph. In the
fifth preambular paragraph, the words “Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant” should be replaced with the

word “ISIL”. In the fifteenth preambular paragraph, the
words “Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh)”
should be replaced with “ISIL (also known as Da’esh)”.
Those changes correct a technical error that occurred
during the editing process. They bring the text back
into line with what was agreed to by Member States.
Let me turn now to my introduction.
The situation in besieged parts of Syria, as we
all know, is horrific. With regard to Aleppo, United
Nations officials have reported that, if nothing is done,
it may soon become one giant graveyard. Food supplies
have been exhausted. Families are eating grass and
the little garbage left to survive. The sick and injured
have no hospital to go to and cannot get basic medical
treatment. As we prepare to vote today, regardless of
our political views on the conflict, I invite those present
to put themselves in the shoes of the people of Syria.
What are the remaining 250,000 people in eastern
Aleppo expecting from the world? What is the world
expecting today from the United Nations? Indifference,
cynicism, silence, politicization, deadlock and inaction
are not part of the expectations.
This is a crisis that has become the shame of our
time; yet it is one that is entirely in our hands to stop. To
do that, we must show a genuine concern for people’s
lives. We must respect not just rights, but basic human
dignity. We must, at a bare minimum, provide basic
humanitarian and medical relief so that people can
simply stay alive. We must stand up together with one
powerful voice and say “Enough. Enough”. Civilians
are not targets. Hospitals are not military objectives.
The people of Aleppo have the right to life, and

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-42614 (E)

*1642614*

A/71/PV.58

humanitarian relief delivered now is what will keep
them alive.
As Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura has said,
military logic has taken over humanitarian concerns.
He is right and that must stop. The draft resolution, and
members’ collective support for it, is not a solution to
the conflict. But it is a step, an important statement. It
is a reminder that, above all else, the lives of the Syrian
people should be our priority. They are our priority. And
the world will not stay silent while they suffer without
assistance. And it is a reminder that for us, the States
Members of the United Nations, we must be prepared to
stand up collectively to call for an end to the violence,
the human tragedy, that has become Syria. The draft
resolution that is before the Assembly today is one way
for us together to do just that.
(spoke in French)
Canada and the sponsors of the draft resolution
invite all of the Member States to express loud and
clear the following appeal: “The people of Aleppo, and
of other besieged cities of Syria, have the right to life.
They have a right to humanitarian aid.”
We have had enough excuses and we must take
action. The draft resolution is not about individual
words on a page. It is about the world coming together
to speak clearly and with a common voice to say that
human life matters. The lives of Syrians matter.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of the Arab Republic of
Syria on a point of order.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Before we proceed any further, I wish it
to be known that, despite my delegation’s rejection
of draft resolution A/71/L.39 on a procedural and
substantive basis, the Canadian delegation went ahead
and introduced it. I request you, Mr. President, to seek
the opinion of the Legal Counsel regarding the content
of the seventeenth preambular paragraph, where my
country, the Syrian Arab Republic, is referred to as “the
Syrian regime”. That, as everyone knows, is a blatant
legal violation of Article 2 of the Charter of the United
Nations that constitutes a serious violation threatening
the credibility and impartiality of this international
Organization. I trust that the Legal Counsel’s opinion
will be included verbatim in the record of the meeting.
Despite all their experience, the sponsors of the
draft resolution have committed a blunder that reveals
2/23

09/12/2016

how ill-intentioned they are towards my country. While
the draft resolution is entitled “The situation in the
Syrian Arab Republic”, they then insert, as stealthily
as thieves at night, the words “the Syrian regime” in
the seventeenth preambular paragraph. They should at
least have respected the intelligence of the members of
the Assembly and decided which of those two terms to
use. Such mixing is inappropriate in the context of the
deliberations of the General Assembly.
The President: In the light of the statement we
have just heard, I understand that the Permanent
Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic has
requested a legal opinion from the Legal Counsel on
the use of the term “Syrian regime” in draft resolution
A/71/L.39.
I have consulted with the Office of Legal Affairs,
which points out that questions arising in the General
Assembly concerning the terminology to be used in
General Assembly resolutions are not questions that
formally fall within the competence of the Office of
Legal Affairs unless there is a formal request for a legal
opinion on the matter from the Assembly.
May I remind delegations that the legal opinion
of the Legal Counsel may be requested only by the
Assembly itself. The Legal Counsel will not provide
an opinion at the request of a delegation or a group
of delegations. A request for a legal opinion may be
proposed by a delegation, in accordance with rule 78 of
the rules of procedure, in the form of a draft resolution
or resolution that contains a clearly formulated question
addressed to the Legal Counsel.
I should like to remind delegations that, pursuant
to rule 78 of the rules of procedure, proposals shall
normally be submitted in writing and shall not be
discussed or acted upon unless circulated to all
delegations on the day preceding the meeting. I would
therefore request that the delegation requesting the
legal opinion put the request in writing so that it can be
circulated to delegations for their review.
That is the opinion I have received from the Office
of Legal Affairs.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Out of respect for status of the presidency, I
will not challenge the opinion that the President has
just read out. However, Member States are well aware
that Syria is a founding Member of this international
Organization. Attempts to tamper with its name will
16-42614

09/12/2016

not be successful. Those sorts of legal errors, which
appear time and time again, go against the credibility
of those who promote them.
At the outset, my attention was drawn to the fact
that draft resolution A/71/L.39 states, in its second
preambular paragraph, that it reaffirms its “strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic”.
That is a sentence that appears in all resolutions on
what is transpiring in Syria. However, the practices of
the Canadian delegation and those that have acceded
to its initiative have proved the wide gap between
theory and practice when it comes to the application of
that paragraph.
Those delegations violated the sovereignty of the
Syrian Arab Republic when they called for this meeting
and presented this draft resolution without consulting
with the Syrian Arab Republic delegation, which is the
delegation that is first and foremost concerned, within
this international Organization, with efforts to deal
with all aspects and consequences of the terrorist war
imposed on my country.
In that connection, I would like to refer to the
colossal breach perpetrated by the delegation of Canada
and its partners, particularly when it comes to Article
12 of the Charter of the United Nations, which states:
“While the Security Council is exercising in
respect of any dispute or situation the functions
assigned to it in the present Charter, the General
Assembly shall not make any recommendation
with regard to that dispute or situation unless the
Security Council so requests”.
It is well known that the Security Council is still
exercising its responsibilities in respect of the Syrian
situation. That makes the Canadian move contrary to
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
I am now forced to remind Member States that, a
few days ago, the Canadian delegation, which claims
to be interested in the welfare of the Syrian people,
voted as usual against the resolution entitled “The
Syrian Golan” (resolution 71/24), which considers
Israel’s occupation of the Golan null and void. The
Canadian delegation also voted against the resolution
entitled “Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and the occupied
Syrian Golan” (resolution 71/97), which considers
Israeli settlements in the occupied Syrian Golan to

A/71/PV.58

be illegal and as constituting an obstacle to economic
growth and peace.
How does one reconcile caring for the interests
of the Syrian people with voting against resolutions
that defend the right of the Syrian people to recover
their occupied territory in the Syrian Golan and the
interests of the Syrian people living under occupation
in the occupied Syrian Golan? Is that not a sufficiently
flagrant demonstration of the ill intentions of the
sponsors, the Canadian delegation in particular?
In my statement I did not use the expression
“Canadian regime”, because I respect the Charter
and the rules of procedure that govern our work
in this Organization, and therefore I have not used
the expression “Canadian regime”, but rather the
“Government of the Canadian delegation”.
I am also compelled here to remind Member States
that the Government of the Canadian delegation,
which claims to be interested in the welfare of the
Syrian people, has participated from the beginning in
the so-called global coalition against Da’esh in Syria.
That coalition is inimical to international legitimacy
and violates Syrian sovereignty on a daily basis. It
systematically destroys Syrian infrastructure such as
bridges, electric plants and croplands that were built
over long decades with the time, energy and money of
the Syrian people. Canadian, American, French, British
and Danish jets razed them to the ground, instead of
targeting the bases, supply lines and leadership of
Da’esh in Syria and Iraq.
That was still not enough for them: they deliberately
targeted safe hospitals and schools and killed thousands
of civilians. The United States of America in particular
bombarded Syrian army sites that were standing in
the way of Da’esh spreading into Deir ez-Zor. The aim
of that bombing was to prevent the Iraqi and Syrian
armies from tightening their grip on the terrorists and
the border area between Syria and Iraq.
Those are the same people who are presenting
a draft resolution on humanitarian assistance to
the Syrian people in Aleppo. The practices of the
coalition I mentioned prove that its real name should
not be the global coalition against Da’esh but rather
the global coalition against the Syrian people. From
experience — and there are many examples — any
international coalition established by the United States
will most definitely lead to destruction and sabotage,
creating terrorist entities such as Da’esh. That was

16-426143/23

A/71/PV.58

recently acknowledged by President Obama. It seems
that the American Administration has not learned
from its mistakes and insists on supplying armed
terrorist groups with weapons of all kinds, including
anti-aircraft missiles. Yet it talks about the safety of
civilian flights while itself providing terrorists with
missiles of all kinds. We do not yet know the identity of
the new terrorist entity for whose creation the incoming
American Administration will ascribe responsibility to
its predecessor.
I am also forced to remind Member States that the
Government of the Canadian delegation, which claims
to be interested in the welfare of the Syrian people,
along with many of the draft resolution’s sponsors,
has imposed unilateral coercive economic measures
that primarily affect Syrians and impede the ability
of the Syrian Government to respond to the daily
needs of its citizens, particularly those who have been
disadvantaged as a result of the terrorist war imposed
on my country, Syria.
The statement that I have just made highlights
a few examples that refute the allegations made by
the Canadian delegation and call into question the
sponsors’ interest in the welfare of the Syrian people.
Our people did not appoint them as spokespersons with
the authority to talk about our humanitarian suffering.
They have in fact contributed to aggravating such
tragedies day in and day out.
It would have been better, before the meeting,
for the Canadian delegation and its partners to listen
to the tragic stories told by tens of thousands of our
people who have been saved by the Syrian army. Those
stories, and the practices of Jabhat Al-Nusra and other
terrorist groups over the past four years, are proof of
what we have been saying for the past five years — that
armed terrorist groups kill, detain and torture civilians
and subject them to horrifying living conditions that
are a throwback to Wahhabi dark ages. They plunder
humanitarian assistance and sell it to the needy for skyhigh prices; they force children and young people to
carry arms and join their ranks. They kidnap women
and force them to marry foreign terrorist mercenaries
brought into Syria by regional, Arab and international
intelligence services from more than 100 countries,
including Canada itself. The Canadian delegation
would do better to recognize the achievements of the
Syrian army, which saved 100,000 Syrians in Aleppo
from the merciless treatment of Jabhat Al-Nusra and
other terrorist groups and provided them with shelter,
4/23

09/12/2016

food and medicine, giving them a feeling of security
and stability after more than four years of suffering.
The Canadian delegation would do better to look at
the corpses of the innocent civilians who attempted to
enter areas under our army’s control. Those genetically
modified terrorists, the so-called moderate opposition,
killed them. Most of those terrorists are citizens of
those very States presenting the draft resolution today.
The approach used by some Member States to
address the consequences of the crisis in my country,
Syria, in particular its humanitarian aspect, poses
a genuine threat to the status of the United Nations,
its impartiality and credibility, as well as to its
effectiveness in addressing international crises.
The Canadian draft resolution is a reflection of the
alternating roles played by some delegations inside
the various bodies and organs of the United Nations
through endless recurring meetings in order to adopt
draft resolutions under various agenda items, with the
intention of protecting terrorist groups and providing
them with moral, political and information support, and
of putting pressure on the Syrian Government and its
allies in order to distort their considerable achievements
in the war against terrorism that they have undertaken
on behalf of the entire world.
As a matter of fact, I do not dispute the impartiality
of the Canadian delegation, nor the integrity of the
delegations of Saudi Arabia, Turkey and Qatar, which
support the terrorists with money, logistics and
extremist religious speeches. Nor do I want to make
much mention of the brazenness of Israel — which is
occupying the Syrian Golan and supporting terrorist
groups in the Area of Separation — or of the arrogance
of the United States, Britain and France, which continue
to provide political and military news coverage about
such groups. I address my statement to the delegations
of those States that continue to abide by the provisions,
goals and objectives of the Charter of the United Nations.
They believe in the independence, effectiveness and
impartiality of the United Nations and in meeting the
humanitarian needs of the Syrian people, eliminating
terrorism and reaching a political solution.
From this rostrum, I would like to state that
the Syrian Arab Republic declares its readiness to
resume the Syrian-Syrian dialogue with no external
interference, preconditions or participation by any
terrorist sponsored by the States I have just mentioned.
A vote against the Canadian draft resolution will reflect
countries’ rejection of the use and exploitation of the
16-42614

09/12/2016

Organization by some Member States and the haggling
over the blood and suffering of the Syrian people. It
will also reflect their support for a political solution
to the crisis in Syria, and for the right of the Syrian
Government, and its constitutional and legal duty,
to fight terrorism and save Syrians from the scourge
and practices of terrorist groups, in accordance with
the principles of international law and with Security
Council resolutions on combating terrorism. Like
any other State that upholds its independence and
sovereignty within the Organization, I request that the
Canadian draft resolution be put to the vote.
Mr. Vale de Almeida (European Union): I have the
honour of speaking on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its 28 member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, as
well as Ukraine and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
The European Union welcomes today’s meeting
on the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic. The
General Assembly cannot remain silent in the face of
the dramatic situation in that country. We demand an
immediate and complete end to all attacks on civilians
and civilian objects in Aleppo and elsewhere in Syria,
as well as an immediate end to all sieges in Syria.
The escalating violence in Aleppo is causing
untold and unacceptable suffering for thousands of its
inhabitants. Since the beginning of the offensive by
the regime and its allies, notably Russia, the intensity
and scale of the aerial bombardment of eastern Aleppo
is clearly disproportionate. The deliberate targeting
of hospitals, medical personnel, schools and essential
civilian infrastructure, as well as the use of barrel
bombs, cluster bombs and chemical weapons, constitutes
a catastrophic escalation of the conflict and has caused
further widespread civilian casualties, including among
women and children, and may amount to war crimes.
The Syrian regime has the primary responsibility for
the protection of the Syrian population. The European
Union therefore strongly condemns attacks by the regime
and its allies, whether deliberate or indiscriminate, on
civilian populations, humanitarian and health-care
personnel and civilian and humanitarian infrastructure,
as well as all disproportionate attacks, and urges
them to cease indiscriminate and disproportionate
aerial bombardments.

A/71/PV.58

The European Union condemns the continued
systematic, widespread and gross violations and abuses
of human rights and all violations of international
humanitarian law by all parties. We look forward to the
findings of the United Nations internal inquiry on the
targeting of a United Nations humanitarian convoy on
19 September — a clear violation of international law
that requires full investigation. Those responsible for
such violations and abuses must be held accountable
through fair and independent investigations and
prosecutions at the domestic and international levels,
including a referral to the International Criminal Court.
The European Union renews its call to the Security
Council to take action in that regard.
An immediate cessation of hostilities in Aleppo
and in all other parts of Syria, monitored by a strong
and transparent mechanism, an immediate end to all
sieges and full, unhindered, sustainable, countrywide
humanitarian access granted by all parties are essential
steps that must be taken to save civilians and lay the
ground for a resumption of credible intra-Syrian talks
aimed at providing security for the country’s entire
population. In that context, regional actors, particularly
neighbouring countries, bear special responsibility.
The European Union will continue conducting
intensive humanitarian diplomacy and seek ways to
improve access and protection, as well as to promote
humanitarian principles and local consensus on
guidelines for the delivery of aid. We call on all
parties, especially the Syrian regime, to provide
full, unhindered, countrywide access to all those
in need and to end all obstructions to the delivery of
humanitarian aid. We urge the Syrian regime, without
delay, to authorize cross-line humanitarian convoys
to be delivered, including to eastern Aleppo. Such
acts as besieging populated areas — for which the
regime bears the greatest responsibility — in order
to use the starvation of civilians as a tactic of war,
and making forced population transfers for purposes
other than international humanitarian law allows, are
clear breaches of such law and must stop. Providing
immediate relief for the suffering is imperative.
The European Union stresses the importance of the
International Syria Support Group (ISSG) and its
humanitarian task force for achieving concrete results
and alleviating the suffering of the Syrian people.
The European Union firmly believes that there can
be no military solution to the conflict. We reiterate
our commitment to the unity, sovereignty, territorial

16-426145/23

A/71/PV.58

integrity and independence of the Syrian State. The
European Union is an active participant in the ISSG
and its task forces, and fully supports Special Envoy
De Mistura in his efforts to create conditions that can
enable a resumption of intra-Syrian talks. We take
note of his proposal for eastern Aleppo. We recognize
the efforts that have been made to re-establish a full
cessation of hostilities, regret that they have not yet
succeeded and encourage further attempts to achieve
that. We deplore the fact that, in the space of only two
months, two Security Council draft resolutions aimed
at establishing a ceasefire in Aleppo, restoring the
cessation of hostilities and enabling humanitarian access
throughout Syria, particularly Aleppo, were vetoed.
A renewed cessation that would promote efforts
to find a political solution, in line with the provisions
of Security Council resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268
(2016) and the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012
(S/2012/522, annex), cannot wait any longer if we are to
enable all the parties to re-engage in negotiations on a
genuine political transition, which must include a broad,
transitional governing body with full executive powers,
formed by mutual consent. The European Union will
continue to support the efforts of the Syrian opposition,
in particular the High Negotiations Committee as the
opposition representative, in the Geneva talks brokered
by the United Nations. There cannot be a lasting
peace in Syria under the current regime or until the
legitimate grievances and aspirations of Syrian society
are addressed.
The European Union condemns in the strongest terms
the confirmed use of chemical weapons — as detailed
in the reports of the Joint Investigative Mechanism of
the Joint Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the United
Nations — and the widespread attacks on civilians
and human rights violations and abuses by the Syrian
regime and Da’esh. The findings of the Mechanism
reports will require strong action on the part of the
OPCW and the Security Council. Impunity for such
crimes is unacceptable, and the European Union will
therefore continue to support efforts to gather evidence
with a view to future legal action. In that context, we
will act swiftly, according to established procedures, as
long as repression continues, with the aim of imposing
further restrictive measures on Syria that target Syrian
individuals and entities who support the regime.
The European Union condemns the atrocities
committed by Da’esh and other groups designated as
6/23

09/12/2016

terrorists by the United Nations, and we reaffirm our
strong commitment to combating them. We continue
to support the efforts of the global coalition to counter
Da’esh in Syria and Iraq. Da’esh and other organizations
designated as terrorists by the United Nations constitute
a threat to the future of Syria as well as to the interests
and values of the European Union. We call for a wellcoordinated and comprehensive international approach
aimed at preventing material and financial support
from reaching individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities associated with such terrorist groups and
dissuading any parties from collaborating with them.
The European Union calls for the expeditious separation
of all combatants not designated as terrorists from such
terrorist groups. We reiterate that the fight against
terrorism can never be used as an excuse for violating
international humanitarian and human rights law.
A political solution is the only one that will enable
us to decisively defeat Da’esh and other terrorist
organizations in Syria. We thank the Secretary-General
and his Special Envoy for their persistent efforts. Only
when an inclusive political transition is in place will
the European Union be able to assist in the country’s
reconstruction, both directly and through international
organizations, a European Union objective that will
enable the millions of Syrians who have been forced to
flee their homes to return to them and live in peace and
security in their own land.
Lastly, we would like to reiterate our full support
for draft resolution A/71/L.39, put forward by Canada,
and urge its immediate implementation.
Mr. Petersen (Denmark): I speak on behalf of the
Nordic countries — Norway, Finland, Iceland, Sweden
and my own country, Denmark.
Today the General Assembly will adopt a draft
resolution (A/71/L.39) that clearly expresses the horror
we all share as we witness the ongoing bloodshed
in Syria. We thank Canada for its leadership and
constructive process. The broad support for the draft
resolution shows that we are united in our call for an
end to that human and humanitarian disaster.
At the time of our meeting here today, the situation
in Aleppo is of catastrophic dimensions in terms
of human suffering. The Secretary-General and his
Special Envoy have repeatedly warned the world about
the possible destruction of Aleppo and the alarming
conditions that prevail in other parts of Syria. Let me
16-42614

09/12/2016

A/71/PV.58

take this occasion to reiterate some key messages from
the Nordic countries.

with draft resolutions that have pursued the primary goal
of alleviating the suffering of the civilian population.

The heavy and indiscriminate attacks inflicting
devastation and harm on civilians, hospitals, medical
personnel, humanitarian workers and schools must stop.
Priority must be given by all sides to protecting civilians
and facilitating humanitarian relief. All violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights must
be brought to an end, and those responsible must be
held accountable. That includes attacks using chemical
weapons, as confirmed by the Joint Investigative
Mechanism of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and the United Nations.

In addition, in the cases where the Council has been
able to forge agreement, the results have been rather
depressing; just about a year ago, Security Council
resolution 2254 (2015) was adopted unanimously and
gave hope that a political solution might be within
reach. However, the reality today shows that there is no
political process to speak of and that some of the parties
to the conflict openly pursue a military solution. While
the civilian population has been affected in much of
the country, the situation in Aleppo has become the
tragic symbol of our common failure to live up to our
obligation to prevent more of the mass atrocities that
are unfolding before our eyes, even though the majority
of Council members have committed themselves to
the code of conduct with regard to situations involving
mass atrocity crimes.

Syria is obliged under international humanitarian
law to give immediate, full, unhindered and sustained
humanitarian access to all parts of Syria. There can be
no lasting solution for Syria without a political solution.
We uphold our call for an inclusive and credible political
process, in line with Security Council resolution 2254
(2015), which includes making sure that women and
civil society remain represented around the table.
Unfortunately, the Security Council has been
unable to adequately address the crisis in Syria. The
Security Council resolutions adopted have not been
complied with. The Nordic countries repeat their calls
on the Council to live up to its responsibility to maintain
international peace and security, which includes
addressing with the necessary resolve the humanitarian
disaster unfolding before our eyes, particularly in
Aleppo. We deeply regret that the Security Council was
unable to adopt a draft resolution earlier this week.

In the current situation, the involvement of the
General Assembly is an urgent necessity. We thank
our colleagues from Canada for having taken the lead
in that respect. We fully support the draft resolution
(A/71/L.39) before us and hope that it will have the
immediate impact on the ground that is intended. At the
same time, we also believe that more action is needed
by the Assembly in an area referred to in the text, that
of accountability.

The President: Although I obviously want to allow
speakers as much time as they require to express their
views, given that 12 more delegations wish to speak and
that time is short, I would ask that delegations be as
concise as possible in the remainder of the debate.

The conflict in Syria has long been characterized
by an utter disregard for the most basic standards of
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. The violations committed have been
documented and reported on extensively, in particular
by the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry. Many of those violations amount to crimes
against humanity and war crimes. The use of chemical
weapons, the indiscriminate shelling of civilian targets
and the use of starvation as a method of warfare are
among the war crimes that are being committed. Torture,
enforced disappearances, sexual violence and murder
are among the many gross human rights violations that
have been committed as a matter of policy and as part
of a systematic attack against the civilian population.

Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The situation in
Syria is the defining crisis of our time, both with respect
to human suffering and the inability of the Security
Council to address the unfolding humanitarian tragedy.
Nothing illustrates the paralysis in the Council more
starkly than the repeated use of the veto in connection

Since the referral of the situation to the International
Criminal Court was vetoed in the Council more than
two years ago, there has been no serious effort in the
Council to ensure accountability and end impunity. It is
therefore imperative that the General Assembly step in
and enable the international community to at least take

We remain hopeful that the broad international
resolve shown by the draft resolution before us today
will bring real results for the people of Syria. We will
certainly do our part to that end.

16-426147/23

A/71/PV.58

one decisive step forward in that respect — to prepare
files that can serve as the basis for criminal proceedings
in a court or tribunal that may in the future be able to
exercise jurisdiction over those crimes, irrespective of
the perpetrators.
My delegation has been working closely with others
in order to produce a text that will propose the creation
of such a mechanism. We will consult more widely with
the membership in the coming days and hope that a text
to that end can be adopted expeditiously.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia is deeply troubled by the conflict
in Syria, which is now in its sixth year because of
the reckless foreign policy of some international
regional players. They once conceived the idea of
ousting the Government in Damascus and redrawing
the political, ethnic, religious and economic map of the
region. We view that as an aggressive modern form of
colonialism. We are expending tremendous effort to
help halt the war and to prompt Syrians to engage in
direct United Nations-led talks concerning the future
political landscape of the country. Our immediate aim
is to alleviate the plight of civilians in the conflict.
At the same time, the Russian Federation, at
the request of the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, is providing military support to combat the
terrorists who, acting on instructions, have poured into
the country from all sides in order to help crush the
legitimate Government. And yet the armed extremists
have suppressed protests. The merging of those
phenomena has occurred thanks to generous support in
the form of materials, finance and propaganda coming
from abroad. The phantom notion of a moderate Syrian
opposition has effectively collapsed.
On the political track, Russia, together with other
interested international partners, has undertaken
significant efforts to bring about a prompt end to the
conflict. We have set up the International Syria Support
Group, which is co-chaired by Russia and the United
States. The Group, along with the Security Council,
has prepared a series of core documents with a view
to a settlement, and these help guide Special Envoy
De Mistura.
As the Syrian question concerns peace and security,
it needs to be considered by the Security Council, in a
way that is consistent with its prerogatives under the
Charter of the United Nations. To say that Council
efforts to uphold peace in Syria are being blocked is
8/23

09/12/2016

to distort reality. If at times consensus eludes us on a
given document — which last occurred on 5 December
(see S/PV.7825) — that means that the document is
unbalanced, insufficiently well prepared or serves
purposes that have little to do with a settlement.
Vociferous presentations in front of television cameras
certainly do not help.
The situation in Aleppo is tragic. The eastern part
became a veritable stronghold of terrorists, led by Jabhat
Al-Nusra. They mercilessly terrorized the civilians
and ground them under their heel, and they tormented
the civilians in the Government-controlled western
neighbourhoods. We could not tolerate a continuation
of that situation. We are working tirelessly with the
Americans and with key regional partners to arrive at
the most effective solution for Aleppo. That was the
aim of the meetings between Mr. Lavrov and Mr. Kerry
on 2 and 7 December. Finalizing an agreement is the
aim of the meeting to be held tomorrow, 10 December,
between Russia and America. Yesterday, the Syrian
army suspended hostilities around eastern Aleppo, so
as to allow the civilians that wished to leave the city to
do so. Some 10,500 people, among them 4,015 children,
were granted passage.
The draft resolution (A/71/L.39) under consideration
has major shortcomings: faulty references to the
reasons for the outbreak of conflict in Syria, intensified
accusations against the Government, overly simplistic
references to the elements related to the terrorist threat
and the role of foreign sponsors in maintaining and
bolstering them. Terrorists in the region have learned
to manufacture and use toxic substances as weapons.
The scale of that threat has yet to be assessed and
the appropriate response to be found. There is no
clear reference in the draft resolution to the fact that
a cessation of hostilities cannot apply to terrorists.
There is no reference to the key issue of differentiating
between them and the so-called moderate opposition.
The recent developments around Aleppo are not taken
into account.
On the humanitarian track, we are helping with
specific initiatives in a host of areas. Significant
humanitarian assistance is being delivered to Syria, a
task that we carry out together with our foreign friends.
We hope that others will follow suit, above all those
who categorically refuse to cooperate with the Syrian
Government and who squander their energy on threats
and accusations. They are not educating the Syrian
Government through unilateral restrictions, but rather
16-42614

09/12/2016

asphyxiating the people they ardently claim to care
about. Our doctors have been working selflessly in
Aleppo. Recently, owing to the shelling of a Russian
field hospital. Two female medical professionals were
killed. The response to that tragedy — both from
States and from international and non-governmental
organizations — was muted, at best.
We are hardly surprised any longer by such double
standards. We urge a swift resumption of the intra-Syrian
talks, pursuant to the relevant Security Council
resolutions. The six-month interruption — caused
by the unwillingness of the disparate elements of the
opposition to engage in a substantive discussion — is
something we cannot afford. We expect that United
Nations mediation will do whatever is necessary. We
note that it is more important than ever to set up a truly
international counter-terrorism coalition, based on
international law. Today’s tragedy can strike anywhere
no matter how well defended the place may be. That
warrants the broadest possible discussion among
Member States, especially in the General Assembly.
For those reasons, the Russian delegation will vote
against the draft resolution submitted by Canada.
Mr. Gómez Camacho (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this important meeting, which was requested by over
70 Member States, including my own. After over five
years of conflict in Syria, the lack of a political solution
has resulted in the worst humanitarian crisis of the
twenty-first century. This meeting is an opportunity
to pool efforts and political will to urgently address
the situation.
The staggering number of civilian victims,
including women and children, who have been attacked
indiscriminately with banned weapons is truly
tragic. That is why we welcome the draft resolution
(A/71/L.39) currently before the General Assembly,
which we are co-sponsoring. It seeks to respond to
the tragic humanitarian situation of millions of people
and to put an end to the unacceptable suffering of the
Syrian people.
That task is particularly important given the Security
Council’s inability to assume its responsibilities in
the crisis. Mexico regrets that, on both 8 October (see
S/PV.7785) and 5 December (see S/PV.7825), differences
in the Security Council once again prevented it from
exercising its authority by adopting measures aimed at
responding to the tragic humanitarian crisis in Syria,

A/71/PV.58

particularly in Aleppo. We reiterate that the use of the
veto is not a privilege, but rather a great responsibility.
That is why its use in situations like this one — where
more than 300,000 people have died, 6.5 million have
been displaced and more than 4 million live as refugees
in countries in the region — is unacceptable.
The United Nations cannot and must not continue
to be a passive bystander in the face of such a tragedy.
We are duty-bound to take action in response to the
conflict, which has also had serious regional and global
consequences. Our primary challenge is to address
the repeated violations of international humanitarian
law by all parties to the conflict and to eliminate the
restrictions on access to humanitarian assistance for
those who need it the most, especially in besieged or
hard-to-reach areas.
Humanitarian action is no substitute for political
action. The only solution to this humanitarian crisis is a
political agreement that puts an end to armed violence.
Mexico reiterates its support for the efforts led by the
Special Envoy, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to promote
a political dialogue that will enable peace talks to
begin between the Syrian Government and opposition
representatives. We hope that these talks will take place
and soon lead to tangible benefits for the Syrian people.
We also trust that the Secretary-General-elect,
Mr. António Guterres, will continue the efforts to work
with the actors involved in order to strengthen peace in
this country and in the region as a whole.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation welcomes the convening of
this plenary meeting. The situation in Syria could not
be more urgent. In the vast majority of conflict zones,
humanitarian aid has not been delivered for more than
six months. We cannot be immune to the gravity and
scale of this tragedy.
The Charter of the United Nations assigned the
mandate for the maintenance of international peace
and security to the Security Council. However, we have
witnessed how the Security Council has been unable
to arrive at a decision whereby the extremely serious
humanitarian situation being experienced in Syria
can be addressed effectively. It is not acceptable that
States should continue to overlook the resolutions on
Syria that both the Security Council and the General
Assembly have adopted.

16-426149/23

A/71/PV.58

Costa Rica hopes that the members of the Council
will manage to place the suffering of the Syrian people
above their own political differences and assume their
responsibility once and for all to use the measures
provided by the Charter to end this tragedy. We
reiterate our concern over the repeated use of the veto
in cases such as this, where the necessary action by the
Council is prevented, and especially in cases where
mass atrocities may be involved.
Given the lack of effective action by the members
of the Security Council, other States cannot remain
indifferent. Costa Rica strongly urges all the parties
to the conflict to implement the recommendations
contained in the report of the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
issued on 11 August, which, in paragraph 139, calls
on all parties once again to restore and revitalize the
cessation of hostilities, minimize civilian casualties,
end indiscriminate attacks and allow safe, sustained,
unhindered and unconditional access to humanitarian
aid. We also call for the implementation of the United
Nations four-part plan for the delivery of food, medicine
and other essential goods, medical evacuations and
the rotation of medical personnel to attend to the sick
and wounded.
Costa Rica welcomes as a step in the right direction
the various negotiating efforts that are under way in
order to change the situation on the ground. We are
also pleased to see unilateral actions being undertaken
for humanitarian reasons, such as those announced by
Russia for the evacuation of civilians in Aleppo. We
hope that such initiatives will allow the citizens of
Aleppo to move to safer areas and that they will be
maintained and extended to other zones that are also in
need of humanitarian assistance.
My delegation cannot help but mention its enormous
concern regarding the presence of terrorist groups in
Syria. These groups are exponentially worsening the
crisis and have committed abominable violations of
the human rights of the civilian population. The fight
against them must be our common objective.
Costa Rica is convinced that all the parties to the
conflict must focus their efforts on finding a political
solution to the conflict through renewal of dialogue,
with, as their primary objective, the prevention by all
means possible of any greater suffering on the part of the
civilian population. The first step must be a ceasefire,
followed by unrestricted access to humanitarian aid. We
10/23

09/12/2016

need to remember that the process must be guided by the
principles of humanity, neutrality and impartiality. For
this reason, we support the draft resolution submitted
by Canada (A/71/L.39), whose delegation we thank for
its efforts. We shall vote in favour, and we respectfully
urge other delegations to do the same.
Every day, every hour and every minute are
precious for those who have lost everything but who
cling to the hope that the world has not forgotten them.
As Secretary-General-designate António Guterres said,
“What is at stake is nothing more and nothing
less than the survival and well-being of an entire
generation of innocent people”.
We cannot continue to sit idly by.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin with a word of thanks to you, Sir, and
to the Permanent Representative of Canada for your
presentations. I should also like to warmly thank
the Canadian delegation for the significant efforts it
has undertaken over recent months — efforts which
today afford the General Assembly an opportunity to
deliver a strong message at a critical juncture of the
Syrian conflict.
During these terrible times endured by the people
of Aleppo, we cerainly have no right to abandon the
struggle. It is never too late to save lives; it is never too
late to provide assistance to a suffering population; it is
never too late to lay down the foundation for a political
solution, which is the only way to bring the Syrian
tragedy to an end. That is why the Syrian situation
requires a united voice from all the members of the
international community, as we are all aware.
Eastern Aleppo today is on the brink of an abyss.
The Syrian regime, backed by its supporters, has been
obsessively bent on destroying all who have opposed it
over the past five years and has had no regard whatever
for the lives of civilians. It has had no hesitation about
indiscriminately striking civilians using incendiary
bombs, chemical weapons and barrel bombs. For years
it has flouted international humanitarian law and the
basic rules of humanity and morality, and each day the
violations continue.
Today tens of thousands of people are still
in eastern Aleppo. The solemn message that the
General Assembly must deliver today is a message of
humanitarian emergency. The civilians of Aleppo have
been living in a state of siege since July: they have not
16-42614

09/12/2016

been able to receive aid or evacuate their medical cases
or leave for cities of their choice in safety. We must
say collectively to all the parties that, regardless of
our differences, the international community is united
in demanding the protection of civilians and wanting
to prevent one final battle in which the massacre of
civilians will be on a scale not previously experienced
in the Syrian conflict — a massacre for which all the
responsibility will, in the eyes of the world, rest with
the supporters of the Al-Assad regime.
France has noted the opening of the humanitarian
corridor out of Aleppo as announced by Russia.
However, actions speak louder than words. It is critical
for those seeking to leave Aleppo to be able to do so
safely, and to be able also to select their destination.
Beyond this urgent message, the General Assembly
must draw attention to the conviction that prompted the
establishment of the United Nations: that a negotiated
solution must prevail over military thinking. After
months of fierce fighting, we must collectively call for
the renewal of a credible political process, based on the
acquis of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex)
and Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), to provide
a future of peace and stability for the Syrian people.
We cannot emphasize enough that there is no
military solution to the Syrian conflict. Taking back
Aleppo is the obsession of the Al-Assad regime.
However, taking back Aleppo will not settle the Syrian
conflict. A military solution will never open up space
for the reconciliation of the Syrian people or the
rebuilding of their tormented country. Until a political
solution is reached, Syria will remain what it is today: a
landscape of war and desolation in which radicalization
and terrorism continue to thrive. It is therefore the duty
of the General Assembly, which is convening at this
moment of truth, to open the way for new possibilities
for the Syrian people. That is why France will vote in
favour of the draft resolution (A/71/L.39) submitted by
Canada and hopes that the General Assembly will be
able today to deliver a strong and unanimous message.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is deeply concerned about the continuous escalation
of conflict in Syria and the worsening humanitarian
situation in the affected areas. The conflict in Syria has
caused untold suffering for the Syrian people. We feel
for Syria’s war-torn civilians.
The current situation in the country can be
attributed to a plethora of overlapping factors. The

A/71/PV.58

situation in Aleppo and the humanitarian situation in
Syria are not isolated. The international community
should focus on the overall situation and adopt an
integrated approach with the United Nations playing a
central coordinating role so that efforts can be made to
find a comprehensive, fair and proper solution to the
question of Syria.
Against such a complex and sensitive background,
the international community should above all maintain
the overarching goal of seeking a political solution to
the Syrian question. All efforts made should aim at
facilitating the work on four tracks — a resumption of the
ceasefire, political negotiations, the joint fight against
terrorism, and humanitarian assistance. All parties
in Syria should be encouraged to find a universally
acceptable solution through peaceful negotiations, in
accordance with the principle of having a solution that
is Syrian-led and Syrian-owned. Parties to the Syrian
conflict should focus on the fundamental interests of
the country, the safety and security of its people, a
return to dialogue and negotiations, and commit to the
political settlement of the Syrian issue.
Recently, the Security Council has been seized of
the situation in Syria. Countries such as Russia and the
United States are actively engaged in diplomatic efforts
to ease tensions on the ground. Against that backdrop,
any measure taken by any party to the conflict must
respect the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria, contribute to those efforts
and seek to resolve problems rather than to complicate
issues. Such measures must enable the parties to play a
constructive role in the search of a political settlement
at an early date. Any unilateral attempt to exert pressure
or politicize humanitarian issues will only bring about
further turbulence in the situation rather than turning
it around.
The fight against terrorism is an important, integral
part of the search for a solution to the Syrian question.
The conflict in Syria has caused the development and
spread of terrorism. The international community
should focus on fighting terrorist forces inside Syria.
On the question of counter-terrorism, the international
community should adopt uniform standards, strengthen
coordination and resolutely combat all terrorist groups
designated by the Security Council.
On the question of Syria, China maintains the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. It upholds the basic norms governing

16-4261411/23

A/71/PV.58

international relations and has played a constructive
role in seeking a political settlement to the conflict.
Recently, the Special Envoy of the Chinese Government
visited Syria to work with the parties concerned in order
to find a political settlement. China is ready to join
hands with the international community in the common
search for a political settlement at an early date.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s meeting. Like others, we
acknowledge the important role played by Canada in
leading this initiative. Brazil supported the call for
today’s formal plenary meeting to express our strong
concern with the humanitarian consequences of the
escalation of violence and terrorism in Syria.
After nearly six years of extreme violence, the
conflict in the country has further destabilized the
Middle East, magnified sectarian tensions, fostered
terrorism on a global scale and nurtured the worst
humanitarian crisis of our times. Ongoing sieges and
indiscriminate attacks in Deir ez-Zor, Aleppo, Idlib and
the so-called four towns of Fo’ah, Kefraya, Madayya
and Zabadani, among other locations, continue to
cause unacceptable levels of civilian suffering. We
are also alarmed by the persistent denial of access to
humanitarian relief operations, including those of
United Nations agencies. Reports of incidents involving
the use of chemical weapons are deeply worrisome and
should be comprehensively scrutinized.
My country also condemns in the strongest possible
terms the attacks and violations of international
humanitarian law perpetrated by terrorist organizations
currently active in Syria, such as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front, among
others designated by the Security Council. We reaffirm
that all acts of terrorism are unjustifiable, regardless
of their motivation. We also reiterate our concern with
the negative impact of unilateral economic sanctions,
which are detrimental to civilians in Syria and hinder
humanitarian assistance and reconstruction activities.
We recall that according to the Charter of the United
Nations, the only international body with the legal
authority to impose coercive economic measures is the
Security Council.
Today’s meeting should be guided by the need to
find positive and constructive solutions to the conflict,
as well as to the humanitarian crisis. Brazil regrets the
continued inability of the Security Council to reach a
decision on the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, as
12/23

09/12/2016

demonstrated by the rejection of three draft resolutions
in just the past two months. Such an impasse underlines
the urgent need to reform the Council in order to render
it more democratic, effective and transparent, and
therefore more adapted to the complex realities of our
multipolar world. As evidenced by the letter supported
by 74 Member States that called for today’s meeting,
the General Assembly has an essential role to play as
a forum for discussion and collective action on Syria.
The draft resolution on which we are voting
today (A/71/L.39) is a concrete manifestation of this
responsibility. However, we should be careful in our
debates to avoid reproducing the self-defeating logic
of polarization that currently paralyses the Security
Council in its deliberations on Syria. Instead, the
Assembly should contribute to building confidence
among the parties. In that regard, we also highlight the
need to abstain from a selective or politicized approach
to the developments in Syria. As pointed out by the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic, serious violations of
international humanitarian law have been attributed
to all actors. The plight of Syria’s civilians will not
be relieved by rhetorical exercises, finger-pointing or
blame games.
As Brazil has long stated, the only sustainable
solution for Syria is a political solution. We stress the
need for a Syrian-led political process aimed at creating
credible, inclusive and non-sectarian governance and
the drafting of a new Constitution, as established by
resolution 2254 (2015). In order to achieve this goal,
all actors and their external supporters should restore
the cessation of hostilities endorsed by resolution
2268 (2016), allow unhindered humanitarian access,
ensure the separation between terrorist groups and the
opposition, coordinate efforts to tackle terrorism, and
resume the intra-Syrian dialogue as soon as possible
under the auspices of the United Nations.
Those steps can and should be immediate and
simultaneous, without any preconditions. As repeatedly
stated by Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, whose
efforts we fully support, the political, humanitarian and
security aspects of the Syrian crisis are interdependent.
We also urge the members of the International
Syria Support Group, in particular its co-Chairs,
Russia and the United States, to rise above their
differences and resume full dialogue and cooperation
on Syria. A political solution to the crisis in Syria
16-42614

09/12/2016

should not neglect the need to ensure accountability
for the crimes committed by all parties to the conflict.
Serious violations of international humanitarian law, as
well as violations and abuses of international human
rights law, must be investigated in an impartial and
non-selective manner.
I conclude by calling upon the Security Council
to discharge its duties as the organ with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Under Article 24 of the Charter of
the United Nations, the Council has a political, legal
and moral duty, acting on behalf of all Member States,
to decide on the concrete actions required to bring
peace, justice and stability to Syria, in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Ms. Kabua (Marshall Islands): In September 2013,
Pacific Islands Forum leaders gathered in the Marshall
Islands and expressed concern over the situation in
Syria and
“call[ed] on all members of the United Nations
Security Council, individually and collectively, to
provide leadership”.
That call for leadership was made more than three
years ago. The Marshall Islands is gravely concerned
at the subsequent and ongoing diplomatic failure both
to address the basic and worsening humanitarian crisis
in Syria and to confront growing security threats. I
need not recount the facts on the ground, which have
already been clearly laid out by the Secretary-General
and many others.
The Marshall Islands is a small island nation, very
distant from the Middle East. But as a former United
Nations trust territory, through our own history, we
have realized the consequences of distant decisions
made from New York. Indeed, as much as the United
Nations has realized success in multilateral diplomacy,
there have also been far too many inexcusable
shortcomings over the years — grave humanitarian
and security crises, even genocide — where the United
Nations failed to act in time and where leadership was
blinded by politics. It already appears that the situation
in Syria will be added to this list, but it is not too late
to take at least some measures of action to ensure that
going forward every Syrian civilian receives the basic
humanitarian assistance he or she so desperately needs.
The violence must end. Accountability for potential
violations of international law is imperative. Credible

A/71/PV.58

and effective steps to end this conflict must be
undertaken. It is due time to look outside our walls here
at United Nations Headquarters and be a truly United
Nations, upholding the basic tenets of the Charter of
the United Nations, not just in words, but in practice.
We strongly support draft resolution A/71/L.39, and we
hope our fellow member States in the General Assembly
will join us. I also affirm our support for Canada and its
leadership in facilitating this initiative.
Ultimately, this crisis will be our responsibility to
shoulder, and the whole world is watching, looking to all
of us for action. Today, as the General Assembly takes
action on the draft resolution, our vote is our voice.
Accordingly, the Republic of the Marshall Islands will
vote in support of the draft resolution.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin with the words of a Syrian teacher left trapped
in Aleppo:
“People here are dying of pain, dying of hunger,
dying of bombing, dying of cold. This is the
situation now in eastern Aleppo”.
Those are the words of just one of the tens of thousands
of men, women and children currently enduring hell in
Aleppo. They are words that should haunt us all.
We welcome the message sent by the membership
in holding this meeting today, but in truth, just three
Members of the Organization can bring an immediate
end to the suffering and collective punishment: the
Al-Assad regime and their Russian and Iranian backers.
They claim that they cannot because they need to defeat
terrorism. Really? Do they need to reduce Aleppo to
rubble to defeat terrorism? Do they need to destroy
hospital after hospital to defeat terrorism? Do they
need to block humanitarian aid time after time to defeat
terrorism? Their actions will not defeat terrorism and
extremism; they will only fuel it.
Russia claims they are being misrepresented. They
proudly point to the suspension of combat operations
yesterday and the evacuation of 8,000 people as evidence
of their humanitarian intent. But until Russia, Iran and
the Syrian regime have implemented every word of the
draft resolution we are about to adopt (A/71/L.39), and
the countless others adopted by the Security Council,
it will simply be too little too late. It will be too little
too late for that teacher and for his pupils, too little and
too late for the thousands who have died, the thousands
who are suffering.

16-4261413/23

A/71/PV.58

Yet despite all of this, it could get still worse.
Hundreds of men and boys are disappearing as they
flee eastern Aleppo, taken by the regime, their fates
unknown. Let us therefore call on all parties to the
conflict to protect civilians, not abduct or attack them
as they leave. Let us call on them to allow the United
Nations to put in place the necessary measures that will
ensure the protection of those fleeing and to allow the
United Nations to play a role in planning evacuations.
In truth, whether those steps are taken or not, the
fighting in Aleppo will eventually end. When it falls
silent, over the rubble of that once great city, the war,
the killing, the suffering will all continue elsewhere.
The Al-Assad regime will just control one third of
Syria, and despite trying, they cannot control the hearts
of those fighting for peace and democracy. We cannot
give up. We must not give up. We must use every tool at
our disposal, including in this General Assembly draft
resolution, to bring about an end to the suffering.
Ultimately, we must never forget. When I was
British Ambassador to Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
guns had been silent there for a decade. In that time,
Slobodan Milošević, the architect of that conflict and
that genocide, was already behind bars, facing justice.
Let us make no mistake: the war in Syria, like the war
in Bosnia in Herzegovina, will eventually come to an
overdue end. Our memories are long and whether it
is in a year or in 10, there will be accountability for
those responsible for all those deaths in Aleppo and
across Syria.
Ms. Power (United States of America): A journalist
in eastern Aleppo named Wa’ad Al-Khateib won an
award recently for her reporting. She could not escape
the fighting around her, so Wa’ad sent her thoughts to
be read out at a ceremony. Her conclusion:
“There is a perished city called Aleppo,
and all its people are asking you to remember
your humanity.”
All Aleppo’s people are asking you, us, to remember
your, our, humanity.
In September, the Secretary-General described
Aleppo to the Security Council, saying even a
slaughterhouse is more humane (see S/PV.7779). Russia
and the Al-Assad regime had just reimposed their siege
of eastern Aleppo and renewed their military offensive.
In October, United Nations Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura warned,
14/23

09/12/2016

“The bottom line is, in a maximum of two months,
two and a half months, the city of eastern Aleppo
may be totally destroyed.”
The barrel bombs kept falling. In November, UnderSecretary-General Stephen O’Brien said eastern
Aleppo could become one giant graveyard, but Russia
and the Al-Assad regime pressed on with their assault,
and the city’s graves filled up. In December — this
month — Egypt, New Zealand and Spain put forward
a draft resolution in the Security Council demanding
something quite simple: a seven-day halt to the fighting.
Russia and China vetoed, allowing the butchery to
go on.
Russia, the Al-Assad regime and their allies heard
all the warnings, the same warnings all of us have
heard. They knew the humanitarian catastrophe that
would come from seizing a city of 275,000 civilians by
force. Let us consider the toll: estimates are that Russia
and the Al-Assad regime have displaced at least 32,000
people in the past two weeks alone, and the real number,
we know, is likely much higher. Food stocks ran out
almost a month ago in eastern Aleppo. Russia and the
regime’s campaign of air strikes have struck every
single hospital in eastern Aleppo, every single one.
The people left in eastern Aleppo do not know
where to go. Some get shot in the street as they try to
flee, others stay in their basements hoping Russia and
Al-Assad’s aircraft refrain from dropping a bomb over
their heads this time. Still others make it across the
front line, only to have Al-Assad’s intelligence agencies
forcibly disappear them.
The United Nations has reported in the last couple
days that many men who have crossed the lines have
gone missing. These men who are missing may well
have been, or be, murdered. Those who support the
Syrian regime will forever be associated with the fate
of these men, some of whom are still boys.
We must remember what Wa’ad wrote: “All of
Aleppo’s people are asking you to remember your
humanity”. We, as members of the General Assembly,
can remember our humanity by demanding right here
that Russia and the Al-Assad regime comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law, allow
civilians, including the White Helmets and other first
responders, to leave eastern Aleppo peacefully, not send
them to be tortured in regime prisons, give fighters who
wish to leave a safe exit, permit aid agencies, finally, to
deliver medicine and food to those who choose to stay
16-42614

09/12/2016

in eastern Aleppo, and, above all, protect the civilians
in eastern Aleppo who are in the firing line.
The way for all of us to make these demands is
simple: we reach over and we push the green button
to vote yes on today’s draft resolution (A/71/L.39). I
thank Canada for showing leadership in bringing this
text forward to call for an end to this senseless violence.
Russia, the Al-Assad regime and all of their allies
bombarding eastern Aleppo are watching this Hall
carefully. So, somehow, are the people in eastern
Aleppo. This is a vote to stand up and tell Russia and
Al-Assad to stop the carnage. This is a vote to defend
the bedrock principles of how States should act, even in
war. This is a vote to urgently demand food, medicine
and safety for a population in eastern Aleppo who
have none.
This draft resolution is far from perfect. No
resolution negotiated among States Members of the
United Nations on a compressed timeline in response
to an urgent catastrophe could be perfect. If ever there
were a time not to let the perfect be the enemy of the
good and the decent, this is the time. The people of
eastern Aleppo need help. The General Assembly must
stand with them. I urge representatives to vote in favour
of this draft resolution.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland) (spoke in French): In
the face of the unprecedented scale of violence and the
inhuman suffering that is plaguing Syria, Switzerland
insists upon the three following priorities.
First, the Swiss Government renews its call on
all parties to the conflict to fully and unconditionally
uphold the rules of international humanitarian law, in
particular the principles of the conduct of hostilities.
All parties have an obligation to allow and facilitate
rapid and unfettered humanitarian access. Furthermore,
Switzerland recalls that the use of chemical weapons,
the use of starvation as a means of warfare and
the systematic forced displacement of civilians are
war crimes.
Upholding the law also implies the punishment of
perpetrators. Since 2013, some 80 States have called
upon the Security Council to refer the situation in Syria
to the International Criminal Court. Today Switzerland
reiterates that appeal, as it has done regularly for
three years. My delegation regrets the fact that it was
not possible to include a reference in draft resolution
A/71/L.39 to the sole existing mechanism that would

A/71/PV.58

enable the delivery of justice to the victims. Until
justice is possible at the national or international level,
Switzerland supports all efforts that contribute to the
collection and preparation of evidence with a view to
judicial proceedings.
Secondly, Switzerland calls upon all parties to
the conflict to immediately cease hostilities, ensure
the protection of civilians in areas under their control
and enable swift unfettered provision of humanitarian
assistance. We also call upon those who have influence
to bear upon the parties to the conflict to draw upon all
necessary means to prompt the parties to fully uphold
international humanitarian law, as well as to uphold all
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Thirdly, Switzerland unreservedly aligns itself
with calls for parties to rapidly and in good faith resume
discussions with a view to a political solution, which is
the only way to end this conflict. To that end, the Swiss
Government shall continue to offer its good offices to
facilitate on its territory the holding of such discussions
within an appropriate framework.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the Canadian
delegation, which facilitated negotiations on the
draft resolution that we shall adopt later and which
Switzerland fully supports.
Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): Jamaica joins other
delegations in welcoming this opportunity for the
General Assembly to discuss the situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic, which is undoubtedly one of the worst
humanitarian crises of our time.
We are shocked and deeply disturbed by the
images of destruction and the intense suffering of
civilians — innocent men, women and children who
have fallen victim to a war that has raged for over five
years. We are also dismayed that the perpetrators of
these horrors are able to do so with impunity and urge
that robust accountability mechanisms be established
to investigate and bring to justice those found to
be in violation of international human rights and
humanitarian laws.
The stark and deeply disturbing facts speak
for themselves: more than 450,000 casualties and
13.5 million people in need of humanitarian assistance,
with approximately 6.1 million people internally
displaced. It is a stain on our conscience that the
international community has failed to bring relief to
those trapped in besieged, inaccessible areas. We view

16-4261415/23

A/71/PV.58

the situation as both unacceptable and intolerable. We
should not hesitate to take action in the face of the
inertia that has paralysed other parts of the international
system. It falls to us — the General Assembly — to
stand up and declare with one clear and unequivocal
voice that enough is enough.
We therefore urge the Assembly to demand an
immediate cessation of hostilities. We do not have the
luxury of time, particularly as we move rapidly into the
increasingly harsh winter conditions that will add yet
another layer to the cloak of suffering and despair that
blankets the citizens of besieged places such as Aleppo.
We all have an obligation under international law
to ensure that the violations and abuses taking place
in the Syrian Arab Republic are immediately curtailed.
My delegation therefore urges the Security Council to
assume its responsibility to take prompt and effective
action to enable the delivery of the complete spectrum
of humanitarian assistance that is required for the
civilian population in Syria.
Our plea for Syria is a plea for human life, for
dignity and, ultimately, for justice.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela would like to reiterate its deep concern
over the deadly armed conflict that has ravaged Syria
for the past five years and over its impact on the entire
civilian population. In that regard, we condemn the
attacks against civilian targets and humanitarian actors,
regardless of their origin, because such actions violate
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
Today, the draft resolution proposed by Canada
(A/71/L.39) aims to condemn Syria, a brotherly Arab
country, which has been a victim of terrorist barbarism
and is fighting to defend its sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity and to guarantee
respect for the human rights of its people. As Venezuela
has stated in the Security Council during the past two
years, we believe that, while we must urgently address
the serious humanitarian effects of the conflict in Syria,
we must also bear in mind the causes behind it that
determine its evolution. Those include the geopolitical
agendas of a few States Members of the United Nations
that put their interests before finding a true political
solution to the war in Syria and promote it directly
or indirectly.
16/23

09/12/2016

Similarly, we reject the politicization of the
humanitarian issue, with the aim of overthrowing
legitimate Governments and undermining the social
fabric of a country that has historically been prosperous,
open and productive, a country that suddenly became
involved in the war agenda of the major Powers that
are violating regional stability and are today exhibiting
a cynical double standard, claiming to be the standard
bearers of the humanitarian cause, when in fact they are
the principal parties responsible for this tragedy.
The military interventions in Iraq, Libya and
Syria have destabilized the Middle East and North
Africa region, fostering the expansion of the scourge of
terrorism, especially the emergence of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, the Al-Nusra Front and other
associated entities. Terrorism continues to be the most
nefarious consequence of this foreign interventionism
in the region and, at the same time, is the main agent of
armed violence and the humanitarian crisis which has
caused thousands of deaths and millions of refugees,
affecting the Middle East and North Africa region.
The imposition of the war in Syria and the ensuing
humanitarian tragedy is a contemptible act, to which we
must add the lack of will to find a real political solution.
Some of those who have promoted this draft resolution
covertly encourage terrorist groups to deepen the
tragedy of a civilian population trapped in an endless
conflict. If a country really wants to help the Syrian
people, it should stop supporting extremist groups
with weapons and money. These extremist groups
have become terrorist groups that murder, torture and
destroy the social fabric and everything in its wake in
Syria, spreading death and destruction.
We would like to have a debate in the General
Assembly on the origins of the conflict in the Middle
East — in Iraq, Libya, Syria and Palestine. We are sure
that we will always find the same actors promoting
war. We therefore consider legitimate the efforts
actively undertaken by the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic, with the support of other countries, in
an attempt to overcome the scourge of terrorism and
make effective progress in finding a political solution,
which is the only possible solution. The Syrian people
have every right to defend their territorial integrity,
sovereignty and right to self-determination, as set out
in the Charter of the United Nations.
In that regard, we support the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
16-42614

09/12/2016

and the work of the International Syria Support Group
in finding a definitive solution through dialogue
and political negotiation. Only if the relevant actors
demonstrate a true political will to move forward along
this path can we embark on a true path to alleviate the
suffering caused by that terrible humanitarian crisis.
Politicized resolutions on this issue in any of the
bodies of the United Nations, absent real efforts aimed
at considering the political parties in this conflict and
a clear resolve to fight terrorism, will only undermine
any well-intentioned initiative to the detriment of
peace and add to the suffering of the people. Today it is
Syria that is the victim of this military aggression and
political manipulation. Tomorrow any other brotherly
country could fall victim. Draft resolution A/71/L.39 is
a poor precedent.
Finally, we continue to call for a negotiated political
solution to this terrible conflict, ending the foreign
intervention in Syria and respecting the right of its
people to choose its own path towards a future peace.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
express our thanks and appreciation for the holding
of today’s important meeting. I also wish to express
our gratitude to Canada for its initiative and for the
considerable and worthy efforts it has made towards
the adoption of draft resolution A/71/L.39, which
will hopefully reflect the international community’s
determination to maintain the political impetus needed
to find a permanent solution to the Syrian crisis. Over
the past few years, we have contributed positively to
the negotiations on this issue, and we will support the
draft resolution on the situation on Syria on which we
will vote today because we believe that these efforts
complement other efforts undertaken, whether they
be in the Security Council or the International Syria
Support Group or at the regional or international levels.
Our support is based on the pressing need to stop
the bloodshed, the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation and the violation of international human
rights law and international humanitarian law. We
will contribute to any initiative aimed at a political
situation to ensure the security, stability and territorial
integrity of Syria, fulfil the aspirations of its people
and eradicate radicalism and extremism. We agree
to all those goals and wish to achieve them in Syria
through the implementation of the draft resolution to
be put to the vote and all other relevant United Nations
resolutions to concretely establish peace on the ground.

A/71/PV.58

In numerous international forums, we have stated our
clear and balanced vision for ways to end the strife and
suffering. For us, three priorities must be respected at
this delicate stage.
First, we call for the cessation of hostilities so that
humanitarian assistance, medical supplies and food
can be delivered to hard-to-reach areas under siege,
particularly in Aleppo. We emphasize that the main
priority is the protection of civilians. Secondly, we
emphasize that, in order to reach a political solution,
which is the only way to achieve peace in Syria,
negotiations among Syrian parties must be resumed
with a view to reaching a consensus on a transitional
political process under Syrian leadership, in line
with the guidelines of the International Syria Support
Group, the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex)
and the relevant United Nations resolutions. Thirdly,
we call for redoubled and united efforts to combat and
eliminate the terrorist organizations, including Da’esh
and Jabhat Al-Nusra, that have exploited political
divisions in Syria.
In conclusion, I wish to state that we appreciate
all the work of the Security Council, particularly the
recent efforts of Egypt, New Zealand and Spain. We
reiterate our call to the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibilities and take all possible measures to curtail
the violence and facilitate the delivery of assistance
inside Syria. We urge all the concerned parties to fulfil
their obligations, in accordance with international
humanitarian law and respect for human rights.
Mr. Garcia Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): Argentina has followed with alarm and grave
concern the developments in the Syrian Arab Republic
since the beginning of the conflict in 2011 and is deeply
concerned about the worsening humanitarian situation
over the past several weeks. Accordingly, along with
73 other Member States, we signed on to the request
for the convening of this meeting of the General
Assembly because we believe that the most democratic
and representative body of the Organization cannot
continue to be silent. We thank Canada for its valuable
and important initiative, which we support on the
understanding that its goals are primarily humanitarian.
It is of particular concern that the Security Council
remains unable to agree on measures to achieve a
ceasefire to provide humanitarian assistance and
protection to the Syrian civilian population. For
Argentina, now is not the time for political speculation

16-4261417/23

A/71/PV.58

or pointing fingers, but for taking firm action in
accordance with the responsibility that devolves on
the Council and, in particular, on its five permanent
members. The General Assembly must send a clear and
strong message to the parties to the conflict on the need
to strictly abide by international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, including the necessary
distinction between combatants and civilians. At the
same time, the Assembly must demand assurances that
immediate and unimpeded access will be granted for
humanitarian assistance to reach all areas of conflict,
including besieged and difficult-to-reach areas, such as
Aleppo, which during the past several weeks has been
the scene of intense fighting and bombardment.
Although we welcome any initiative — even if it
is for a few hours only — to alleviate the suffering
of the civilian population, which is the most affected
by the conflict, we are convinced of the need for an
unconditional ceasefire rather than temporary truces,
thereby affording the time to accelerate the effort to
arrive at a permanent political settlement.
Argentina condemns the acts of violence, the
terrorism and the indiscriminate attacks committed
against the civilian population, including against
hospitals, schools and humanitarian aid convoys, as
well as the use of chemical weapons, as reported by
the Joint Investigative Mechanism of the Joint Mission
of the Organization of the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and the United Nations, which have led to a
thoroughly unsustainable situation throughout Syria. In
that regard, we note the primary responsibility of the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to protect its
people in accordance with international law, as well as
the necessity for all parties to the conflict to respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law.
Argentina emphatically condemns terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations and rejects in
the strongest terms the terrorist activity of the selfproclaimed Islamic State and of the Al-Nusra Front
and other terrorist groups recognized as such by the
Security Council. In that vein, our country reaffirms
its conviction that the fight against terrorism must take
place within the framework of international law, respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law.
Similarly, I would also like to reiterate yet again that
providing arms, related materials and financing to the
parties to the conflict simply serves to exacerbate the
tragedy that the Syrian people is experiencing.
18/23

09/12/2016

We wish to emphasize the need for the serious
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law committed by the parties during the
conflict to be duly investigated and the perpetrators
tried, either by the national authorities or by the
applicable international mechanisms.
Argentina is convinced that there can be no
military solution to the prolonged conflict that Syria
has been experiencing since 2011. We therefore
reiterate our strong support for the efforts undertaken
by the Special Envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, and
the international community, including the discussions
under way between the co-Chairs of the International
Syria Support Group, the United States and the Russian
Federation, in the quest to arrive at an immediate solution
to the serious humanitarian crisis, the implementation
of the ceasefire and a political agreement between the
Syrian Government and the opposition to end the Syrian
conflict through a credible, inclusive and non-sectarian
political process led by Syria that follows the guidelines
established by the relevant Security Council resolutions
and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) of
30 June 2012.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/71/L.39, entitled “The situation in
the Syrian Arab Republic”, as orally corrected.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Four delegations have requested to speak in
explanation of vote before the voting: the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Saudi Arabia, Trinidad and Tobago
and the Russian Federation. In the interests of time, I
will assume that it is the Assembly’s wish to finalize
the list.
It was so decided.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): Draft
resolution A/71/L.39, on the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, is one-sided and divorced from the reality on
the ground in Syria. We agree that the situation in the
Syrian Arab Republic has been alarming for several
years now and that the humanitarian situation has been
deteriorating. We also fully agree that the international
community, represented by the United Nations, should
do everything in its power to address the humanitarian
crisis in Syria.
16-42614

09/12/2016

From the outset of the crisis, Iran, through its
Red Crescent Society, has been actively engaged in
humanitarian operations in Syria. Bearing in mind its
moral and international commitments, Iran will continue
to assist Syrians in need of humanitarian assistance.
However, it is evident that the crisis is only the
effect and that the draft resolution is totally silent about
the root cause. It is an established fact that terrorism and
violent extremism are the root causes of the disaster.
That is the issue that should be first and foremost
addressed by the international community. Militants
and terrorists who are let into Syria, mostly through
lax border control, and who are supported by some
foreign countries, are responsible for the very difficult
situation and the ongoing humanitarian disaster.
It is again an established fact that a number of armed
terrorist groups, such as Da’esh, Jabhat Al-Nusra and
Jaysh Al-Fatah, have been active in Syria and in control
of territory. Their occupation of some densely populated
regions of that fellow State Member of the Organization
has exacerbated the situation. Actions by those groups
have been the main source of the civilians’ suffering and
have been and continue to be a tremendous challenge
to humanitarian operations. They have spread terror
and intimidation among the population, some of whose
members they have forcibly used as human shields. The
control of territory by feckless and reckless groups,
wherever it occurs, creates major threats and can ignite
a humanitarian crisis. That is the core of the problem
that we are facing in Syria.
Given that established fact, I have a question for
the main sponsors of the draft resolution. The question
can also be directed to the representative of the United
Kingdom and the members of his delegation, who have
blamed others for their fight against terrorism. What
would they do if part of their own territory had been
occupied by similar terrorist groups? Would they not
take military action to dislodge them?
To resolve the crisis in Syria, we need to put an
end to terrorist activities and at the same time continue
our efforts to reach a comprehensive and exclusively
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political settlement based
on dialogue among Syrians, without preconditions,
aimed at ending hostilities and establishing peace
and tranquillity. Those two actions should go hand in
hand. The draft resolution is totally silent on those two
major imperatives. Therefore, we will vote against the
draft resolution.

A/71/PV.58

Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting to discuss the grave humanitarian situation in
Syria and the actions taking place there, including mass
killings, displacement, blockade and other crimes.
Those actions by the Syrian regime and its allies are an
affront to the conscience of humankind and constitute
crimes against humanity. That must be addressed
and curbed.
We appreciate the efforts of the sponsors,
particularly Canada, in preparing draft resolution
A/71/L.39. We also appreciate the good offices that
accompanied the negotiations on the draft resolution.
Regretfully, we find that the sum total of the draft
resolution does not rise to the level of the suffering of
the Syrian people. Nor does it distinguish adequately
between the attackers and the attacked. Nor does it fully
address the responsibility of the Syrian authorities and
their allies, given the aerial bombardment of residential
areas, with their defenceless civilians, the use of
chemical weapons and the displacement of millions
of people.
Hence the draft resolution cannot serve as an act
of loyalty to the resilient Syrian people. It addresses
the situation in Syria. But the grave situation in Aleppo
and the inability of the Security Council to address that
situation by adopting effective resolutions, given the
double Russian-Chinese veto, make it necessary for the
General Assembly to hold an emergency special session
and to take over the responsibility of maintaining peace
and security, which is being endangered by the military
operations of the Syrian authorities and their allies.
Consequently, and despite our reservations
regarding the draft resolution, my delegation will vote
in favour of it. Together with other friendly countries,
we will seek ways to circumvent its shortcomings.
Ms. Beckles (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad and
Tobago wishes to provide the following explanation of
vote prior to the voting on draft resolution A/71/L.39,
entitled “The situation in the Syrian Arab Republic”.
Trinidad and Tobago has maintained a principled
stand on country-specific draft resolutions brought
before the General Assembly. Although we have
deviated from that position on occasion, we have a
carefully constructed track record of abstention on
country-specific resolutions in the General Assembly.

16-4261419/23

A/71/PV.58

In that context, Trinidad and Tobago wishes to
express its reservations with respect to the references
to the Syrian authorities in the draft resolution before
us. Quite apart from the problematic references to the
Syrian authorities, as well as my country’s principled
position on country-specific resolutions, our preference
would be to have a more balanced resolution that refers
to all the parties involved in the conflict.
Trinidad and Tobago’s position on the draft
resolution is also informed by its shared responsibility,
as part of the international community, to take action
in the face of crises such as the unfolding humanitarian
crisis in Syria. That responsibility includes the
responsibility to protect populations from war crimes
and crimes against humanity. In that regard, we are
of the view that the gravity of the situation at hand
warrants a departure from this country’s principled
position on country-specific draft resolutions brought
before the General Assembly. Trinidad and Tobago will
therefore vote in favour of draft resolution A/71/L.39.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I must briefly comment on the statement
delivered by the representative of the United States. The
United States delegation prefers to engage in aggressive
rhetoric, betting on further escalation around Aleppo,
without any regard for the fate of its civilians. It was
the United States delegation that disavowed a proposal
that the United States Secretary of State submitted
to our Foreign Minister on 2 December. It was the
United States delegation that sabotaged a meeting of
experts that was agreed by our mnisters, preferring to
engage in a loud and useful propaganda show at the
Security Council.
Rather than replicate propagandistic clichés
about Aleppo, the United States delegation should
rather explain what is occurring under United States
leadership around Mosul, what has occurred under
United States leadership in Fallujah. The United States
delegation could have rather drawn conclusions from
its disastrous policy in Iraq, Libya and Syria, a policy
for which the people in those countries and far beyond
have paid and will continue to pay far too high a price.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/71/L.39, entitled “The situation in the
Syrian Arab Republic”, as orally corrected.
20/23

09/12/2016

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. Pollard (Under-Secretary-General for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/71/L.39: Albania,
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Botswana,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta,
the Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia, Monaco,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Belize,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cameroon, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominica,
Dominican
Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Niger, Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
16-42614

09/12/2016

Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen, Zambia
Against:
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burundi,
China, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Nicaragua,
Russian Federation, South Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Bangladesh, Bhutan,
Cambodia, Central African Republic, Ecuador,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Guinea-Bissau, India, Iraq,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Lebanon,
Lesotho,
Madagascar, Mali, Mongolia, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Philippines, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname,
Tajikistan, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania,
Viet Nam
Draft resolution A/71/L.39, as orally corrected,
was adopted by 122 votes to 13, with 36 abstentions
(resolution 71/130).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Citations from literature may help us to
understand the surreal landscape in Syria. The German
philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche said that people do
not always wish to hear the truth because they do not
want their illusions to be shattered. According to the
American novelist Mark Twain, it is “easier to fool
people than to convince them that they have been
fooled”. And our renowned Islamic and Arab leader
Imam Ali Abi Talib spoke words of wisdom to us all
when he said, “Oh, right! You have not left me with
any friend”.
I would like to thank the delegations of the States
that refused to be puppets and instead were independent
in supporting international law. They took hold of a

A/71/PV.58

hot-potato issue when they defended the right, chose
to respect the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and voted against or abstained
on the egregiously unfair resolution just adopted. My
delegation regrets the fact that the General Assembly
has adopted a politicized, non-consensual text that runs
counter to the provisions of the Charter, as I said in my
earlier statement today.
In that regard, I would like to stress that the
statements of some countries have confirmed what
I said earlier, namely, that some delegations are
disregarding the humanitarian situation in Syria.
In that regard, their real intention is to use various
forums — including the United Nations — to extend
political help to the terrorist group Jabhat Al-Nusra and
the other such groups that they support, as a cover-up
for Governments of those countries that continue to
provide armed terrorist groups with information and
logistics, as well as military, political and financial
support, in order to kill the Syrian people and destroy
what they have built over decades, thereby serving
the interests of Israel, which are to destroy peace and
legitimize occupation and settlement activities.
We are witnessing a despicable, satanic coalition
among Israel, its sponsors and its old and new allies. All
the desperate attempts to distort the facts — through
fabricated reports and the exploitation of the United
Nations for the purposes of destructive agendas — will
not, however, deter our Government and its allies from
continuing to fight terrorism and attempting to rid the
Syrians of this evil scourge. The States I mentioned
created, sponsored and supported those groups, which
are now a threat to the entire world.
We promise the Syrian people that we will not
betray them — even as those States try to frustrate their
dreams and mar their future. Our Government, army
and allies will restore security, stability, development
and prosperity to all of Syria. No sponsor of terrorism
will participate in our rebuilding. I want to inform the
sponsors of terrorism in Aleppo that the Syrian army
has now liberated 93 per cent of the terrorist-controlled
areas in Aleppo and that their bloodthirsty game is all
but over. The full liberation of Aleppo will take place
very soon. My advice to the sponsors of terrorism and
terrorists in Aleppo is to find a corner, like punished
children, to cry over their failure, frustration and defeat.
Their bloodthirsty terrorist game in Aleppo and Syria
is over. It is high time for them to acknowledge their
loss, a loss that will not be mitigated through today’s

16-4261421/23

A/71/PV.58

adoption of a trivial, unjust and politicized resolution. I
would like to assert that those who wager on terrorism
as a political weapon will eventually lose when the
terrorists turn against them, with all of their evil might.
Mrs. Chartsuwan (Thailand): We would like to
thank you, Sir, for promptly convening this formal plenary
meeting to address the ongoing humanitarian crisis facing
the people of Syria, an important issue in which the
United Nations as a whole has an essential and responsible
role to play. The armed conflict and escalation of violence
that we are witnessing has taken an unprecedented toll on
civilians in Aleppo and elsewhere in Syria. That is why
Thailand has given careful consideration to resolution
71/130, sponsored by Canada.
Our support of the resolution reflects Thailand’s
grave concern over the dire humanitarian situation and
expresses our solidarity with those who continue to face
devastation from the ongoing crisis, particularly civilians
in besieged and hard-to-reach areas and those requiring
urgent medical attention and assistance.
Regardless of their political alignment, all parties
concerned must abide by and respect international
humanitarian law. We urge all parties to cease hostilities
and violence and to protect and minimize harm to
civilians by ending all sieges, prohibiting indiscriminate
attacks against civilians and civilian objects and granting
humanitarian access to those in need.
As the conflict continues in its sixth year, it is clear that
there is no military solution. Therefore, the international
community must exhaust all channels for dialogue, with
the goal of achieving a peaceful and lasting political
settlement of the crisis.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Uruguay’s
position with regard to the humanitarian crisis in Syria
has been expressed on numerous occasions during open
meetings of the Security Council, where we sit as a
non-permanent member. We decided to support resolution
71/130, as we know that what is needed now is a clear
and concise resolution to ensure an urgent cessation of
hostilities, access to humanitarian assistance throughout
Syria, the protection of civilians and the lifting of all
sieges, with a view to subsequently advancing towards a
political solution to the crisis.
In that connection, Uruguay supports the paragraphs
of the resolution that aim to alleviate the desperate
situation of the Syrian people. However, my country
cannot support most of the preambular paragraphs, as
22/23

09/12/2016

they do not promote the resolution’s objectives, but rather
politicize the results of the negotiation. In doing so, they
present a picture that does not fully reflect the realities of
the conflict. Therefore, we disagree with the contents of
the fifth to the twentieth preambular paragraphs, inclusive,
and express our reservations regarding them.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
On behalf of the delegations of Argentina and Brazil, I
wish to explain our votes on resolution 71/130, which was
just adopted by the Assembly.
Our delegations voted in favour of the resolution
because we believe that, when faced with facts that
are common knowledge, the General Assembly must
send a strong and clear message regarding the tragic
humanitarian situation resulting from the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic. In keeping with its humanitarian
objective, the resolution calls for an immediate cessation
of hostilities and reiterates that the parties must strictly
comply with international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. And, accordingly, they
should facilitate access for humanitarian assistance to all
the conflict-affected zones, including besieged and hardto-reach areas.
We are also categorical about the need to ensure
that those responsible for war crimes and crimes against
humanity are brought to justice. We hope that this General
Assembly initiative will help to overcome the current
polarization that is paralysing the Security Council with
regard to Syria, rather than prolonging it.
Our delegation has reiterated that the only sustainable
solution to the conflict entails a political process, led by
Syria, that is aimed at establishing a credible, inclusive
and non-sectarian system of governance and the drafting
of a new constitution, as Security Council resolution 2254
(2015) requires.
Although our delegation supports the text of the
resolution as a whole, we believe that some paragraphs
can be regarded as selective, in that they portray the
Syrian Government as the only party responsible for
the origin of the conflict and its continuation. Not only
does the language fail to reflect the complexity of the
humanitarian tragedy in Syria, especially if we consider
the many foreign players involved, but it is not appropriate
to the primarily humanitarian objective of the resolution.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China has
always taken a responsible approach to the Syrian issue.
We are firmly committed to the purposes and principles
16-42614

09/12/2016

of the Charter of the United Nations and to a political
solution to the Syrian issue. China maintains that, in view
of the current situation, all the parties should focus their
efforts on the four-track strategy: the resumption of the
ceasefire, political negotiations, cooperation on counterterrorism, and humanitarian assistance.
Unilaterally imposing pressure and politicizing
humanitarian issues will only further escalate the situation.
At the same time, China would advise a small number of
countries to end the practice of criticizing the legitimate
positions of other countries and to make genuine efforts to
help arrive at a political solution to the Syrian issue.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile voted in favour of resolution 71/130, entitled “The
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic”. It did so because
the resolution has a humanitarian objective, as established
in its operative part, which focuses on protecting the
civilian population and allowing access, and which calls
for compliance with international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. However, we do not agree
with the inclusion of elements of a selective nature in the
preambular part concerning the origin of the conflict, or
with the terms that are used to refer to some of the parties,
because they do not contribute to promoting the necessary
understanding to elicit a humanitarian response.
A political solution and political dialogue are the
only way to tackle the humanitarian crisis. We cannot
be oblivious to the fact that it is the civilian population,
including millions of boys and girls, that has been the
most affected during the years of conflict. Nor can we
think about lasting peace without justice, accountability
and reconciliation. We stress that any effort to tackle
the humanitarian situation will be insufficient if, at the
same time, we do not guarantee an inclusive political
process that is led by the Syrians themselves. A political
solution, however, will remain out of reach so long as the
militarization of the conflict continues. Hence, we call
categorically for an end to the provision of arms to all
the parties, and we hope that the report of the SecretaryGeneral requested by the General Assembly will offer
viable recommendations on protecting the civilian
population and the critical infrastructure, such as hospitals
and schools.
Mr. Isnomo (Indonesia): My delegation voted in
favour of resolution 71/130, adopted today, entitled “The
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic”, and wishes to
explain its position.

A/71/PV.58

Since March 2011, Indonesia has remained consistent
in its repeated encouragement and calls to all conflicting
parties in the Syrian Arab Republic to resolve political
issues peacefully through dialogue and negotiation, instead
of resorting to force and violence, because we believe that
there is no military solution to the conflict. In doing so,
Indonesia has called for the international community
to respect the sovereignty, independence, unity and the
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic, while
calling on the latter to respect international human rights
law and humanitarian law and to fulfil its obligations
under the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
It is unfortunate that the situation in Syria has yet
to improve. It has, in fact, worsened. Indonesia remains
deeply disturbed by the developments affecting civilians
and the loss of human lives. We urge all parties to grant
humanitarian access and desist from targeting civilians
and essential civilian infrastructure, which is in clear
contravention of the Geneva Convention. In that regard, the
recent news of the brief suspension of military activities in
Aleppo would be a first step in providing humanitarian and
medical access to the civilian population in the besieged
areas. We once again urge a cessation of hostilities by all
sides and access for humanitarian relief.
Indonesia had hoped for a more concise and balanced
text that would place immediate priority on the cessation
of conflict and hostilities, the granting of access to
humanitarian assistance and the immediate resumption
of a Syrian-led inclusive political process aimed at the
formation of a Government that would establish order
and foster long-awaited peace for the Syrian people in
the country. Nevertheless, in the spirit of constructive
engagement and to reach a possible resolution to the
current situation in Syria, and in particular to relieve the
plight of the Syrian civilian population, especially women
and children, Indonesia joined the international call for
resolving the situation in Syria by voting in favour of
the resolution.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to underscore that
the protracted conflict, which has caused immeasurable
loss, casualties and harm for the Syrian people, could
have long been resolved had the Security Council
demonstrated its leadership and fulfilled its obligations
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
The President: It is approaching 1 p.m., and we still
have another 12 speakers who wish to explain their votes.
Therefore, we will continue this afternoon at 3 p.m.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

16-4261423/23
