A/63/PV.22

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

22

nd plenary meeting
Wednesday, 8 October 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

Agenda item 71 (continued)

are turning to the General Assembly to convey that
request to the Court, in fulfilment of its powers and
functions under the United Nations Charter.

Request for an advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on whether the unilateral
declaration of independence of Kosovo is in
accordance with international law

This non-confrontational approach is highly
principled and legitimate. It will serve to reduce
tensions in the region and facilitate our efforts at
reconciliation.

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.

Draft resolution (A/63/L.2)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, His
Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, to introduce draft
resolution A/63/L.2.
Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): It is my honour and
pleasure to introduce the draft resolution proposed by
the Republic of Serbia contained in document
A/63/L.2. My presence here today as Foreign Minister
of the Republic of Serbia signifies the importance that
my country assigns to this issue.
On 17 February 2008, the provisional institutions
of self-government of Serbia’s southern province of
Kosovo
and
Metohija
unilaterally
declared
independence. Our democracy responded with maximal
restraint. We ruled out the use of force and the
imposition of economic sanctions against the
breakaway province. Serbia decided to defend its
sovereignty and territorial integrity through diplomacy
and international law.
We have chosen to seek an advisory opinion from
the International Court of Justice (ICJ) on the legality
of the unilateral declaration of independence. Today we

The Republic of Serbia believes that sending this
question to the Court would prevent the Kosovo crisis
from serving as a deeply problematic precedent in any
part of the globe where secessionist ambitions are
harboured.
We also believe that the Court’s advisory opinion
would provide politically neutral, yet judicially
authoritative, guidance to many countries still
deliberating how to approach unilateral declarations of
independence in line with international law.
Lastly, we believe that recourse to the Court
would strengthen the rule of law in international
relations and make the proposed course of action a
symbol of the world community’s resolve to take the
United Nations Charter as its guide.
Supporting this draft resolution would also serve
to reaffirm a fundamental principle: the right of any
Member State of the United Nations to pose a simple,
basic question on a matter it considers vitally important
to the Court. To vote against it would be in effect a
vote to deny the right of any country to seek — now or
in the future — judicial recourse through the United
Nations system. To vote against it would also mean

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-54101 (E)

*0854101*

A/63/PV.22

accepting that nothing can be done when secessionists
in whichever part of the globe assert the uniqueness of
their cause and claim exception to the universal scope
of the international legal order.
My country would like to extend our appreciation
to those that, while not currently persuaded of the
utility of the proposal, have decided to engage
themselves in this question, acknowledging that our
draft resolution addresses important issues of
international law.
All Member States have on numerous occasions
confirmed their confidence in the Court as the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations. We must therefore
have full confidence that the Court will perform its
duty in an exemplary fashion without any special
directives.
The question posed is amply clear and refrains
from taking political positions on the Kosovo issue.
The Court’s response, in the form of an advisory
opinion, will be based on international law, in
accordance with the Court’s Statute and Rules of
Procedure. Article 66 of the Statute gives a clear
indication of the procedures utilized by the Court. No
additional instructions by the General Assembly are
appropriate.
We believe that the draft resolution in its present
form is entirely non-controversial. It represents the
lowest common denominator of the positions of the
Member States on this question, and hence there is no
need for any changes or additions. Let us adopt it and
allow the Court to act freely and impartially within the
framework of its competencies. We are confident that
the Court will know what to do, and that it will take
into account the opinions of all interested Member
States and international organizations. We hold that the
most prudent way to proceed today is to adopt our draft
resolution without opposition, in the same way that it
was decided at the General Committee to include this
item in the agenda.
The Republic of Serbia’s steadfast pursuit of this
peaceful course of action is a demonstration of our firm
commitment to the international system that we have
all helped to build.
History has placed the problem of Kosovo’s
unilateral declaration of independence before us all.
The choice of whether to act through law is upon us.
By acting concertedly in support of our draft

2

resolution, we will have come together to help restore
the sacrosanct character of the Charter of the United
Nations, the document that binds us to one another as a
world community of sovereign equals. And, by seizing
the present moment, we will have begun to further
enhance the enduring benefit and honour of the
founding principles of the United Nations.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Colleagues
will be aware of the letter I wrote to the President on
1 October (A/63/461), enclosing a note of issues raised
by the Serbian request for the General Assembly to
seek an advisory opinion from the International Court
of Justice on the legality of Kosovo’s declaration of
independence.
Let me start by making clear that the United
Kingdom is a strong supporter of the International
Court of Justice. We have for many years accepted the
Court’s compulsory jurisdiction. We are one of only 65
States with a current optional clause declaration, under
article 36 (2) of the Court’s Statute, giving the Court
jurisdiction over a wide range of matters. We support
the use of the Court by Member States to resolve their
disputes and the right of United Nations institutions to
seek advisory opinions on questions affecting the
performance of their functions.
Why, it might be asked, are we now raising
questions about the Serbian request? The reason is that
the Serbian request is primarily for political rather than
legal reasons. It is designed to slow down Kosovo’s
emergence as a widely recognized independent nation,
playing its part in the international institutions of the
world. Many members of the United Nations emerged
into independence during what, at the time, were
controversial circumstances. These circumstances
normalize over time and the clock of history is rarely
turned back. Kosovo’s independence is and will remain
a reality. The Government of Serbia will have to decide
how it comes to terms with that reality.
Kosovo’s independence has now been recognized
by 22 out of 27 member States of the European Union,
an organization that Serbia aspires to join. We too want
to see Serbia as a member of the European Union. To
that end, Serbia will need to work constructively with
its future European Union partners to maximize
stability in the region, including in Kosovo, so that we
can achieve our goal of bringing the whole region and
its peoples to a stable and more prosperous future.

08-54101

A/63/PV.22

In Security Council debates on this issue, I have
set out that the United Kingdom is confident in its legal
position as a State that has recognized the
independence of Kosovo following the final status
process, which was conducted pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999).
In terms of the draft resolution before us, my
delegation regrets that our Serbian colleagues have
declined to seek a consensual way forward. They have,
on the contrary, decided to push this draft resolution
through the General Assembly with minimal debate
about the issues. That is not the custom in the General
Assembly, and it is regrettable that Serbia has decided
to pursue that course. In the light of our reservations on
matters of both substance and procedure, the United
Kingdom will abstain on this resolution.
If the resolution is adopted, the question will
need to be addressed against the background of the full
context of the dissolution of Yugoslavia in so far as it
affects Kosovo, starting with Belgrade’s unilateral
decision in 1989 to remove Kosovo’s autonomy
through to events of the present day.
Serbia complains about the unilateral declaration
of Kosovo in February 2008. But it was Serbia that, in
a unilateral move of its own, rendered successful
negotiations impossible. In November 2006, while the
United Nations status envoy was conducting talks,
Serbia brought forward a new constitution that
unilaterally reasserted control over Kosovo. That
constitution was narrowly approved by a referendum.
But well over a million Kosovo Albanians, people
whom Serbia was by its new constitution claiming as
its own, were effectively excluded from voting. And
the effect of the constitution was to tie the hands of the
Serbian negotiators to the point where they could not
even accept a status-neutral proposal put forward by
the European Union.
That status-neutral proposal in December 2007
represented the last chance for a negotiated settlement,
and it was rejected by Serbia. So, in coordination with
many of the countries most closely involved in
stabilizing the Balkans, Kosovo’s Assembly declared
Kosovo independent on 17 February 2008. The
declaration committed Kosovo to full implementation
of the United Nations envoy’s Comprehensive Proposal
for the Kosovo Status Settlement, including the most
extensive safeguards for minority communities
anywhere in Europe, together with international

08-54101

supervision. In the past eight months, 48 countries
have recognized Kosovo as a sovereign independent
State; and that number is set to grow.
If this draft resolution is adopted, my delegation
invites the Court to proceed in accordance with the
principle that, without prejudice to the advisory
opinion being sought, all parties with an interest,
including the Government of Kosovo, should be able to
present arguments on an equal footing.
My Government’s overwhelming concern in its
policy towards the Balkans over this last 18 years has
been to provide for peace and stability and to build a
basis for long-term prosperity in the region. Those
principles continue to guide us today. The people of
Serbia have made a strategic choice in their recent
election, one that my Government welcomes. We will
do what we can to facilitate Serbia’s integration into
Europe. We will expect in return that the Government
of Serbia will cooperate fully with the European Union
in achieving stability in the southern Balkans for
generations to come. Our disagreement with Serbia
over the tactics that it is adopting on this particular
issue will not distract us from our strategic objectives
that we believe are widely shared and advance the
interests of the people of the Balkans as a whole.
Mr. Neritani (Albania): Each and every Member
State has the right to operate within our current
Charter-defined system and to use the rules of
procedure, including even some loopholes, in order to
clarify an issue, solve a dispute between parties,
remedy a situation and/or seek an opinion. The
International Court of Justice is a very well respected
body in this regard and we strongly support it.
This institutional right comes together with the
responsibility to exercise it objectively and in good
faith. This nexus becomes more relevant because the
issue at hand involves all of us as Members of this
institution. The sense of purpose and the practical
utility of this exercise must be based on that equation.
Let us go one small step further. The intentional
reduction of the complex issue of Kosovo into a simple
aspect, namely, the legal one, is an attempt to establish
a situation outside of its context, cutting it away from
its root causes. In other words, it attempts to establish a
false connection between cause and effect.
The General Assembly deserves the truth and
information that are known on the subject. Any

3

A/63/PV.22

intentional attempt to conceal the facts or to make a
presentation based on half-truths is not a good-faith
attempt in approaching this issue. Our institution’s
competence and its ability to take ownership of this
issue hinge on a fair approach to this question.
The involvement of the General Assembly
membership in this debate must have a purpose. I
believe that the General Assembly need not be engaged
in a debate aimed at meeting certain bars in the
domestic politics of a particular Member State, bars
raised artificially because of very painful events in the
recent past.
A projected prolongation of the Kosovo
recognition process is not in and of itself a good reason
and a bona fide purpose for engaging the General
Assembly membership in this debate. We have to be
engaged and resolve, not freeze or block, certain
developments that are proving to have a positive result
on the ground for the present and the future.
In
its
known
historical
and
political
developments, Kosovo constitutes a unique case. This
is true for each and every person that knows the facts
on the ground and views them without any speculation
or bias. For the sake of a violent and non-consensual
break-up of the former Yugoslavia, a biblical exodus of
1 million Kosovar Albanians and thousands killed and
disappeared, including into mass graves, took place
only nine years ago. That State-run ethnic cleansing
enterprise and genocide was stopped thanks to the
intervention of international community, which,
entirely legally, administered Kosovo until its
declaration of independence.
The potential engagement of the International
Court of Justice (ICJ) in this unique case, as it is
presented in the draft resolution before us — that is,
out of context — and the offering of an opinion based
upon an intentionally singled-out element — the legal
one — could lay the groundwork for interpretations
that could have wider latitude and scale of application.
While not anything close to a theoretically established
precedent, this would reflect a top-down approach.
Kosovo in and of itself is not a precedent. Pushing the
envelope on this question by engaging the General
Assembly might create a precedent, although a
negative one, with potentially bad applications
elsewhere.
On another technical matter, the wording
“unilaterally declared independence”: the word

4

“unilateral” is not a factual representation, but a biased
interpretation. The legal act of declaration of
independence may have different qualifiers. As the
General Assembly is discussing an issue to be referred
to the ICJ, biased rhetoric that deviates from a factual
representation of the circumstances on the ground is
not a good reflection on the competence of the General
Assembly.
We respectfully disagree with this attempt, which
is logistically legal, but which is in essence a
manipulative attempt to stall the process of recognition
of Kosovo and to cause as much detrimental effect on
the ground as possible. We believe that the Balkans
deserve to channel these enormous energies towards
building our common future with prosperity for all of
us. Old stereotypes of getting even are outdated,
everywhere.
We call upon other members to vote against draft
resolution A/63/L.2.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): Peace and stability in the
Balkans have always been of the utmost importance for
Turkey. In line with this, we are determined to further
our relations with all Balkan countries in all fields. In
this context, we value the close relations we have with
Serbia and believe that that country’s welfare and
stability are indispensable to the well-being of the
greater Balkan region and of Europe.
At the same time, Turkey has historical ties and
strong fraternal bonds with the Kosovar people. Turkey
was one of the first countries to have recognized
Kosovo, and it is our view that this recognition is also
consistent with international law. In fact, 48 countries
have recognized Kosovo, and that only bolsters that
conclusion.
We understand the particular reasons that have
led Serbia to seek an advisory opinion from the
International Court of Justice (ICJ). However, we do
not think that this will help achieve the desired and
immediately needed atmosphere of peace, stability and
security in the Balkans.
On the other hand, Turkey strongly supports the
ICJ as the principal judiciary organ of the United
Nations. Therefore, out of respect for the ICJ, Turkey
will not challenge the right of Serbia to have recourse
to the ICJ and will not participate in the vote.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): After
years of war, post-communist transition and deep

08-54101

A/63/PV.22

hardship and suffering, the people of the Balkans,
including those in Serbia and Kosovo, have rejected
the destructive nationalism that brought them such
misery in the 1990s. They seek a future as integrated,
prosperous citizens of Europe.
Under the leadership of a democratically elected,
multi-ethnic Government, the Republic of Kosovo
today is at peace. The Government in Pristina has
scrupulously followed the comprehensive proposal for
the Kosovo status settlement developed by the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy.
Kosovo has adopted a far-reaching constitution
and has enacted 41 pieces of legislation to implement
the comprehensive proposal. These include specific
provisions which protect the rights of all ethnic
minorities as well as the religious and cultural heritage
of the population. Kosovo’s Government has also acted
with vision in seeking strong relations with all its
neighbours, including Serbia.
For its part, Serbia is on the path to European
integration, having recently signed a Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union.
The United States firmly believes that our
common concern should be to focus our efforts to help
shape this European future for Serbia and Kosovo.
Specifically, we are extending economic and political
support to both of these countries. We hope they will
integrate further into international markets and
structures, which will guarantee peace and prosperity
for all of the region’s peoples.
However, we do not think that the draft resolution
proposed by Serbia advances that goal. Let me make
clear that the United States offers its full support to the
International Court of Justice (ICJ) and its role in
providing
advisory
opinion
in
appropriate
circumstances.
In regard to the specific question before us, on
referring the declaration of independence of Kosovo
Provisional Institutions of Self-Governance to the
International Court of Justice, we respectfully suggest
that an advisory opinion on this question is
unnecessary and unhelpful. Therefore, the United
States will vote against referral.
As a practical matter, Kosovo’s independence is
irreversible. Forty-eight countries have recognized
Kosovo as an independent State, including 22 of the 27
members of the European Union. We are confident that

08-54101

recognition of Kosovo’s independence by an everincreasing number of States is consistent with
international law.
We do not think it appropriate or fair to the Court
to ask it to opine on what is essentially a matter that is
reserved to the judgement of Member States. We ask
members to consider the potential consequences if
other Members or separatist movements within their
countries were to seize upon language, in any opinion
the Court might render, to bolster their own claims for
or against independence.
Should this draft resolution go forward, the Court
will, understandably, have to look at the referred
question with extreme care, taking into account the
particular context in which the events leading to
Kosovo’s declaration occurred. Kosovo must be
viewed within the context of the violent dissolution of
the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s. The policies of that
period led the Security Council to adopt resolution
1244 (1999), which authorized the United Nations to
administer Kosovo and called for a political process to
determine
Kosovo’s
status.
After
intensive
negotiations, the United Nations Special Envoy
recommended to the Secretary-General that Kosovo
become an independent State. It is also important that
the Court hear from the States most directly interested
in this matter — Serbia and Kosovo — on an equal
basis, as well as from the many other States that can be
expected to make contributions to the Court’s
consideration of the case.
The United States welcomes and supports the
remarkable progress made in the Balkan region
towards building stable, multi-ethnic democracies and
laying the groundwork for growth and development.
Although we may disagree with Serbia on the issue
before us today, the United States will work closely
with Serbia and all other countries in South-Eastern
Europe to advance our shared vision of a Europe that is
whole, free and at peace.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful for the opportunity to express the legal opinion
of the Government of Mexico on this important issue.
Draft resolution A/63/L.2, submitted by Serbia, is
based on the prerogative, conferred on the General
Assembly in Article 96 of the Charter of the United
Nations, to request the International Court of Justice to
give an advisory opinion on any legal question.

5

A/63/PV.22

Since the founding of the United Nations, Mexico
has been a firm and constant promoter of the principles
of justice and international law enshrined in the
Charter and of the International Court of Justice, which
is the jurisdictional body par excellence for the
peaceful resolution of disputes arising from the
interpretation of international law.

of the Charter of the United Nations, to request the
International Court of Justice, pursuant to article 65 of
the Statute of the Court, to render an advisory opinion
on the following question: “Is the unilateral declaration
of independence by the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment of Kosovo in accordance with
international law?”

The rule of law, to which we, the members of the
international community, are subject, is possible only if
it is equipped with effective jurisdictional mechanisms
for the peaceful resolution of disputes arising from
specific interpretations or applications of international
law. The International Court of Justice, as the principal
judicial organ at the international level, makes an
invaluable contribution to consolidating the rule of law
through its opinions on specific legal issues arising in
the exercise of its advisory jurisdiction.

Should the draft resolution be adopted, the Court
would proceed to establish the scope of the work
arising from the request. Resources have been provided
in the programme budget for the biennium 2008-2009
for the Court to provide advisory opinions as requested
by organs of the United Nations and specialized
agencies. It is anticipated, however, that, owing to the
complexity of the question on which the Court is
requested in the draft resolution to render an advisory
opinion, adoption of the draft resolution is expected to
give rise to additional resource requirements.

The General Assembly, for its part, also plays an
important role in consolidating the rule of law by
entrusting to the Court — and thereby strengthening
it — specific legal issues on which there is some
disagreement. In Mexico’s opinion, the initiative and
the text of Serbia’s request for an advisory opinion are
in keeping with the framework established in
paragraph 2 of article 65 of the Statute of the
International Court of Justice. Likewise, draft
resolution A/63/L.2 fully meets the requirements set
out in the Charter of the United Nations whereby the
General Assembly may request an advisory opinion
from the International Court of justice on a specific
legal question referred to it.
In the light of all those considerations, Mexico
will vote in favour of the draft resolution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/63/L.2. In that connection, I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department of General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/63/L.2, I wish to place on record the
following statement of programme budget implications
on behalf of the Secretary-General, in accordance with
rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly.

On the basis of a determination by the Court of
the scope of work, a detailed statement of programme
budget implications would be submitted to the General
Assembly for its consideration during its present
session.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
call on those representatives who wish to speak in
explanation of vote before the voting. May I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mrs. Miculescu (Romania): My delegation
would like to underline the following before the voting.
Compliance with international law is the very essence
of our Organization and the matrix on which we strive
to build international peace, stability and security.
Draft resolution A/63/L.2 contains a question that is
fully in line with the simple right of recourse to
international law, to which any United Nations
Member is entitled to benefit under the Charter itself.
Romania fully trusts the advisory opinions of the
International Court of Justice, the main judicial organ
of the United Nations, a prominent promoter and
guardian of international law. We are absolutely sure
that its opinion on the question raised in the draft
resolution will assist us in making decisions in the
future, in particular when fundamental issues such as
the sovereignty and territorial integrity are at stake.

By draft resolution A/63/L.2, the General
Assembly would decide, in accordance with Article 96

6

08-54101

A/63/PV.22

In the light of those considerations, Romania has
decided to vote in favour of draft resolution A/63/L.2.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): Slovakia, as a matter of
principle, respects the right of every Member State to
seek advisory opinions from the International Court of
Justice as the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations and one of the principal organs of the United
Nations. In that context, Slovakia will vote in favour of
the General Assembly draft resolution submitted by
Serbia that is before us today.
Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Panama
has decided to vote in favour of draft resolution
A/63/L.2, whereby the General Assembly would
request an advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice concerning the legality of the unilateral
declaration of independence by Kosovo, because we
believe in the peaceful settlement of disputes. We
support the rule of law and believe in the authority,
capability and independence of the International Court
of Justice. Panama is voting on the understanding that
all parties, in particular the authorities of Serbia and
Kosovo, will be given the opportunity to express their
views before the Court.
While we support the draft resolution being
considered, at the same time I wish to make it clear
that our support does not affect or predetermine the
political decision that Panama may or may not take to
recognize the independence of Kosovo.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): Egypt believes that the
agenda item in question should be considered strictly
within the legal and judicial context. Our view is based
on the following considerations.
First, every Member State has the right to request
an advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice and the General Assembly has the responsibility
to grant that request in accordance with Article 96 of
the Charter. Egypt believes in the importance of the
legal and moral values of the Court’s judgments and
opinions and the important role it has to play in
resolving international conflicts with the needed
objectivity, independence and neutrality in a manner
that would enhance the rule of law at the international
level.
Secondly, Egypt is committed to the collective
position of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM)
reflected in many NAM documents, the latest of which
is the final document of the fifteenth ministerial

08-54101

conference of the Non-Aligned Movement, held in
Teheran from 27 to 30 July 2008, in which the
Movement
“Invites also the General Assembly, the other
organs of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies duly authorized, to request advisory
opinions of the International Court of Justice on
legal questions arising within the scope of their
activities”.
It is clear, in our opinion, that the question is a legal
and not a political issue and thus falls within the
purview of the General Assembly in that regard.
Thirdly, strengthening the role of the United
Nations and in particular that of the General Assembly
when dealing with issues related to sovereignty and
territorial integrity, as two of the main principles of the
United Nations Charter and of international law, entails
recognition of the pivotal role of the International
Court of Justice as the principal judicial organ of the
Organization. The General Assembly should not shy
away from its responsibility to establish the necessary
legal and judicial opinions in this case and in any case
that entails a dispute in the application of the principles
of the Charter or any principles of international law.
Therefore, Egypt will vote in favour of the draft
resolution submitted by the Republic of Serbia in
document A/63/L.2.
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
As is well known, the Spanish Government believes
that respect for international law is the fundamental
principle governing the actions of States and
international organizations, and in particular the United
Nations, in the context of their international relations.
Spain has therefore placed that fundamental principle
at the core of all its actions in the international arena,
while at the same time giving the United Nations an
unparalleled leading role in that regard.
It is also well known that the Spanish
Government attaches great importance to the correct
functioning of the principal organs of the Organization,
including the General Assembly and the International
Court of Justice, and to interaction among those organs
to promote the achievement of the purposes and
principles of the United Nations, in accordance with
the Charter.
In that regard, we feel that, in the general interest
of the Organization and the international community as

7

A/63/PV.22

a whole, it would be advisable to provide the Assembly
with an authorized opinion of the main judicial body of
the United Nations on the legal aspects of issues that,
such as the present one regarding Kosovo, have been
the object of diverse interpretations by Member States.
Moreover, we believe that it will ultimately fall to
this Assembly and the other bodies of the United
Nations to draw the conclusions they deem appropriate
concerning the advisory opinion that the International
Court of Justice will pronounce at the proper moment,
without, at this stage at least, drawing any preliminary
conclusions or conditioning in any way the actions of
the main judicial organ of the United Nations, which
enjoys full independence and impartiality in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
its statutes.
Therefore, Spain will vote in favour of the draft
resolution submitted by Serbia, contained in document
A/63/L.2.
Mr. Mourikis (Greece): As a matter of principle,
Greece believes that every State has the prerogative to
request an advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice on issues of importance and relevance to
international law. We would also like to stress that we
recognize and respect the authority and competence of
the Court to investigate issues of international law and
express views and opinions on such topics.
As regards the draft resolution submitted by
Serbia (A/63/L.2) on referring the issue of the
unilateral declaration of independence by Kosovo to
the International Court of Justice and request that it be
examined for its legality in accordance with
international law, Greece is of the opinion that such a
request is based on international law and practice and
we would like to express our support for it.
We believe that the text of that draft resolution is
based on the inalienable right of every State to seek the
advice and opinions of the most relevant juridical
authority within the United Nations system through the
approval of the General Assembly.
Therefore, Greece will vote in favour of the draft
resolution submitted by Serbia.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): On
17 February 2008, the Assembly of Kosovo declared
the independence of the Republic of Kosovo. That
declaration of independence marked the end of a very
specific historical sequence — the violent

8

dismemberment of the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s,
followed by a long period of international
administration under the aegis of the United Nations.
It is also the result of the process of defining
Kosovo’s status, which was provided for by Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). The common
European prospects offered to Kosovo and to Serbia
are also a very specific characteristic of the situation.
The independence of Kosovo is thus a sui generis case
that does not call into question the issues of
sovereignty and territorial integrity that lie at the very
core of international relations.
In such conditions, on 18 February France
decided to recognize the new State, as have 22 of the
27 members of the European Union since then. Since
the entry into force of the Constitution on 15 June,
moreover, the Republic of Kosovo possesses a
legislative framework that conforms to European
norms and values and provides a framework for
protecting all communities living in Kosovo.
In that context, France marked its disagreement
with Serbia’s draft resolution (A/63/L.2), which would
request an advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice on the legality on the declaration of
independence of Kosovo. France fully backs the Court,
which is the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, but to us the request for an advisory opinion
proposed by Serbia is neither useful, since the situation
of independent Kosovo recognized by 48 sovereign
States seems to us to be devoid of any legal
uncertainties, nor appropriate, since it does not
contribute to the necessary easing of tensions and
could complicate the European prospects for the
western Balkans.
In those conditions, France will abstain in the
voting.
To overcome the divisions of the past, Europe
offered a European future to the people of the western
Balkans. France remains dedicated to that basic goal,
which should be a priority for all. We remain especially
resolved to help Serbia to engage on the path of a
European future. The integration of Serbia into the
European family is important to the stability of the
region.
In that regard, France reiterates its belief that
Serbia can accelerate the progress of its rapprochement
with Europe. It recalls that the European Union has

08-54101

A/63/PV.22

also expressed its readiness to assist Kosovo in its
economic and political development by providing it
with at a clear European prospect.
Lastly, France wishes to underscore the European
Union’s frequently reiterated resolve to play a lead role
in stabilizing the region, particularly through the
deployment of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission throughout Kosovo. In that respect, France
encourages the Serbian Government to adopt a
constructive approach to the efforts undertaken by the
European Union to contribute to peace and stability in
the Western Balkans.
Mr. Hadjimichael (Cyprus): My delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution contained in
document A/63/L.2. We consider that, as a matter of
principle, it is the prerogative of every State to seek an
advisory opinion from the International Court of
Justice on matters that affect its vital interests and that
pertain to the fundamental principles of international
law.
We believe that the unilateral declaration of
independence by Kosovo’s provisional institutions is
an issue that merits legal clarity and that the Court can
provide valuable guidance to States thereon through
the exercise of its advisory function.
Our decision to support the draft resolution
before us is based on and forms an integral part of a
principled policy that the Republic of Cyprus has
consistently advocated. It derives from our support for
the rule of law and the international legal order and our
conviction that adherence to international law is an
indispensable element that determines the conduct of
States in international relations.
My Government will continue to caution against
the interpretation of international law according to
political expediencies, and strongly to support the
peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with the
United Nations Charter, including through the tools
provided therein.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Indonesia has been
consistent in expressing its preference for the path of
dialogue and diplomacy in resolving the question of
the final status of Kosovo. That principled position
remains.
Indonesia has also been steadfast in upholding the
rule of law and the Charter of the United Nations in
governing relations among States. We deem it of

08-54101

paramount importance to maintain the integrity of the
United Nations Charter and international law. That
principled position also remains. Paragraph 1 of Article
96 of the Charter provides that “The General Assembly
or the Security Council may request the International
Court of Justice to give an advisory opinion on any
legal question”.
For the aforementioned reasons, Indonesia will
vote in favour of the draft resolution (A/63/L.2)
currently before the General Assembly on the request
for an advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on whether the unilateral declaration of
independence of Kosovo is in accordance with
international law.
Mr. Malmierca Díaz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba supports the legitimate right of any Member State
to request an advisory opinion from the International
Court of Justice. The draft resolution contained in
document A/63/L.2, introduced by Serbia, is an
expression of its legitimate right to request an advisory
opinion of the Court concerning the unilateral
declaration of independence by Kosovo.
Cuba believes that the draft resolution is in
keeping with the purposes and principles of the Charter
and international law. The draft resolution, moreover,
is consistent with the positions adopted by the
Non-Aligned Movement concerning the relationship
between the General Assembly and the International
Court of Justice. For those reasons, Cuba will vote in
favour of draft resolution A/63/L.2.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation will
vote in favour of draft resolution A/63/L.2. The
International Court of Justice is an organ of this
Organization and my delegation has full confidence
that its decision will be important and inclusive of all
opinions. While it may be true that 48 countries have
recognized Kosovo, it is also important to note that 144
countries of this Assembly have not taken that
decision. It is for that reason that we support the right
of the Republic of Serbia to seek the advice of the
International Court of Justice.
Mr. Oussein (Comoros) (spoke in French): We
have every confidence in the impartiality of the
International Court of Justice and the role it must play
in international conflicts to preserve the primacy of
international law. The Union of the Comoros is also
attached to the fundamental principle of respect for the
territorial integrity of States and condemns any form of

9

A/63/PV.22

secession that would undermine the fundamental
principles of the Organization. The Union of the
Comoros will therefore vote in favour of draft
resolution A/63/L.2.
Mr. Ballestero (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
We have adopted a principled position of respect for
the primacy of international law in conformity with the
United Nations Charter. That is why we have supported
and continue to support the path chosen by Serbia on
the issue of Kosovo.
Everyone is aware of Costa Rica’s position on
Kosovo. As a State that is respectful of international
law, we recognized their independence and have
adopted a position that we deem legally valid.
However, precisely because there are divergences in
legal interpretations of the situation, we are convinced
that an advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice would be desirable and bring clarity to the
discussion.
As a State that respects international law, we will
vote in favour of draft resolution A/63/L.2. We believe
that the advisory opinion will certainly assist all
Member States in making their own decisions.
Mr. Baghaei Hamaneh (Islamic Republic of
Iran): The Islamic Republic of Iran would like to
reaffirm its firm commitment to and high respect for
the principles of the pacific settlement of disputes and
the rule of law at the international level, as embodied
in the United Nations Charter. My delegation’s vote
today in favour of draft resolution A/63/L.2 should be
regarded as an indication of our principled
commitment to that high principle.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French):
Algeria firmly supports the work of the International
Court of Justice and believes in the primacy of
international law in international relations. Moreover,
draft resolution A/63/L.2 before us contains no
elements of a political or controversial nature. Algeria
believes it to be the prerogative of any State to request
an advisory opinion of the Court, in conformity with
Article 96 of the Charter. For those reasons, Algeria
will vote in favour of draft resolution A/63/L.2.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote before the
voting. The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/63/L.2.

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Chile, China,
Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Fiji, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Madagascar,
Mauritius, Mexico, Montenegro, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Philippines, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Timor-Leste, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Andorra, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada,
Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Grenada, Haiti, Hungary, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malaysia,
Malta,
Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Vanuatu, Yemen.

A recorded vote has been requested.

10

08-54101

A/63/PV.22

Draft resolution A/63/L.2 was adopted by
77 votes to 6, with 74 abstentions (resolution
63/3).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Ecuador,
Ethiopia, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela advised
the Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour; the delegation of Tonga advised the
Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The President (spoke in Spanish): I call on the
representative of Liberia on a point of order.
Mrs. Osode (Liberia): Liberia voted against the
draft resolution; I repeatedly pressed the red button,
but without result.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I have been
informed by the Secretariat – which is so informing the
representative of Liberia – that, in accordance with the
provisions of Article 19 of the Charter, Liberia may not
vote.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
I now call on representatives who wish to speak
in explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I regret the
fact that the vote of Liberia could not be counted. It
has been clear from the performance this morning that
we are having technical problems in the General
Assembly and it would have surely been right to have
taken into account the fact that those technical
problems extended to the vote as well as to the
speakers.
In my statement in the debate, I set out a number
of reservations on the part of the United Kingdom with
regards to the draft resolution which has just been
adopted. Those reservations led us to abstain in the
voting, notwithstanding our long-standing support for
the International Court of Justice.
It is striking that more Member States felt unable
to support the resolution than voted in favour of it. We
might infer from this that we are far from alone in
having deep reservations. The United Kingdom
welcomes the use of the advisory jurisdiction of the
Court in appropriate cases, but we question the utility

08-54101

of the question being raised by Serbia. An advisory
opinion cannot in itself determine Kosovo’s status.
The position of the United Kingdom reflects our
conviction that implementation of the comprehensive
settlement proposed by an independent Kosovo under
international supervision offers the best chance for
Kosovo, Serbia and the region to achieve peace,
stability and prosperity.
The United Kingdom also regrets the lack of
substantive debates within the General Assembly on
the draft resolution, including on the context and the
formulation of the question and on the desirability of
signalling, in the interest of fairness, that Kosovo
should be allowed to present its arguments to the
Court.
For all those reasons, the United Kingdom
abstained in the voting on the resolution. Nevertheless,
we recognize that the question which the General
Assembly has decided to ask the Court raises
significant issues of international law. We are confident
of our legal position as a State that recognized the
independence of Kosovo following the final status
process, which was conducted pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999).
The United Kingdom looks forward to engaging
constructively with the Court to assist in its
considerations of those important issues. In parallel,
we look to Serbia to engage constructively with the
European Union on promoting stability in the region.
Mr. McNee (Canada): Let me begin by saying
that Canada fully supports the role of the International
Court of Justice as an instrument in the pacific
settlement of disputes. Canada’s vote today is not
intended to detract from that important principle. It is
our view, however, that the case raises highly political
matters that are unsuitable for judicial review.
Moreover, Canada is of the view that the referral
put before us in resolution 63/3 and the frame of
reference it purports to set for the International Court
of Justice are unlikely to result in an advisory opinion
that could usefully contribute to fostering stability in
the region. At a minimum, the resolution would have
benefited from the inclusion of additional context to
reflect the unique circumstances of the case. For those
reasons, Canada abstained in the voting on the
resolution.

11

A/63/PV.22

Let me conclude by saying that Canada takes the
view that, as a matter of basic fairness, Kosovo should
be given the opportunity to present its case to the
Court.
Mr. Pereyra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
recognized
Kosovo
on
22
February
2008,
understanding that in this case there is a set of peculiar
humanitarian circumstances that make it unique. In that
regard, Peru’s decision to recognize Kosovo constitutes
a sovereign act of its foreign policy. In Peru’s view, the
legality of Kosovo’s independence is, in the light of
international law, fully justified by the peculiar
circumstances that make this an exceptional case.
Peru reiterates its firm commitment to respect the
norms and principles of international law and, in
particular, the principle of peaceful settlement of
disputes. Therefore, Peru reaffirms its emphatic
backing of the International Court of Justice as the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations, whether
it is acting in its judicial capacity or whether recourse
is made to it for an advisory opinion.
In the current case, Peru would like to highlight
that Article 96 of the Charter clearly establishes that it
is within the competence of the General Assembly, the
Security Council or other organs or specialized
agencies that are authorized by the General Assembly
to request advisory opinions of the Court on legal
matters. Thus, Peru respects Serbia’s right to place
such a request before the General Assembly. Given the
particular circumstances of the case, the relevance of
Kosovo’s arguments and points of view must be
considered. Lastly, Peru would, once again, emphasize
that it will continue to act, in connection with this case,
in keeping with its long tradition of respect for the
norms and principles of international law, specifically
those that govern peaceful settlement of disputes.
Mr. Matussek (Germany): Germany is strongly
committed to the International Court of Justice and to
the important role of international law in governing
relations between States. However, any action by the
General Assembly should contribute to the aim of
advancing a just, lasting and stable settlement in
Kosovo and in the Western Balkans as a whole. It is in
this spirit that Germany has approached the request for
an advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on the specific issue raised today by the
Republic of Serbia.

12

Again, in this vein, we do not believe that the
resolution we have just adopted will help advance this
cause. Moreover, we remain doubtful that an advisory
opinion of the Court would serve the stated purpose, in
affording guidance to the General Assembly on
questions of international law relevant to the
performance of its functions. In any case, Germany
would trust that the Court will proceed according to the
principle of fairness and will be hearing arguments as
appropriate. At the same time and out of this respect
for this Hall, we do not want to oppose the requests
supported by a considerable portion of the General
Assembly’s members. It is for these reasons that
Germany has chosen to abstain on the resolution.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
pillar of the United Nations system is international
peace and security. The principal organ of the
Organization with powers in this area is the Security
Council. The whole of the collective security system is
based on the fact that Members of the United Nations
are duty bound to abide by the relevant resolutions of
the Organization.
In the case of Kosovo, Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), for which Argentina voted in
the affirmative, establishes clearly the legal and
political parameters for the solution to the situation of
the Kosovar minority in Serbia, ensuring the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia, as well
as the settlement of the disputes through a negotiated
agreement that is mutually accepted by all parties.
Argentina believes that that resolution is clear.
Nevertheless, we join with the majority in agreeing to
the request for an advisory opinion on this matter.
Ms. Lintonen (Finland): The International Court
of Justice plays a crucial role in the peaceful settlement
of disputes and in the promotion and application of
international law. It has made considerable
contributions to the development of international law,
also through its advisory powers.
Finland has recognized the compulsory
jurisdiction of the Court since 1958 without any
reservations. We have actively participated in efforts to
promote wider acceptance of the Court’s jurisdiction.
We have also supported the Secretary-General’s trust
fund to assist States in the settlement of disputes
through the Court. Consistent support for the Court and
the rule of law in international relations is an integral
part of Finland’s foreign policy.

08-54101

A/63/PV.22

However, Finland has abstained in the vote on the
resolution. Our abstention is related to the subject of
the resolution. Finland is among the 48 countries that
have recognized Kosovo. While we do recognize that
an advisory opinion on the subject of the request could
have the potential of clarifying important legal
questions, we are concerned about any developments
that may create uncertainty as to the status of Kosovo
and the instabilities in the region. We also regret that
the Assembly has not decided to indicate, in the
resolution, that Kosovo should be allowed to
participate in the proceedings. In order for the court to
deliver a fully reasoned opinion of this topic, all
relevant actors should be able to present arguments on
the subject.
Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Australia
recognizes the right of every State to raise matters
before the General Assembly for consideration by the
Assembly. In particular, we respect the right of Serbia
to bring this request for an advisory opinion from the
International Court of Justice to the Assembly.
Australia is a strong supporter of the International
Court of Justice as the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations and recognizes that the advisory
jurisdiction of the Court is an important part of the
international system established by the United Nations
Charter. We assess the merits of requests for advisory
opinions on a case by case basis. In this case, we were
not convinced of the merits of having the Court
consider this question and Australia was therefore
unable to support this resolution. We consider that
Kosovo should be universally recognized as an
independent State in the interests of promoting peace
and stability in the region. An advisory opinion would
serve only to delay efforts for peace and stability.
What is important now is that the international
community, in particular the United Nations and the
European Union, continue efforts to bring about a
lasting and peaceful future for Kosovo and the region
and that the Serbian Government continues to engage
with European and other parties in the interests of the
stability and economic development of the region and
its own future peace, stability and prosperity.
As the question is now being referred to the Court
for an advisory opinion, we considered it appropriate
for Kosovo to be represented in the proceedings and to
present arguments in its own name. We would like to
make a final point. In responding to Liberia’s
intervention, the President of the General Assembly

08-54101

indicated that Liberia cannot vote — at least that is the
way it was rendered in English. I think it should be
recorded that, in fact, Liberia did vote. The fact that the
vote was not registered because of a technical
difficulty is a matter of regret.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia has asked to take the floor to explain its
abstention in the voting on resolution 63/3, introduced
under agenda item 71, concerning the request for an
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on whether the unilateral declaration of independence
of Kosovo is in accordance with international law.
In so doing, I wish to underscore, first of all, the
importance that Colombia attaches to the jurisdiction
granted by the Charter of the United Nations to the
International Court of Justice to issue, upon request of
the General Assembly, the Security Council and other
bodies, advisory opinions on legal questions relating to
the way in which they carry out their functions.
As a country that is respectful of international
law, Colombia regards that function as a valuable tool
for the work of the Organization. My country’s
abstention today, while recognizing that jurisdiction, is
also the result of a close consideration of the historical
circumstances that led to Kosovo’s declaration of
independence.
It should be recalled that a long series of events
since the disintegration of the former Yugoslavia led to
instability in the region that affected Kosovo, among
others, necessitating sustained and broad efforts on the
part of the United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, to promote a negotiated settlement among
the parties.
Colombia has absolutely no doubt about its
recognition of the independence of Kosovo. At the
same time, my country takes the view that transparency
and compliance with the existing international legal
order are essential and that the International Court of
Justice, by means of an advisory opinion, can make an
appropriate contribution to that important issue.
Mr. Staur (Denmark): Denmark is a strong
supporter of the International Court of Justice.
Denmark has for more than 50 years accepted the
Court’s compulsory jurisdiction under Article 36 of the
Statute of the Court. We have been a party to a number
of contentious cases before the Court, thereby also in
practice attesting to our belief in a rule-based

13

A/63/PV.22

international legal order and our support for the
principle of peaceful settlement of disputes by
international judicial bodies. Likewise, we believe that
advisory opinions may in some cases be an important
tool for the relevant parties of the United Nations to
seek clarification from the Court on legal questions.
After careful consideration, however, we decided
to abstain in the voting on the Serbian proposal
regarding an advisory opinion. We did so because we
are not convinced of the utility of an advisory opinion
in this case.
Denmark, together with 47 other countries so far,
has recognized Kosovo, and our legal position on
Kosovo’s independence is well known and quite clear.
We believe that stability, development and economic
integration in a broader European context are crucial to
Kosovo and to the entire region. In our view, those
aims are best served through a common effort to
address the real issues and challenges facing the
region. While Denmark will, of course, continue to
contribute to advancing prosperity and development in
the region, we are not convinced that the coming
proceedings will help to advance a forward-looking
agenda focused on improving the everyday lives of the
people in the western Balkan region.
With the adoption of resolution 63/3, we expect
that the proceedings will be fair and comprehensive.
We believe it to be very important that all parties,
including Kosovo, be given adequate access so that
they can present their views before the Court in their
own name, and we expect that that will be the case. A
full picture of the complex background of Kosovo’s
independence must be presented to the Court.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): We believe that
requesting an advisory opinion from the International
Court of Justice is acceptable and can serve to stabilize
the region, even if there are also sound arguments
against engaging the Court in a matter regarding a new
State, given that most peoples enter statehood under
difficult and often turbulent circumstances.
Nevertheless, we believe that the initiative taken
by the Government of Serbia has the better potential
over time to bring stability to the region and to its
countries into European institutions. That is why we
have chosen to support the proposal by Serbia.
Our support cannot, however, be interpreted as
being incompatible with Norway’s recognition of the

14

Republic of Kosovo as an independent State. We trust
that the Court will proceed according to established
principles of judicial fairness and will be hearing and
assessing all relevant arguments from all sides,
including the Government of Kosovo.
Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French): We
have always been attached to the promotion of the rule
of law and international justice. That is why
Switzerland has supported the International Court of
Justice since its founding and considers it to be an
important instrument for the peaceful settlement of
disputes. Switzerland is also committed to peace,
stability and socio-economic development in the region
at issue. The present request for an advisory opinion
could create uncertainties and undermine the stability
and economic development of the region.
It is on the basis of those considerations that we
decided to abstain in today’s voting. Switzerland
decided to recognize the independence of Kosovo after
having carefully examined all relevant questions of
international law. We are therefore convinced that the
International Court of Justice, after having considered
all the aspects at issue, will rule in favour of the
conformity of the declaration of independence of
Kosovo with international law. We call on all interested
parties to be guided by their political and economic
future in Europe.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
Mr. García González (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): El Salvador voted in favour of resolution
63/3 concerning the request for an advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice on whether the
unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo by
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government of
Kosovo was in accordance with international law.
El Salvador recognizes the option available to
Member States, in keeping with Article 96 of the
Charter of the United Nations, to request an advisory
opinion from the International Court of Justice as a
fundamental element of international law. The Court,
in keeping with article 66 of its statute, shall issue an
advisory opinion on the question raised in order to
resolve the dispute by peaceful means, making use of
the international community’s legal and political
instruments for that purpose.

08-54101

A/63/PV.22

In view of the juridical differences that exist
between Member States, El Salvador has supported
today’s initiative and trusts in the value of the
contribution that the International Court of Justice will
be able to make to resolve such sensitive issues within
the framework of international law as it applies to
matters regarding the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States. Similarly, my delegation supports
the role played by the General Assembly in the matter,
since we feel that it is a juridical matter that falls under
its jurisdiction. We reaffirm our commitment to
working to strengthen the General Assembly, in
keeping with the decision of the heads of State and
Government adopted at the Millennium Summit.
Mr. Tow (Singapore): Singapore is sympathetic
to the desire of the people of Kosovo for control over
their own destiny. It is undeniable that the Kosovars
have endured great suffering and terrible treatment in
the past. After the crimes committed against the people
of Kosovo in the early 1990s, many countries,
including Singapore, expressed sympathy and support
for some form of autonomy for Kosovo. However,
Singapore has not, to date, supported Kosovo’s
unilateral declaration of independence, as we are
concerned about the precedent that it could set in other
parts of the world. Our strong preference is for the
issue to be resolved peacefully by all parties
concerned.
In that regard, Singapore voted in favour of
resolution 63/3 as we believe that this is a highly
complex situation and that there is value in clarifying
the interpretation and application of international law.
In that regard, the International Court of Justice is the
appropriate international body to provide an advisory
opinion on the legality of Kosovo’s unilateral
declaration of independence.
Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): Iceland supported the
draft resolution (A/63/L.2) submitted by Serbia. In so
doing, we departed from the position of some other
States that, like us, have recognized Kosovo’s
independence. We do nonetheless share their

08-54101

viewpoints in respect to the developments that gave
rise to Serbia’s proposal. Iceland voted in favour of
resolution 63/3 on the basis of the fundamental
importance of international law, especially for small
States, and with full confidence in and support for the
view that the rules and principles of international law
should always govern the behaviour of States.
The Acting President: For purposes of
clarification with respect to the voting, I wish to draw
the attention of the General Assembly to document
A/63/350, which contains a letter from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the General
Assembly outlining those Member States that are in
arrears under the terms of Article 19 of the Charter of
the United Nations. I cite this document with respect to
one Member in particular, in relation to its vote. The
General Assembly took note of the document at its
1st meeting, on 16 September.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia to make a statement after the adoption
of resolution 63/3.
Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): Serbia believes that this is
a great day for this body and a great day for
international law. Serbia wishes to thank the United
Nations for having provided us with the opportunity to
defend our case and to ask for support for our legal
view in this Chamber. First and foremost, Serbia wants
to thank the countries that have supported resolution
63/3. We wholeheartedly thank those countries that
have demonstrated their solidarity with a course of
action that in our opinion, upholds the very
foundational principles of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations. We look forward to
working constructively with the United Nations and all
Member States regarding the process to determine the
future status of our southern province.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 71.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

15
