TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING: 24/25 OCTOBER 1967
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l369/Rev.l)

,...........,.,.....,....

Page

1

Statement by the President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President and welcome to the representative
of Denmark . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
f’n) Letter dated 24 October 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Republic addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8207);
fb) Letter dated 24 October 1967 from the Permanent Representative of Israel

addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8208)

...........

1

S/PV. 1369

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN HUNDRED

AND SIXTY-NINTH

MEETING

Neld in New York on Tuesday, 24 October 1967, at 9 p.m.
President; Mr. Senjin TSURUOKA

(Japan).

congratulate you on your assumption of office as President
for the month of October. We are meeting today under the
shadow of a grave threat to peace in West Asia. Tonight and
in the days to follow the Council will have to grapple with
the problem of restoring peace in the area. May I say with
all respect, Mr. President, that you have already shown your
mettle by the able manner in which you have been
conducting consultations among the members. I am sure
that under your able and wise guidance the Council will
take steps to consolidate peace in West Asia. My delegation
offers its full co-coperation to you and wishes you
Godspeed in your efforts.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 3691Rev.l)

I. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
(~1 Letter dated 24 October 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8207);
lb) Letter dated 24 October 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8208).

4. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I should
also like to take this opportunity, on behalf of all members
of the Security Council, to welcome the new Permanent
Representative of Denmark to the United Nations, Ambassador Borch, and to express the hope that we shall be
working together with him for a long time. Every one
knows how much Denmark, the country Ambassador Borch
represents, is guided by the desire for peace and how it is
working effectively towards that end.

Statement by the President

1. The PRESIDENT
(translated from French]:
The
present meeting of the Security Council has been convened
at short notice because the President received a message this
afternoon from the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Republic requesting an urgent meeting of the
Security Council [S/8207/. I immediately contacted the
members of the Council with a view to holding a meeting
this evening. Subsequently, the Permanent Representative
of Israel also requested an urgent meeting of the Council

5. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): I am deeply touched,
Mr. President, by the kind words of welcome you have just
addressed to me as I participate for the first time in the
work of this Council. I am conscious of the responsibility
and the privilege of serving in the Security Council. In this
task, however, I shall be aided by the fact that the Danish
Government believes in the United Nations and supports
fully and whole-heartedly the ideals and purposes of the
world Organization. I realize that the previous Danish
representative on the Security Council, the present Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Denmark, enjoyed a relationship
based on friendship and co-operation with his colleagues. It
shall be my endeavour, Mr. President, to establish a similar
relationship with you and the members of the Council.

/S/8208].
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
and welcome to the representative of Denmark

2. The PRESIDENT: Before turning to the business for
which the present meeting of the Security Council was
urgently called I should like, on behalf of the Council and
in my capacity as President for the month of October, to
pay a very warm and sincere tribute to my predecessor, our
good friend Ambassador Parthasarathi, the Permanent
Representative of India, who was President of the Council
during the month of September. Ambassador Parthasarathi’s devotion to peace, his rich experience and his
profound wisdom have set very high standards of excellence
which will greatly inspire me in the performance of my
duties as President of the Council this month and which I
shall do my best to emulate.

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 24 October 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed
to the President of-the Security Council (318207);
fb) Letter dated 24 October 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8208)

3. Mr. PARTI-IASARATHI
(India): Mr. President, I thank
you for your very generous reference to me. May I in turn

6. The PRESIDENT (translated jk~m French): 111 accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and the

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adapted.

1

usual practice of the Security Council, I now propose with
the consent of the Council to invite the representatives of
Israel and the United Arab Republic to take places at the
Council table in order to participate without vote in the
discussion.

report equally reveals the criminal character of the Israel
attack. From the moment Israel began its attack the Chief
of Staff of the military observers in the area made various
proposals to arrange for a cease-fire, yet they were rejected
by Israel.

At the invitation of the B-esident, Mr. G. Rafael (Isruel)
and Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic) took places
at the Council tclble.

13. It is also revealing that when the Chief of Staff of the
military observers made his first proposal for a cease-fireto
take place at 1330 hours GMT, the Israel side proposed
instead that the cease-fire would go into effect at 1530
hours GMT. The Israel plan of aggression obviously needed
two more hours to be fully effective, and on aggression
Israel would not compromise. Other proposals were equally
rebuffed until Israel managed to secure the implementation
of its massive plan of aggression and destruction.

7. The PKESIDENT

(translated from Prench): I have
received a letter dated 24 October /S/8210] addressed to
me by the Minister of Sate for Foreign Affairs of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan requesting that he be
allowed to participate in the Council’s discussion. If there is
no objection, I shall invite him to take a place at the
Council table.

14. The Security Council is required to examine the most
grave and serious aspects of this new Israel aggression. First,
the Israel aggression was carried out against the entire
civilian and industrial life in the Suez area, one of the most
vital industrial sites of the United Arab Republic, The Arab
States have already been accustomed to the barbaric nature
of the Israel aggression against civilian life since the
cease-fire was put into effect. This aggression today comes
as the most serious and criminal act of aggression, a most
violent defiance of the provisions of the Charter and a most
flagrant violation of the Security Council decisions on the
cease-fire.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. M. R$a’i
{Jordan) took a place at the Council table.

8. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have also
received a letter dated 24 October [S/8211] from the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, asking that he
be allowed to participate in the Council’s discussion. If
there are no objections, I shall invite him to take a place at
the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. G. .I, Tomeh
(@r&z) took a place at the Council table.

15. Israel’s policy has been aimed at the total destruction
of civilian and industrial achievements of the United Arab
Republic, as well as the indiscriminate murdering of as
many as possible of the civilian inhabitants. Its various
attwks on and bombardments of the cities along the Suez
Canal and the canal installations; its attacks, which have
caused heavy losses in civilian life and property, were just
the beginning of its plan of destruction of civilian and
industrial life iri the United Arab Republic. Equally, Israel’s
violation of the cease-fire decisions have been marked by a
dangerous escalation against civilian targets-hospitals,
schools, churches and mosques and other humanitarian sites
have been the chosen targets of Israel attacks. Today,
Israel’s aggression has been widely extended and aimed at
the total destruction of industrial and civilian life in the
Suez Canal area.

9. The PRESIDENT (trunslated from French): The Council will now begin its consideration of the item before it.
The first speaker on my list is the representative of the
United Arab Kepublic, on whom I now call.
10. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): The Security
Council has been convened upon the urgent request of the
United Arab Republic to consider the most violept and
barbaric act of war committed by Israel since it launched its
perfidious aggression against my country on 5 June 1967.
The action taken by Israel today in the area of Suez and
against its peaceful inhabitants, with the aim of demolishing
a most vital civilian industrial complex of the United Arab
Republic, violently defies every element of civilization, law
and morality.

16. Israel’s aggression today, on a massive and unprecedented scale, cofnes as a most serious and grave landmark in
the outstanding criminal record of Israel. The Israel
aggression against the civilian population of the United
Arab Republic today is an act of the gravest magnitude and
the most vicious nature. The Security Council, therefore,
has the inescapable responsibility of applying the relevant
provisions envisaged by the Charter to punish the aggressor.
Secondly, Israel’s massive act of aggression today against
the United Arab Republic is totally unprovoked and
premeditated. It follows immediately upon Israel’s aggrep
sive act of last Saturday, 21 October, when the Israel
destroyer Eilat was spotted by the United Arab Republic
naval defensive forces speeding in the territorial waters of
the United Arab Republic towards Port Said.

11. At 2.30 p.m. Cairo local time, the Israel armed forces
took upon themselves the wild task of virtually destroying
every element of civilian life in the area of Suez. The targets
were as follows: to set aflame the oil refineries of the
United Arab Republic; the total destruction of the fertilizer
plant and the petro-chemical plant, as well as the harbour
of Suez and many other civilian and industrial establishments of the United Arab Republic. This mad undertaking
by Israel was entirely without provocation. The city of
Suez is at present in flames. The loss of life is great. Israel’s
aggression is without provocation and totally premeditated,
pre-planned and wantonly carried out.
1’2. The report of General Odd Bull, Chief of Staff of the
military observers in the area is self-explanatory. It clearly
states that Israel carried out its sinister attack on the
civilian targets in the Suez and port of Tawfiq area. The

17. This ac;t naturally prompted the United Arab Republic
defensive forces to resort to measures of self defence. The
2

j

subsequent sinking of the Israel destroyer was only the
result of its violation of the territorial waters of the United
Arab Rbpublic and its attempt to carry out aggression
against the city of Port Said. The record of this Israel
destroyer is well known and it was the Mat which
previously, on 12 July, sank two United Arab Republic
boats in the territorial waters of Port Said. These boats had
instructions from the United Arab Republic Command not
to engage in any combat. The Israel destroyer Eilat fired
upon them and bombarded them, nevertheless, without any
reason whatsoever. They were sunk, in the territorial waters
of the United Arab Republic.
18. It was natural, therefore, that when the Israel destroyer again was spotted speeding in the territorial waters
of the United Arab Republic the United Arab Republic
defensive forces responsible for the defence of the city of
Port Said should attempt to stop its penetration of the
territorial waters and its advance towards Port Said. The
fact that the destroyer Eiht was speeding in the territorial
waters has been confirmed by the Israel side.

its Charter and full resort to the policy of aggression, of
armed attack.
23. The Security Council, by any yardstick of objectivity,
cannot but condemn this policy of Israel and compel the
Israel leaders to account for their complete and unequivocal
disregard of the authority of this Organization. The Israel
aggression against the United Arab Republic today has
reached intolerable limits in threatening international peace
and security. The Security Council must be fully aware of
the serious consequences which the aggression might set in
motion. It should be emphasized here that the inaction of
the Security Council following the Israel aggression on
5 June has only led to the aggression which took place
today, and previously to the many unlawful acts committed
by the the Israel armed forces against the people of the
United Arab Republic and other Arab countries still
occupied by the Israel forces.
24, The grave nature of the Israel aggression today, aside
from its criminal and unprovoked character, brings the
Security Council face to face with its inescapable responsibilities under the Charter. What we face today is a situation
which can neither be tolerated nor allowed to fall into the
pattern of inaction and the policy of drift which the
Security Council has been following since the war of
aggression committed by Israel on 5 June.

19. In his report of 22 October to the Secretary-General
[S/7930/Add43/,
General Odd Bull reported that the
Israel liaison officer told him that the destroyer Eilut was
ten miles off the shores of Port Said. In view of the record
of the destroyer, its previous aggression which led to the
sinking of two United Arab Republic boats in our territorial
waters and the fact that it was this time again speeding in
the territorial waters of the United Arab Republic towards
Port Said, and in the light of the systematic acts of
destruction which have been carried out by the Israel forces
in the area, the United Arab Republic naval forces had no
alternative but to stop the advance of the destroyer. There
is no other act which makes self-defence more fully
legitimate than the act which forced defensive actions upon
us.

25. The Security Council is called upon to apply to its full
capacity and in full awareness of its responsibilities the
provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter and the enforcement measures against Israel, the outlaw of the international community. Not only the people of the United
Arab Republic are watching this meeting, but also the
entire Arab nation, as well as people everywhere who are
rightly and legitimately entitled to expect the most
responsible organ of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security to take a
responsible course of action in meeting this most barbaric
aggression committed by Israel today. This would be the
only sincere, faithful application of the Charter. It is
equally the only course of action which is required if the
Council is aware of its responsibilities for peace and
security.

20. The Council must observe that the advance of the
destroyer Eilat is fully prohibited under the cease-fire
resolutions of the Security Council, particularly its resolution 236 (1967) adopted on 12 June 1967 which prohibited “any forward military movements subsequent to
the cease-fire”. But when the destroyer was sunk last
Saturday, all the Israel leaders and the neo-Nazi generals
made it abundantly clear that they would not tolerate the
defensive action of the United Arab Republic forces and
that the Israel retaliation would be forthcoming.

26. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

I now call on the representative of

27. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): On Saturday, 21 October,
Egyptian naval craft, supplied by the Soviet Union and
equipped with Soviet Komar missiles, attacked the Israel
destroyer EiZat at 1730 hours on the high seas.The ship was
on a routine patrol on its normal course, noted and
observed by the Egyptian authorities for the last few
months, At the time of the attack the Mat was on the
point of completing its regular patrol along its normal
course. It was sailing on the high seas outside Egyptian
territorial waters and was not engaged in any unusual
activity. Suddenly it wasstruck by an Egyptian missile. The
hit immobilized the ship, its power plant was put out of
commission, it listed heavily and dropped anchor. More
than one and a half hours had passed while the Eilat
remained crippled and helpless when the Egyptians renewed
the attack. They launched two more missiles; one of them
struck the ship and sank her.

21. Israel committed its aggression today at exactly the
same time when the United Arab Republic wasopening up
its territorial waters for the rescue operations carried out by
the Israel forces in relation for the sinking of the Israel
destroyer. This act on our part, motivated solely by
humanitarian considerations, was again met by a sinister
and criminal attack on the United Arab Republic.
22. Yesterday the Foreign Minister of Israel publicly
refused to resort to the United Nations machinery and
emphatically stated that Israel would not ask the Security
Council to consider the acts which led to the sinking of the
Eilat. This position of arrogance and total disregard of the
United Nations has become the standard policy of Israel
-total disregard of the United Nations, its machinery and
3

Mr. Shukairy’s comment, broadcast over Radio Cairo on 23
October, was: “The destruction of the Eilat is the first step
in demolishing the military legend which is called Israel,”
The Iraqi newspaper Al-Fajr al-Jadid of 23 October said:
“The blow to the Israel destroyer indicates the time has
come for revenge.” In Syria, Radio Damascus had the
following comment: “This achievement of the Arab people
proves that the way of force should be followed and that
compromise and surrender are unacceptable. Resistance
must continue also in the occupied areas.”

28. The Egyptian military command admitted that it
returned to the attack after having received explicit orders
from its highest authorities to do so. Nothing can demonstrate more convincingly the premeditated nature of this
callous act of aggression than this renewal of the attack on
a helpless and immobilized vessel. The second strike came
to complete what the first strike had intended to do. As a
matter of fact, immediately
after the first attack the
Egyptian authorities informed the United Nations observers
that they had sunk the Israel destroyer. Realizing that their
first missile strike had not completed its mission, the
Egyptian authorities-military
forces-after deliberation decided to press on with their aggression. It resulted in
casualities of nineteen killed, twenty-eight missing and
ninety-one wounded, twenty of them seriously.
29. The United Arab Republic’s action was the gravest
extension to the high seas of Egyptian maritime lawlessness
and belligerence, after they had instituted naval blockades
in international waterways in the area. The use of missiles,
their introduction into Middle Eastern warfare, was a
deliberate act of military escalation. Evaluating the situation, The Timesof London of 23 October said:
“The gravity of the incident needs no emphasizing.
Ships of one navy do not sink ships of another unless
they are at war or spoiling to start a war.”
30. It is obvious that the Government of the United Arab
Republic had been preparing for this situation for some
time. By government decree the civilian population of the
Suez area was evacuated and a general atmosphere of
tension was deliberately created. The Egyptian Press and
radio dramatically announced during the last three weeks
that the renewal of the fighting was imminent, and even at
an earlier stage, soon after the conclusion of the cease-fire,
Radio Cairo said on 12 July: “The war has not ended-it
has only begun”. And on 20 July the Voice of the Arabs,
Saut al-Arab, said: “With the help of our beliefs, of Allah,
of neutralism, of revolutionary principles, and of those
seeking peace-we will march forward with assurances
towards the battle”. And the noted journalist, Mohamed
Hassanien Heikal, wrote in Al-Ahram on 11 August:
“Nothing but a miracle could prevent renewed warfare and
I do not believe that we live in a time of miracles.”
Al-Mzusawar on 1 September 1967 said: “In Port Tawfiq all
are alerted for the battle and the readiness is at its peak.”
Rosa aZ-Yt[suf on 9 October said: “We wish to feel the
battle . . . this feeling should be translated into deeds and
active movement.” On 15 October, a week preceding the
attack on the Israel naval craft, radio Saut al-Arab said:
“Prospects of renewal of the war in the Suez Canal zone
still exist because of the Israel presence in the occupied
areas.”
31. After Egypt had succeeded in its attack, patriotic
fervour was whipped up. The news of the great victory was
spread throughout all available channels of its vast propaganda network. A pro-Cairo newspaper published in Beirut,
AZ-Mukarir said: “We can now say that the Israel army is
going to suffer defeat that will make the world forget the
Arab defeat of last June.” Al-Ahram stated the day after
the attack: “The results of the six-day war did not reflect
the accurate picture of the power balance in the area.“, and

32. That was the general trend of the gloating repeated in
the Press and on the radio. The elegiac version given by the
representative of the United Arab Republic tonight is not
exactly attuned to yesterday’s exhilaration of the radio and
Press of Cairo. The attack on the Israel destroyer was not
an isolated act of Egypt’s violation of its obligations under
the cease-fire resolutions of the Security Council. There is
enough evidence in the records of the Security Council of
the opening of fire by the United Arab Republic forces
against Israel positions that I do not have to tire the
Council at this hour by giving a full account of them. Again
and again the United Arab Republic has broken the
cease-fire by shelling the Israel forces from gun emplacements in the close vicinity of, or inside, built-up areas,
33. The Egyptian forces did not content themselves with
operations on land but also interfered with Israel shipping
in the Gulf of Suez. The incidents of today are of exactly
the same nature, bringing to a culmination a long series of
Egyptian provocations. The policies and actions of the
Government of the United Arab Republic are clearly
designed to undermine the cease-fire. In doing so, it is
reverting to the old techniques which it practised under the
armistice regime when it claimed for itself the right of war
and for Israel the obligations of peace. It is now applying
these methods to the cease-fire rCgime.
34. But reciprocity is the very essence of the cease-fire. If
there is no reciprocity as regards the cessation of fire then
naturally the whole system collapses. I am reminded of an
Arabic saying, “Those who light a fire cannot ask for
protection from the flames.” Again and again Israel has
emphasized its policy of strict observance of the cease-fire
on the basis of reciprocity. The attack on the destroyer
Eilat has placed in jeopardy the cease-fire obligations.
35. We are again engaged in a vicious and dangerous circle,
followed with such perseverance by the United Arab
Republic, of shooting and shouting and shouting and
shooting. Where does that lead to? To more suffering and
more destruction. The time has come to put a stop to this
folly. Israel again declares that it is ready right here and
now, tonight, under this very roof, to meet representatives
of the United Arab Republic and of any other Arab State
and to discuss with them all measures designed to ensure
security for all and to lay the basis for a peaceful future.
36. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): First of all let
me convey my respects to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of your duties as our President. Already in the
consultations which you have conducted you have earned
the admiration of us all. I should like also to add a word of
welcome to the Ambassador of Denmark. Denmark has

4

established already in this Council the highest reputation,
and I am sure that the new Ambassador will fully maintain
that reputation in the future.
37. I do not wish to pursue recriminations of recent tragic
developments. I do not think that accusation and counteraccusation will take us anywhere. All of us, I am sure,
deplore and condemn the grave breaches of the cease-fire
which have taken place, breaches which have occurred in
spite of the persistent and admirable efforts of General Bull
and the United Nations observers.
38. It is well that we should meet urgently tonight. We
meet to put the whole weight of the Council and of the
United Nations behind a demand that the cease-fire shall
now be observed and that belligerence from either side shall
once and for all be abandoned. I wish to speak tonight only
to urge-1 would hope on behalf of all of us-that we should
turn from hate and conflict. I trust that all that has
happened will now at last require a change of heart and a
change of direction, that we should not go back to
bloodshed but go forward to a secure peace. Surely we can
now all of us see that delay has had frightful consequences.
Surely no one now can claim that we should hesitate any
longer. Surely the need for urgent action is now clear to
everyone.
39. I am glad to have the opportunity to speak once more
openly here in the Security Council on the issues which we
last discussed in the Council more than three months
ago-three wasted months. It is true that we had a month’s
debate in the General Assembly in June and July, and our
fears that that debate would not lead to effective and
urgent action were unhappily confirmed. Our conviction
that the right place to take action was here in this Council
has been reinforced.
40. Our view is that the Security Coun+l should have met
much earlier and acted much sooner. That view is stronger
still tonight. Before the conflict began we were amongst the
first to call for the Council to meet and to act. We
supported the Secretary-General’s call to forgo belligerency;
and had the Council acted then, the conflict could have
been averted. When the war broke out we at once
advocated an immediate cease-fire; and had our recommendation been approved, Jordan and Syria need never have
been involved, For months we have been urging the
appointment of a United Nations special representative. I
recall that the representative of India was also amongst the
first to make that proposal, and we were amongst the first
to support it, as long ago as last June. What a difference in
the present situation there might now be if our proposal,
first made last June, had been promptly approved.
41. In July we supported and voted for the draft
resolution in the General Assembly calling for urgent action
by the Security Council. Had action been taken then, we
might now be well.on the road to a settlement. All along we
have worked and spoken for action in the Security Council.
We have done so openly and consistently. Our proposals
throughout have been absolutely clear.
42. We were balked and frustrated in our purposes. We
were criticized and even attacked by different interests, at

different times, for different reasons. But no one can say
that we were not clear in our recommendations, and no one
can say that we were not consistent in our aims. No one can
accuse us of the delay and the hesitation and the opposition
to United Nations action which first led to conflict and
then to deadlock, has led to so much unnecessary suffering,
and has now led to more death and destruction. It was
delay that led to the conflict; it was delay that Ied to the
deadlock; it has been delay that has now led to more death
and destruction.
43. We all know that members of this Council have been
working with increasing urgency, particularly in the past
few days, to establish and declare the principles which
should govern a settlement and to take the first practical
steps on the hard road to peace. We know that they have
set themselves the task of preparing a fair and balanced
draft resolution-I emphasize “a fair and balanced draft
resolution”-under which a United Nations special representative can go without further delay to deal with the
situation on the spot, in consultation and co-operation with
those directly concerned. That is what we have been
advocating all along, My Secretary of State said in the
General Assembly a month ago: “we must work for . , . a
durable peace, the renunciation of all aggressive designs,
and an end to policies which are inconsistent with peace.“l
That is the overriding purpose; that is the prize, a durable
peace. It cannot be won without justice and equal
recognition of equal obligations on both sides. It cannot be
won without a real senseof the utmost urgency.
44. I believe that there is an overwhelming support in the
general membership of the United Nations for a fair and
balanced resolution and for immediate action by a United
Nations special representative. Indeed, I cannot remember a
greater sense of common purpose, common impatience and
general agreement amongst us, That can give us somehope
and some confidence.
45. Surely we should not conclude our discussion tonight-so I earnestly suggest-without resolving together to
move with all possible speed to take such positive, just and
urgent action; and, I trust, to take it unanimously,
46. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): Mr. President, I would, of
course, wish to associate myself with my colleagues in
expressing admiration for the way in which you, as
President of the Council, have already conducted the
consultations on means of finding a peaceful solution to the
Middle East problem.
47. I should also wish to express my happiness in seeing
my old friend Ambassador Borch, with whom I have been
associated in the past, and to say with what pleasure
Canada looks forward to continuing its collaboration with
Denmark in this Council.
48. The current outbreak of Arab-Israel hostilities in the
Suez .area points up, as the representative of the United
Kingdom has just said, the precarious nature of the
cease-firewhich, as we all agreed on 6 June, was only a first
1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Plenary Meetings, 1567th meeting, para. 9 1.

.

step. If that first step is to be followed, as it should already
have been, by further steps towards a restoration of
peaceful conditions in the area, then I believe that all of us
in this Council would agree that the cease-fire must be
scrupulously respected by both sides and that all parties
must desist from all military activities in the area.

occurred in the Suez area today, 24 October, could not fail
to attract the attention of the Security Council, of the
United Nations and of world opinion. This event has
forcibly demonstrated the extent of the tension in the
Middle East and the nature of the explosive situation which
exists in that area as a result of the fact that the
consequences of Israel’s aggression against the Arab States
have not yet been liquidated. This new act of provocation
by Israel’s armed forces, of which the representative of the
United Arab Republic, Mr. El Kony, has just given us a
convincing account in his statement, is a most serious
vio!ation of the Security Council’s decision calling for a
cease-fire and the cessation of military activities. It is an act
of defiance against the basic and generally recognized
principles of international law, a defiance of legality and of
the principles of the United Nations Charter.

49. There is mbre than enough inflammable material in
the area without adding further fuel to the flames by
acrimonious exchanges of charges and counter-charges and
by prolonged debates. I shall therefore be very direct and
very precise.
50. In the present circumstances the Canadian delegation
very much hopes that the Council will adopt the following
measures-not necessarily together, but urgently in a series.

54. It is hardly possible, at the present morncnt, to make a
full assessment of all the consequences of the barbaric
bombardment of the Suez area by Israel artillery, Even
now, however, one thing is quite clear: irreparable damage
has been done to that city. hlany residential areashave been
destroyed, a large number of peaceful citizens have been
killed or maimed, industrial undertakings have been demolished and oil refineries have been set on fire. And, what
is more serious still, this was not any kind of miscalculation
or accident but a premeditated act of barbarism planned in
advance and undertaken on orders from Tel-Aviv. The Israel
occupation forces ignored the appeals of the United
Nations observers in that area for an immediate cease-fire
and continued the shelling for a long time until they had
achieved their criminal objectives and carried out their
monstrous design. The fact that it was the Israel aggressors
who started the attack is confirmed in the report of 24
October by the Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization [S/793O/Add.44];
it states, in
particular:

Sl. First, we should call upon all parties to respect
scrupulously the cease-fire and to cease and desist from all
military activities in the area. Second, we should ask the
Secretary-General for as full information as possible from
General Odd Bull both as to the measures he has taken now
under the terms of the consensus adopted by the Council
on 10 July 1967’ for the surveillance of the cease-fire in
the. area-1 know that we have received several supplementary reports-and also as to what additional resources,
if any, he may require to carry out his important and
onerous task as effectively as possible under the consensus
to which I referred. Third, immediate steps should be
taken-as the delegation of Canada and, of course, also the
delegations of India and the United Kingdom have advocated consistently since early June-to give the SecretaryGeneral appropriate authorization to dispatch a special
representative to the Middle East to start the process
towards restoring peaceful conditions in the area. This
indeed has been recognized as an urgent necessity by the
Secretary-General himself, in paragraph 48 of the intrdduction to his annual report to the General Assembly.3

“(1) Observation post (OP) Mike at Port Tawfiq
reported that Israel Defence Forces initiated artillery fire
at 1231 hours GMT, 24 October, at oil refinery southwest of Port Suez.”

52. In mentioning this third measure, I fully recognize, as
did the representative of the United Kingdom, the difficulties involved in agreeing on the framework of principles
within which the efforts of the special representative should
be made. But I am conscious of the extensive consultations
which have already taken place on this matter and are still
going on under your leadership, Mr. President. I cannot
believe that it is beyond the capabilities of the members of
the Council to reach agreement on such a reasonable
proposal and one which would break the stalemate. A fair
and balanced resolution, as my colleague from the United
Kingdom called it, is what we need and I believe that there
exists today a consensus in favour of such an approach as
the next and essential step towards peace in the Middle
East. I therefore commend this programme of constructive
activity to the favourable consideration of my colleagues in
the Council.

55. In the light of this, the counter-claim so hurriedly
introduced by Israel has the appearance of a delayed
reaction, a pitiful farce whose purpose is to try to deceive
the Security Council and world opinion. Quasi-diplomatic
moves of this nature are characteristic of the Israel
Sepresentatives who, as members of the Council are well
aware, have in the past often resorted to the customary
procedural manoeuvre of the aggressor by seeking to shift
responsibility for their crime on to the victim of the
aggression. However, the facts provided by the United
Nations observers in the Suez area are self-evident; they
reveal the falsity of Tel-Aviv’s absurd accusations.
56. Thus, Mr. President, as is rightly stressed in the letter
dated 24 October from the representative of the United
Arab Republic [S/8207/ requesting an urgent meeting of
the Security Council, the Israel Government bears full
responsibility for this new and serious act of aggression
which, as we now see, goes far beyond what could be
described as a mere violation of the Security Council’s
cease-fire resolutions. It is nothing other than the continua-

53. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated fvom Russian): The incident which has
2. Incorporated in the record of the 1366th lneeting of the
Council, para. 125.
3 Official Records of the General Assembly,
Session, Supplement No. 1A.

lbenty-second

6

II
!

!

tion of aggressivewar against a State Member of the United
Nations, the United Arab Republic. It is merely one link in
the chain of many defiant attacks and provocations
recently committed by Israel against the United Arab
Republic and other Arab countries.

peoples, as long as he puts forward territorial and other
claims, as long as he persists in sabotaging United Nations
decisions, in an outrageous manner, it will be impossible to
remove tension and establish peace in the Middle East.
62. Is it not self-evident that, in conditions of everincreasing tension, new complications are unavoidable?
One cannot exclude the possibility that armed incidents
provoked by Tel-Aviv along the Suez Canal, and on the
Israel-Jordan and Israel-Syrian fronts, will escalate into a
major military confrontation.

57. Only two days ago, Israel committed another act of
provocation by sending one of its warships into the
territorial waters of the United Arab Republic off Port
Said. Warships of the United Arab Republic in Port Said
were obliged to take measures, under the laws of a
sovereign State, to defend themselves against that provocation, but that did not deter the aggressor. And the attempt
by the Israel representative, who just now made every
effort to divert the Security Council’s attention from this
latest aggressiveact committed by Israel armed forces in the
Suez area, and cynically tried to whitewash the provocative
violation of the terriioriil
waters of the United Arab
Republic by an Israel destroyer-did not that attempt
sound ironical?
Whatever epithets or phraseology
Mr. Rafael uses, however much he expatiates on his
assertion that the warship was defenceless and was engaged
on some peaceful routine mission immediately off the coast
of the United Arab Republic, he will never be able to alter
or distort the facts.

63. Recent events also compel the Security Council to be
mindful of its responsibilities and to realize that it is
essential to hasten a political settlement in the Middle East.
The Security Council must do its duty forthwith in
connexion with Israel’s violation of its decisions, in
connexion with the latest aggressive provocation by Israel.
64. The Soviet delegation considers that the United Arab
Republic’s request for an urgent meeting of the Security
Council was fully justified. We firmly support this just
demand; and we also consider that the Security Council has
a duty to condemn unconditionally
the aggressive acts
committed by Israel in the Suez area. At the same time,
Israel must unquestionably pay compensation for the
damage caused to the United Arab Republic and the
inhabitants of Suez as a result of Israel’s barbaric bombing
and artillery attack.

58. One point worthy of note, Mr. President, is that the
Israel representative virtually evaded the main question:
why did Israel carry out a barbarous artillery attack on the
town of Suez? He did not explain to the Security Council
by what right the Israel occupiers killed a large number of
peaceful citizens in Suez and destroyed plants and factories.
But it is precisely this which is the subject of discussion in
the Security Council. However, the aggressor, it seems, has
his own logic. He is following his own rules and considers it
appropriate to act out a melodrama here in the Security
Council.

65. For the reasons given above, the Soviet delegation
submits the following draft resolution for the Security
Council’s consideration:
“The Security Council,
“Having considered the communication of the representative of the United Arab Republic concerning a new act
of aggression by Israel in the area of the city of Suez,

59. We know that on 23 and 24 October unceasing threats
against the United Arab Republic were heard from TelAviv, and these culminated in a large-scale military attack
on the town of Suez. According to Press reports, the Israel
Minister of Defence, Moshe Dayan himself, in a recent
statement, threatened that the Suez canal zone “was
becoming the spark which might start a conflagration”.
These threats, as all the world can see, have now been
carried out by the Israel militarists. All this forcibly
demonstrates that there must be no delay in putting an end
to Israel’s unlawful occupation of the territory of Arab
states, an occupation accomplished by open aggression in
vioIation of the basic principles of the United Nations
Charter.

“Having considered also the information provided by
the Secretary-General in document S/7930/Add.44 that
the Israel forces began and continued an artillery barrage,
ignoring the proposal by the Chief of Staff of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization in Pa!est.ine for
an immediate cease-fire,
“‘Expressing grave concern that the said act of aggression has resulted in heavy losses among the peaceful
population and in serious physical damage,
‘LConsidering that the actions of the Israel armed forces
in the area of the city of Suez constitute a gross violation
of the Security Council resolutions of 6 June 1967
(233 (1967)] and of 7 June 1967 /234 (1967)] calling
for a cease-fire and the cessation of military activities, as
well as of other Security Council resolutions on that
question,

60. As is known, the Soviet Government has issued
frequent warnings to the effect that, in defiance of the will
of the peoples and contrary to the interests of maintaining
peace, the ruling circles of Israel and those who support
them in the United States of America, the United Kingdom,
the Federal Republic of Germany and other Western
countries are playing a dangerous game and are incurring
full responsibility for continuing the policy of aggression
and provocation against the Arab States and peoples.

“1. Strongly condemns Israel for the act of aggression
committed by it in the area of the city of Suez;

61. AS long as the aggressor continues to occupy lands
which have since time immemorial belonged to the Arab

“2. L?emnnrls that Israel compensate the United Arab
Republic for the damage caused by that act;
7

“‘3. UrgerIt& calls npon Israel strictly to observe the
aforementioned resolutions of the Security Council concerning the cease-fire and the cessation of military
activities.” [S/8212.]

Nations Charter and civilization, are responsible for the
most hideous crimes, for which a parallel can hardly be
found in modern history. Private property is being destroyed indiscriminately and the inhabitants are suffering at
the hands of the Israelis the worst kind of treatment that
any human being can endure. Human torture, looting,
robbery, obliteration of Jordanian villages are the order of
the day. Half of my country and half of our population are
under Israel occupation and persecution.

66. We appeal to the Security Council
to act without
delay and to take the necessary decision in accordance with
the duties and the high responsibility assigned to it under
the United Nations Charter.
67. The PRESIDENT:
Jordan.

I call on the representative of

71. Why should all this, and more than this, be allowed to
continue? The answer is simple and clear, It is simply that
the organs of the United Nations, notably the Security
Council, are shrinking from the responsibility of taking a
clear and effective stand. Many meetings have already taken
place but have always ended in a complete deadlock, The
underlying reason behind all this can clearly be found in the
attitude of some major Powers, an attitude which only
servesto encourage Israel to persist in its defiance.

6s. Mr. RIFA’I (Jordan): I wish to thank the Security
Council for giving me the privilege of participating in the
present debate. Never before has the United Nations and
the p:inciples that it stands for faced such a challenge .to its
very existence as the crisis of which it is now seized. Never
before has the factor of delay played a more decisive part in
aggravating matters than it has done in the present Israel
aggression. Nearly five months have passed since Israel
occupied large parts of Arab territory by the use of force,
and in spite of this flagrant breach of the principles of the
Charter we are still where we were when Israel first invaded
and occupied those territories. Many meetings of the
Security Council, as well as meetings during the fifth
emergency special session and the present twenty-second
session of the General Assembly, have taken place, but so
far nothing has been done to suppress aggression and
remove its consequences. Does this really mean that,
contrary to what the Members of the United Nations
resalved under the Charter, the United Nations is now
prepared, after twenty years’ hard work and devotion, to
abandon its principles and accept fait accompli situations?
Or is it hoped that the time element may work a miracle
and save the United Nations from taking a firm decision in
the face of challenging pressures?

72. In this regard, we are bound to ask: Why is it that the
Council has not been able as yet to take effective measures
in the grave situation prevailing in the Middle East? Why is
it that so many meetings and private consultations have
been held outside this chamber and outside this building,
and ended nowhere? Why is it that so many ideas and
proposals have been discussed and so many views exchanged, with no definite results? Why is it that the
question has been shifting between the Security Council
and the General Assembly and has been discussedin both,
without either of these two main organs taking an effective
decision? Again, the answer is clear. It lies in the trend,
now evident, to subject the principles of what is right and
just to political considerations alien to the merits of the real
issue before the Council.
73. It will be most disappointing to those who wish to
maintain a degree of confidence in this world Organization
and a respect for international relations and friendship to
find that, despite what has happened today, no clear
pronouncement shall have been adopted in this Council
strongly condemning Israel for its flagrant aggression of
today and laying punitive measures against it. In this regard,
allow me to acknowledge with appreciation the initiative
taken by the representative of the Soviet Union in the draft
resolution which he just read out.

69. In this case the time factor has proved a most
dangerous element. We only need to look at what has
happened since 5 June, and especially at what has happened
today. Israel has again considered that the use of force pays
dividends and has proceeded to launch its wanton attacks
on Arab territory and Population. Today’s vicious attack by
Israel, an account of which has just been put before the
Council by the representative of the United Arab Republic,
is but one link in a chain of continued Israel aggression.
This attack resulted in the extensive loss of the lives of
innocent men, women and children. There has been almost
total damage to the city of Suez and its inhabitants, to
everything living and everything built, What is more, the
Israelis have systematically shelled industrial installations,
including petroleum refineries in Suez, and the Nasr plants
for fertilizers and several other industrial complexes have
been completely destroyed. All this is but an indication of
Israel’s hostile aims towards Arab lands, its people and Arab
progress. The Arab civil population which fell victim to
Israel fire should be well in the minds of representatives day
and night and should remind them of the tragic, serious
situation, of the turmoil resulting from the lack of decisive
action by the United Nations.

74. Today’s armed assault by Israel, which reveals the
ugliest disregard on the part of Israel for the existence of
the United Nations, should indeed serve to move the
Council swiftly to the adoption of a decision ordering Israel
to withdraw all its armed forces to the lines from which it
started its major offensive on 5 June, and to do SO without
any further delay and with no conditions attached. Unless
this basic requirement is strictly observed, there can be ho
hope for any progress in the direction of peace. Any
approach which does not take this essential requirement
into serious account will be a departure from the right
course which can yield fruitful results.
75. Mr. GOLDBERG
(United States of America):
Mr. President, may I welcome you to your seat in the
Council, which you are already filling with great distinction. May I also associate myself with what many of mY

70. In the occupied part of my country, Jordan, Israel
forces, in utter disregard of international law, the United
8

colleagues have said concerning the representative of India,
our good friend Mr, Parthasarathi.

is not just a cease-fire, essential though that is, not just a
fragile and oft-violated armistice, but new steps towards a
durable peace. Real peace must be our aim, and nothing less
than real peace is essential in the area. It should be more
evident now than ever before that we must begin, and begin
now, to move towards a just settlement of all the questions
outstanding between the parties.

76. The United States shares the universal sense of anxiety
over the incidents which underlie this urgent meeting of the
Security Council: the sinking of the Israel destroyer Eilat
on 21 October, and the serious exchange of artillery fire
that occurred today between the forces of Israel and the
United
Arab Republic. Our immediate concern is, of
course, over the loss of lives, the destruction of property
and the suffering which those incidents have caused. But we
are also deeply concerned over the fact that the cease-fire
decisions which the Council adopted last June should have
been violated, with all the danger that such violations entail
for the peace of the Middle East.

83. We must take action tonight, and my delegation
believes that the appropriate action is clearly indicated.
This Council should tonight reaffirm the cease-fire and
demand scrupulous mutual adherence to it by all the
parties, and this Council should condemn any and all
violations of the cease-fire.
84, We have just witnessed a very familiar performance by
our colleague Ambassador Eedorenko of the Soviet Union.
With respect to it I would like merely to say this, that if
there is anything which will not contribute to peace in the
area or to progress by the Council it is a midnight re-run of
that stale record.

77.

The first resolution which this Council adopted last
resolution 233 (1967) of 6 June called upon all the
Governments concerned “to take forthwith as a first step
a;Ll measures for an immediate cease-fire and for a cessation
of all military activities in the area”. By adopting that
resolution and the three subsequent ones which confirmed
it [234 (1967), 235 (1967, 236 (196711, the Council
ckarly rccognized that if there was to be any change of
progress towards peace in the Middle East, the first step
must be a complete cease-fire, a complete cessation of acts
of violence between the parties. That truth was unassailable
and self-evident then and it remains so now.
June,

85. The experience of this Council amply demonstrates
that the Council will not take a one-sided view of the
situation or adopt one-sided resolutions, but will deal
even-handedly with the situation in the interest of stopping
violence and moving towards peace in the area. To that end,
I offer a draft resolution for the consideration of the
Council which, with your permission, Mr. President, I
should like to read out:

78. The United States is ready to join with the Council in
insisting upon this basic point. The United States is even
prepared to go further al>d co-operate in any necessary step
to strengthen the United Nations machinery in the area so
t&at it may be fully equal to the task of supervising the
all-encompassing cease-fire resolutions of the Council. We
should give General Bull what he does not have and what he
needs to implement the cease-fire, in man-power and in
land, sea and air facilities.

YRe Security Council,
Yhvely
concerned at the reports and complaints it has
received of military hostilities in violation of the ceasefire between Israel and the United Arab Republic,
“Convinced that progress towards the establishment of
a just and durable peace in the area requires mutual
respect for the cease-fire, in accordance with resolutions
of the Security Council and the agreements of the parties,

79. An end to violence was imperative in June; it is
imperative
now. Again and again, as the records of the
Council
amply demonstrate, the experience in the area,
including
that of recent events, proves that violence breeds
violence, that belligerency breeds belligerency and that acts
of war breed acts of war.

“1. Condemns any and all violations of the cease-fire;
“2. Insists that the Member States concerned scrupulously respect the cease-fire as contained in resolutions
233 (1967), 234 (1967), 235 (1967) and 236 (1967), and
the consensus of 10 July 1967 and co-operate fully with
the Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization and the United Nations military
observers in their tasks in connexion therewith;

80. This Council has the right to insist that all parties
scrupulously
observe the cease-fire and stop all military
activites in violation of it. And this Council has the right
alld obligation to insist upon peace in the area-a just,
durable and permanent peace.
81.
Under the Security Council resolutions, as I have
indicated,
the cease-fire was to be the first step. This of
course must be assured. But my delegation is ready, and has
been ready for a long time, to take the next step. We have
been ready to do so ever since the deliberations of the
Security Council on the Middle East were interrupted in the
middle
of June 1967. That next step is what I referred to a
moment
ago, and that step is a step towards peace in the

“3. Culls on the Governments concerned to issue
categorical instructions to all military forces to refrain
from all firing as required by these resolutions.“/S/8213.]
I move this draft resolution, which I now ask be circulated.
86. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): At the outset, I wish
to thank the representative of the United States.for the
very kind reference he made to me. The Security Council is
meeting again tonight under the shadow of armed conflict
in West Asia. We have before us the letters of the

area.

82. The events of these last days underscore what we have
all known for a long time: that what the Middle East needs
9

Permanent Representatives of the United Arab Republic
and Israel [S/8207 and S/8208]. We also have available to
us information
provided by the Secretary-General on
reports submitted by UNTSO [S/793O/Add.44 and 4.51.

[S/793O/Add.43]
provides no conclusive information on
this aspect of the matter. Clearly there is need for further
investigation to determine whether or not the destroyer was
actually in the territorial waters of the United Arab
Republic or on the high seasat the time it was sunk,

87. Even a cursory glance at the documents I h.ave just
cited makes clear the deliberateness of the attack mounted
by Israel during the ‘course of the day against the United
Arab Republic. This fact is clear frcm the refusal of the
Israel authorities to accept the proposal of UNTSO to
effect a cease-fire beginning at 1330 hours GMT. The
United Arab Republic, the report of UNTSO continues,
accepted the proposal. The reply of the Israel authorities
was one of equivocation and procrastination.

92. Determination of this fact has great importance in the
context of Security Council resolution 236 (1967) which
specifically prohibited any forward military movements
subsequent to the cease-fire. My delegation, therefore, feels
that an investigation of this incident, with all the circumstances attending it, should be ordered by the SecretaT
General to enable the Council to come to a conclusion.
93. Having dealt with the specific items under discussion, I
should like to emphasize the necessity for the Council to
take further action to resolve the situation in West Asia.
The continued occupation of vast Arab territories and the
frequent clashes along the cease-fire positions are constant
reminders of the grave situation prevailing in that region.
The international community cannot ignore the existence
of the threat to the peace resulting from this state of
affairs. It is a matter of deep regret to us that in spite of
numerous meetings of the Security Council and an cmergency session of the General Assembly no progress has been
registered in securing the withdrawal of the armed forces of
Israel and in bringing peace and security to the area.

88. The deliberateness of the attack is also brought out by
the immense damage done to the industrial installations,
particularly oil refineries in the Suez area. The Council is
entitled to assume that the equivocation and procrastination was for the purpose of completing the plan of
destruction of industrial installations and inflicting other
damage to civilian life and property.
89. There is a related aspect of the matter to which I
should like to draw the attention of the Council. The
practice of reprisals has been specifically prohibited on
several occasions, the last one being as recently as 25
November 1966 in Security Council resolution 228 (1966).
Several successive Security Council resolutions have condemned Israel military measures against its Arab neighbours. I need quote from only one of these resolutions,
namely resolution 228 (1966) which reminded Israel of the
impermissibility
of reprisals. Paragraph 3 of that resolution
read:

94. During the general debate in the current session of the
General Assembly, the leader of the Indian delegation
stated: “We must all realize that failure to find a solution
for the problems of West Asia would lead to even graver
threats to peace.“4 It is our firm conviction that the United
Nations cannot even begin the process of finding lasting
solutions to the serious problems in the Middle East unless
we take some concrete steps first to reduce tensions in the
area. For that reason my delegation stated at the 1352nd
meeting of the Council on 9 June 1967 that, following its
eminent practice, the Security Council should reinforce its
call for a cease-fire and immediately order the withdrawal
of all armed forces to the positions they occupied before
the outbreak of hostilities. My delegation is more convinced
than ever that unless the Security Council takes this first
step of ordering the withdrawal of Israel forces to the
positions they held on 4 June 19G7 the Council will meet
again and again to consider grave violations of the cease.
fire. There can be no beginning to reduction of tensions in
the area unless Israel forces first withdraw from the
territories they have occupied.

“Emphasizes to Israel that actions of military reprisal
cannot be tolerated and that, if they are repeated, the
Security Council will have to consider further and more
effective steps as envisaged in the Charter to ensure
against the repetition of such acts.”
90. All these past resolutions that I have referred to show
that the Security Council has made it very clear that the
policy of retaliation adopted by Israel is impermissible.
What is more, the latest action of Israel infringes the terms
of the cease-fire ordered by the Security Council in the
month of June this year. I would remind the members of
this Council that by its resolution 236 (1967) adopted on
12 June 1967 the Council specifically condemned any and
all violations of the cease-fire. In the context of the clear
prohibitions
of the resolution I have just cited, Israel
cannot justify its attack of today under any pretext,

95. During the course of this long and unhappy crisis in
the Middle East, and more especially since the events of
June 1967, it has become apparent to the world corn
munity that unless certain well-established and well.
respected principles of international law and international
practice come to be reiterated by this Council, with all the
authority vested in it under the Chater, the journey from a
state of war to a state of peace and tranquillity may not be
easy, or even possible. In this, time is of the essence,and
the earlier the Council can act the better. It is the
responsibility of the Members of the Security Coud to
intensify their efforts with a view to securing the with

91, The Council has also heard statements in regard to the
naval incident of 21 October, in which the Israel destroyer
Eilat was sunk. My delegation, amongst others, was and is
seriously concerned at that incident. The representative of
the United Arab Republic has stated in his letter dated 22
October 1967 [S/820.5] to the President of the Security
Council that the destroyer was speeding in United Arab
Republic territorial waters, The representative of Israel, on
the other hand, has stated that the vessel was outside the
territorial waters of the United Arab Republic. The report
of the Secretary-General
on the naval incident

4 Ibid.,

10

Plenary

Meetings,

1582nd meeting, pam. 81.

drawal and finding of solutions of the grave problems of the
area so that the present precarious cease-fire leads to a just
and lasting peace.

chain of events premeditated and prepared for a very long
time, the most significant of them being the Israel
aggression of 5 June 1967. Having as a result of the
aggression of 5 June occupied considerable portio.ns of the
territory of Arab States, which Israel has refused and still
refuses to evacuate, the Israel extremists have been looking
for pretexts and methods for strengthening their hold over
these territories.

96. Earlier tonight we heard the statement of, among
others, the representative of the United Kingdom. I have
great pleasure in agreeing with him that the Council should
act urgently to deal with the serious problem of the area.
What is more, I join my voice to his in saying that the
resolution should be a fair and balanced one. In his turn, I
hope he will agree with me that-a point which I have
consistently urged for more than three tionths-the resolution should be based on certain fundamental guide-lines
to be given to the special representative who, we agree
should urgently proceed to the area.

103. The occupation forces have committed a whole series
of provocations which are designed to perpetuate the
present state of affairs in that area. By this means, it seems,
some Israel extremists are hoping that they can strengthen
their territorial claims on the Arab States. Obviously it is
hardly necessary to quote documents to show the existence
of these territorial claims, which have been stated so often
since the aggression of 5 June and were reaffirmed only a
few days ago. These claims were repeated, for all to hear,
by the same extremists; and, as you know, they have been
echoed throughout the world by Israel propaganda.

97. Mr. DE CARVALHO SILOS (Brazil): Mr. President,
first of all let mc convey to you the admiration of the
Brazilian delegation for the manner in which you have
presided over the consultations which have been taking
place among the members of this Council. I should also like
to greet the new representative of Denmark. The Danish
delegation has played a very active and constructive part in
the Council’s deliberations, and I am sure that its new
Chairman will follow the same path and give the same
statesmanlike performance as his distinguished predecessor.

104. The fact that Israel’s attack on the town of Suez was
premeditated is clear from the statement made here this
evening by the Permanent Representative of Israel, who
said that “the attack on the destroyer Eilat has placed in
jeopardy the cease-fire obligations”. What does this mean?
Does it not mean that the attack on and the destruction of
that ship-which was committing a provocation by entering
the territorial waters of the United Arab Republic-was
taken as a pretext for Israel’s reprisals?

98. My delegation has learned with deep sorrow the news
about the sinking of the Israel dcstroycr Eilat by Egyptian
patroI boats and the attack on the Egyptian oil refineries
and industrial installations near Suez by Israel armed forces.
It is most regrettable that this military action should have
taken place. It is imperative that the parties concerned act
with restraint. It has been said time and again that a
solution to the conflict in the Middle East cannot be
achieved except by peaceful means, and these clashes
cannot but postpone indefinitely the day when a lasting
settlement will be reached.

105. Events have been linked together in such a way that
the .destruction of the ship-an act within the rights of the
party whose territorial waters were being violated-has been
used to justify the provocation committed today. Furthermore, Israel’s provocations have been described by the
representative of the United Arab Republic, who told the
Council of the provocative acts committed by the destroyer
which sank two United Arab Republic vessels in the
territorial waters of the United Arab Republic itself. This is
a point which must be stressed here and now. According to
the information given by the Israel authorities to the
Secretary-General’s representative, this naval vesselwas, as
several speakers have already pointed out, ten miles from
the coast. It was therefore in a place where it should not
have been.

99. Brazil has consistently maintained that the first step
towards a solution of the problem in the Middle East is a
strict observance of the cease-fire resolutions of the
Security Council. We cannot therefore condone any breach
of decisions taken by this body with the full support of the
entire international community. We urge the parties concerned to abide by those decisions.
100. Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
French): Mr, President, may I first of all welcome you to
the Security Council, both as representative of Japan and as
President of the Security Council for this month, since this
is the first time we are meeting in the Security Council. I
should also like to welcome our colleague from Denmark
who has just replaced his predecessor, now Minister for
Foreign Affairs, a post in which he will certainly be able to
render his country valuable service.

106. Of course, the Permanent Representative of Israel has
tried, both in his statement today and previously in his
letter to the President of the Security Council, to give the
impression that the attack was provoked by the fact that
United Arab Republic artillery opened fire. But we have
already been informed here that Israel attacked the
refineries long before lodging any complaint with- the
United Nations authorities on the spot.
107. Thus it was certainly Israel which began the attack,
and Israel has just told us that during its attack on United
Arab Republic forces it accidentally destroyed oil refineries, factories and other installations, and that the
people living near these installations had suffered. It is
clear, therefore, that Israel committed a premeditated
attack on a populated town, on the industrial installations
in the town, and on an area of the United Arab Republic

101. We have just heard with great surprise and disappointment of the events that have occurred today in the
Middle East and especially in the area of Suez.
102. The events which have occurred today, 24 October,
are not an isolated incident or accident of any kind. TO any
objective observer, they seem to be one of the links in a
11

where there was a concentration of civilian population.
Israel has, of course, tried to place responsibility on the
troops and forces of the United Arab Republic. But the
commander of the armed forces of the United Arab
Republic must have known that Suez and the other towns
were within range of Israel artillery and ail the lsrael armed
forces. That mqns he would have risked having the
population of those towns massacred, In order to launch
such an attack, he would have had specifically to wish for
the destruction of the Arab population. The Permanent
Representative of Israel was really going too far in saying
things like that. No responsible Government could take
measures like that which would lead to the massacre of its
own people by an enemy bent on destroying it.

example of the Permanent Representative who is taking its
side here in the Security Council?
112, In view of the situation in the Middle East, which is
really very serious, the Security Council must take imme.
diate measures and, as proposed by the Soviet Union in its
draft resolution it must strongly condemn Israel’s aggression in the area of the city of Suez. It should also demand
that Israel pay compensation for the immense damage
caused to the United Arab Republic by this further
aggression. It should, of course, also urgently call upon
Israel strictly to observe the aforementioned resolutions of
the Security Council, as stated in the Soviet draft. The
Canadian representative has also demanded that these
resolutions be observed. Who is it then that is failing to
observe them? It is those who have committed provocations, those who are violating the territorial waters of other
States, and those who are making a show of force in the
Middle East in order to threaten the Arab States, The
Security Council should, of course, also take immediate
steps to solve this conflict which continues to disturb the
peace in that region and might lead to a war on a much
larger scale which would have terrible consequences.

108. Furthermore, what is significant here, as the Indian
and other representatives have pointed out, is that when a
cease-fire was proposed the Israel forces refused to agree to
it, merely so that they could go on destroying the civilian
population and destroying the industrial installations.
109. What does this mean? It means merely that Israel
could not and did not want to stop because it had a plan
which had to be carried out-just as it had a plan, you will
reme’mber, when the Security Council decided earlier to
demand a cease-fire, and the cease-fire was not accepted
until two days after the events set in motion by Israel, after
it had achieved its military objectives in the Middle East
between 5 and 8 June of this year.

113. The delegation of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria
also wishes to state that the lenient attitude adopted by
some delegations towards the aggression is out of place. In
the face of aggression, there is only one stand to be
taken-condemnation
and the determination to bring it to
an end; &he&se, it may have disastrous consequences.
The Security Council should therefore take forthwith the
necessary measures to put an end to the fighting which has
just broken out and to solve the Middle East situation once
and for all. It is only on these conditions that one can hope
to see peace reign once more in this area and throughout
the world.

110. As long as Israel continues to occupy Arab territory,
its leaders will always be tempted to try to take advantage
of the fact and to commit acts likely to create situations
which will bring them territorial gains. The Sedurity
Council should therefore take the necessary measures to
find a solution to the situation created in the Middle East
by Israel’s aggression of 5 June. Is it not significant that
Israel’s provocations of today have been committed at a
time when efforts are being made in the United Nations to
reach a solution? Is it not significant, Mr. President, that at
the very moment when representatives are congratulating
you on your efforts and your perseverance in continuing
the discussions now being held in the hope of reaching a
solution to this question, more and more provocations are
being committed in order to undermine the efforts being
made in this direction? Is this not a significant fact for
world public opinion?

114. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from Fremh):
Mr. President, I am very glad and pleased to associate
myself with my colleagues who have already congratulated
you on your assumption of the office which you are
discharging for the first time this evening. I am especially
happy to see, as President, the representative of a country
in which I spent several years and which I remember vividly
and with gratitude, I should also like to extend a warm
welcome to our colleague from Denmark.
115. I have no need to describe the feelings of my
country, which has constantly advocated the establishment
of a lasting peace in the Middle East, when it learned of the
events which have once again caused a dangerous distnrbance in that part of the world. I have listened with the
greatest attention to the information given US by the
representative of the United Arabic Republic, information
which was followed by comments from the Israel represenm
tative. I have also read very carefully the reports from
General Odd Bull which have been circulated today.

111. The Security Council should be particularly anxious
to set about this task forthwith, since further incidents may
be provoked by Israel. The Council should not content
itself with hearing declarations from the Permanent Representative of Israel, who has told us in effect: “Israel is ready
now, this evening if you wish, immediately, to meet the
representatives of the United Arab Republic and the other
Arab States in order to conclude peace”. We have already
heard this old refrain. Some countries at war are declaring
all the time that they are ready to make peace. This sounds
like Viet-Nam. People are saying all the time that they are
ready for peace and all the time, under cover of these
statements, they are escalating the war more and more.
Does this not make you think that Israel is following the
examples most easily available to it, particularly the

116. I believe that, in view of the seriousnessof the facts,
an urgent meeting of the Security Council wasessential,if
not for maintaining peace-indeed, peace has not reigned in
that part of the world for a Iong time-then at least in order
to put an end to the fighting, this being the only wayof
restoring the peace which is so earnestly desired,
12

’

I

settlement. This evening let me just assure you that we shall
continue to do this.

I 17. Whatever additional information may be supplied in
order to enable us to assess the situation with greater
certainty, the French delegation wishes to state here and
now that it cannot but’regret that there has once again been
a resort to force and to measures that are bound to reopen
the vicious circle of reprisals and counter-reprisals which
cause grievous losses and serious economic damage.

124. Mr. KANTE (Mali) (translated from French): At a
time when the members of the Council are taking positive
steps to find a just solution to the Middle Eastern conflict,
the United Arab Republic has again been the victim of
barbarous aggression by Israel artillery which has destroyed
more than 80 per cent of the industry of the United Arab
Republic and has caused loss of human life in the Suez area.
This aggression is a typical and deliberate defiance of the
cease-fire resolutions adopted by this Council.

118. Among the incidents of the last few days, the naval
encounter which led to the sinking of a ship, accompanied
unfortunately
by the loss of human life, seems to have been
primarily
a military clash. However, the facts reported by
General Odd Bull (S/7930/Add.44/
and the destruction of
the Suez refineries-representing 80 per cent of the United
Arab Republic’s capacity in this field-with casualties
amounting
to several dead and wounded among the town’s
civilian population, give this latest and regrettable event an
especially,disturbing
character.
1 19.

125. My delegation shares the fears of the delegations
which have already deplored the precarious nature of the
cease-fire and the state of belligerence and insecurity caused
by Israel’s territorial claims and also, I am bound to say, by
the inhuman military occupation of the territories of the
United Arab Republic, Jordan and Syria.

I do not wish to express any views this evening

I have more information at my disposal. I do not
wish
to express any definite views on the question of
responsibility.
I wish however to stress that the Council’s
first duty is to make sure that the cease-fire will in future
be observed. This cease-fire must be complied with by both
parties. The activities of General Odd Bull and his representatives must be effective and their orders and instructions
must be carried out. This is an urgent and indispensable
requirement.
It is only on the basis of an effective cease-fire
it will be possible to tackle the wider task which has
yet to be accomplished in this area, a task which now seems
more urgent than ever since it is the only way of ensuring
that the whole of this area can return to a normal existence
and find the security for which my country so ardently
appeals.

126. On studying General Odd Bull’s report [S/7930/
Add.441, which cannot be accused of bias, we find that the
Israel armed forces initiated artillery fire at 1231 hours
GMT on 24 October at an oil refinery south-west of Port
Suez. We also find that, while the United Arab Republic
agreed to a cease-fire proposal at 1300 hours, the report
mentions that Israel persistently refused to comply with the
appeals for a cease-fire issued three times by the United
Nations observers. A still more serious fact, noted at 1325
hours GMT, was that the senior Israel representative
stated-and here I quote the actual words used by the
United Nations Chief of Staff-that he had received a
message from the Israel Defence Forces Headquarters that
Israel would not agree to a cease-fire until 1530 hours
GMT, that, is several hours after it had started the
hostilities.

120. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): I should like to express my
thanks for the generous words of appreciation that have
been spoken with regard to my predecessor and for the
kind words of welcome to myself.

127. I am dwelling on this part of General Odd Bull’s
report because it clearly reveals a number of facts, as
follows:

before

that

(1) That Israel has once again committed aggression;
121.

It was indeed with the greatest regret and concern
that we learned about the grave incidents and the breaching
of the cease-fire decisions of this Council which have taken
place
recently. Not only have these serious incidents
inflicted
loss of human life, but they have proved once
more the instability of the present arrangement.

(2) That the decision was taken at Tel-Aviv, and not at
the theatre of operations by the Israel units stationed in the
area where hostilities took place;
(3) That this aggression was perpetrated in accordance
with a detailed plan indicating when hostilities were to
begin and when they were to stop, since the order for the
cease-fire which was fixed unilaterally by Israel-despite
repeated injunctions from General Odd Bull-proves, if
proof were necessary, that the plan had a clearly defined
objective. The cease-fire did not come into effect until
Israel’s purposes had been accomplished.

122.
Let me state clearly that my Government deplores
and condems any and all violations of the cease-fire. We
urge, as others have done, indeed we insist on, full and
complete
respect for the cease-fire. I wish also to stress that
my delegation is prepared to give positive consideration to
any request from the Secretary-General for the strengthening of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization.
I-Iowever, such steps, important and necessary as they are,
have only a temporary character.
123.

128. This is a particularly serious fact. We are faced with a
clear case of aggression. The fact is clearly described in an
official report based on the statements of official United
Nations observers operating in the area at the Security
Council’s request, in accordance with the June cease-fire
resolutions and the agreed procedure for implementing
them.

We must realize that the present situation highlights

the continuing duty of the Security Council to pursue its
efforts
to pave the way for a just and durable peace in the
area. For our part, we have actively participated in recent

129. Our delegation, the delegation of Mali, has constantly
reaffirmed that the Middle East situation will continue to

consultations
with a view to giving expression, in a fair and
baIanced way, to the principles that should guide SUCK a
13

be particularly explosive, threatening the peace of the
world, day after day, so long as Israel continues to occupy
the Arab territories which its troops invaded in the days
following 5 June 1967. Consequently, in the opinion of the
delegation of Mali, the Council must condemn Israel’s
aggression of 24 October which is a flagrant violation of th.e
Security Council)s cease-fire resolutions. It must also call
upon the parties concerned to observe the cease-fire
strictly. Furthermore, it must express its regret at the
destruction of a considerable proportion of the United
Arab Republic’s economic potential and must demand fair
compensation.

only the first step in the process of peace-building in the
area of the Middle East. It is naturally a precarious first
step-we all realize that-which calls for the maximum of
restraint on the part of all the parties concerned. General
Bull and his United Nations observers have done their very
best in very trying circumstances to maintain the temporary
arrangement for peace, and for that we should be most
grateful to them. My delegation shares the feeling of
disappointment expressed by many other delegations that
the United Nations has not been able so far to make any
headway in the urgent task of building permanent peabein
the Middle East. Nevertheless, my delegation believes that
when it comes to such a challenging responsibility as
peace-building it is never too late to try again and again,
ever prompted by the conviction that the causeof peaceis
too vital to be abandoned.

130. In conclusion, my delegation strongly supports the
resolution submitted by the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, which we regard as an equitable, fair and wise
proposal.

135. My delegation has been greatly encournged’to sensea
common urge within the membership of the United Nations
for action to be taken by the Security Council. That
consensus in the general membership should encourageus
to strive to take further steps which will change the present
situation of dangerous stalemate to a state of just and
durable peace. In that connexion I wish to associatemyseIf
with the useful suggestions made by my friend and
colleague the permanent representative of the United
Kingdom, suggestions which have been further emphasized
and amplified by other members of the Council. We believe,
like them, that the time is long overdue for the Secllrity
Council to authorize the Secretary-General to send a special
representative to the area with a view to establishing
contact with the governments concerned and in order to
prepare the ground for the just and lasting peacewhich it is
our intention to achieve. Such a representative would, of
course, have to operate within the context of general and
comprehensive guide-lines of principles which should be
reaffirmed by the Council in the resolution authorizing the
appointment of a representative.

131. Mr. MAKONNEN
(Ethiopia): I should like to associate myself and my delegation with those who have spoken
before me in contratulating you, Mr. President, on your
election to the high office of President of the Security
Council. My association with you during the past weeks has
enabled me to gain an insight into your intelligence and
wisdom and, like my colleagues who spoke earlier, I express
sincere admiration for and appreciation of the able manner
in which you have been conducting our consultations
during the past weeks. You may be assured of the full and
faithful co-operation of the Ethiopian delegation in the
important and urgent task which we are called upon to
carry out together under your able and wise leadership. I
should like also to welcome to our company in the Council
the Ambassador from Denmark, to whom I renew my
congratulations and good wishes.
132. The violations of the cease-fire which we are considering tonight are indeed very grave and it is most
appropriate that we should have met in urgent session to
consider these serious threats not only to the cease-fire
arrangements agreed upon by the Council but also to the
future of peace in that vital area. The Council should
deplore all violations of its cease-fire decisions and should
insist and demand that its decisions be respected unfailingly
by all the parties concerned. My delegation is anxious to
ensure respect for the cease-fire decisions of the Council,
and to strengthen the cease-fire machinery of the United
Nations in the area. In this connexion, we shall of course
give very careful consideration to all proposals that may be
put before the Council and more particularly to those
proposals that have already been presented tonight.

136. Those were the preliminary observations I wishedto
make at this stage of our deliberations. I reservemy right to
explain further my Government’s position as may be
necessary in the future.
137. Mr. RUDA (Argentina) (transzated from Sparzi~h).’
Mr. President, first of all I should like to express my
delegation’s satisfaction at seeing you presiding over the
Security Council in these hours which are so difficult for
everyone. Your experience and objectivity, which are well
known to me since I have collaborated with you in other
United Nations work, are, I feel, a sure guarantee that we
shall obtain fruitful results from our debates. I should also
like to welcome the representative of Denmark to the
Council.

133. Moreover, my delegation considers it essential that
the Council should ask the Secretary-General to instruct the
chief United Nations Observer, General Bull, to present a
full report on all the recent incidents in the area, with
particular reference to the two serious incidents-the naval
incident of last Saturday and the grave incident of today.
My delegation is ready and anxious to join other members
of the Security Council in considering all appropriate
measures when the full report of the United Nations
Observer is available to the Council.

138. I can hardly conceal the fact that my delegation has
been disagreeably surprised by the events which the COUP
has been convened to consider this evening, particularly at a
time when the members of the Security Council, under
your expert guidance, were holding consultations which mY
delegation thought were most promising. In my delegation’s
view, the events we have before us this evening do
undoubtedly place in jeopardy once again the unstable
situation prevailing in the Middle East. The events, as

134. As a number of members of the Council who have
spoken before me tonight have pointed out, the cease-fire is
14

Y

reported to us by the parties and by the Chief of Staff of
the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization, will
have to be considered in detail by my delegation and my
Government. Some of the elements and some of the
information seem at first sight to provide evidence of
serious acts whose recurrence we must at all costs try to
prevent. They will be the subject of careful study, in order
to determine the responsibilities of each of the parties, and
we shall wait for further information before passing a final
and definite judgement on the matter.

moment to appeal to delegations to see whether it is
possible to draft, within the next few days, a substantive
resolution which would pave the way to a stable, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East. If we do not do this, we
shall clearly demonstrate to world public opinion, which
places so much hope in us, that the Security Council has
failed on this occasion to measure up to the critical needs
of the times in which we live.
1.41. The PRESIDENT (trmslated from French): I have
no further speakers on my list for this evening. I should like
to take this opportunity to express my sincere thanks to all
my colleagues who have been kind enough to speak so
flatteringly about me.

139. The military confrontation during the last few days,
and particularly today’s clash, obliges us once again to call
for dynamic action on the part of the Security Council. I
believe that we should press for a formula which would
establish a clear-cut balance between the interests and
obligations of the parties, as my delegation and a number of
other Latin American delegations proposed in the Security
Council and in the General Assembly during its fifth
emergency special session. There must be established once
and for all a constructive dialogue between the parties,
because the non-existence of this kind of communication
for peace obviously creates a gap between them which is
becoming daily more and more conducive to violence.

142. I have consulted my colleagues regarding the date
and the time of our next meeting and I should like to
suggest that we adjourn this meeting now and resume our
discussion tomorrow morning at 11 a.m. If there is no
objection, I take it that it is so decided.
It was so decided.

140. Therefore the Argentine delegation, without disregarding the gravity of today’s events, would like at this

The meeting rose on Wednesday, 25 October at 12.5 a.m.

15

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Notions
publicotions.moy
the world.
Consult
your
bookstore
or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les publications
des
d$poaitaires
du monde
Nations
Unies,
Section

KAK

llOJlY’lMTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Las publicocioner
en todas
porter
Ventos,

Litho

in U.N.

Nueva

York

obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Sales
Section,

LES PUBLICATIONS

PUBLICACIONES
de

be

Notions
Unies
sont
entier.
Informer-vous
des venter,
New York

M3flAHMFi

del

PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

en vente
dons
aup&
de votre
ou GenCve.

OPI-AHM3AQMM

Ias Nociones
Unidas
estdn
mundo.
Consulte
a su librero

les libroiries
et les q gences
libroirie
ou adrersez-vous
I:

06bE@lHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIQNES

throughout
New
York

HAulIn

UNIDAS

en venta en librerios
y cosos dirtribuidoras
o dirtjose
o: Naciones
Unidos,
Seccibn

de

o Ginebra.

Price:

$0.50

(or equivalent

in other

currencies)

35743~January

1971-2,100
