S/2013/184

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 March 2013
Original: English

Letter dated 22 March 2013 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
As you know, yesterday I announced my decision to conduct an investigation
into the alleged use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic.
On 20 March 2013, I received a letter from the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic requesting a specialized, impartial and independent mission to investigate
the incident of 19 March 2013 involving an alleged use of chemical weapons in Kafr
Da‘il region in Khan al-Asal area in Aleppo governorate, Syrian Arab Republic.
On 21 March 2013, I received a letter from the Governments of France and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland requesting an investigation
into the alleged use of chemical weapons in the locations of Khan al-Asal in Aleppo
and Ataybah in the vicinity of Damascus, as well as in Homs on 23 December 2012.
Other Member States have also written to me or made public statements
calling for the above-mentioned investigation mission to look into all allegations of
the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic.
In the meantime, I have also been in contact with the Director General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, Ahmet Üzümcü, and the
Director General of the World Health Organization, Margaret Chan. They have both
assured me of their full support.
I have requested the Governments concerned to provide additional information
pertaining to the incidents that they have reported to me. The provision of this
information will be crucial in defining the terms of reference for the mission and the
scope of its work with a view to verifying any alleged use of chemical weapons in
the Syrian Arab Republic.
In communicating my decision to the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, I clearly stated the importance of receiving the fullest cooperation from
all relevant authorities in the country in order to assist the mission in achieving
prompt and credible findings, in particular by respecting the status, privileges and
immunities of the mission and its personnel, granting immediate entry into the
Syrian Arab Republic to all members of the investigation mission, providing
adequate security and through unfettered access to all relevant locations. My senior
advisers will contact the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic regarding the
modalities required for the investigation mission in order to allow it to start its
important work as soon as possible in the coming days.

13-26906 (E) 250313

*1326906*

S/2013/184

As you know, I have emphasized the primary responsibility of the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic to ensure the safety and security of any chemical
weapons and related materials as well as to assure the international community that
any stockpiles of chemical weapons in the country are safeguarded. I stand ready to
assist the Government in this regard.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2

13-26906
