Reeolutio1111 adopted without reference to a Committee

Convinced that all peoples have an inalienable right
to complete freedom, the exercise of their sovereignty
and the integrity of their national territory,
Solemnly proclaims the necessity of bringing to a
speedy and unconditional end colonialism in all its forms
and manifestations ;
And to this end
Declares that:
1. The subjection of peoples to alien subjugation,
domination and exploitation constitutes a denial of
fundamental human rights, is contrary to the Charter
of the United Nations and is an impediment to the
promotion of world peace and co-operation.
2. All peoples have the right to self-determination;
by virtue of that right they freely determine their
political statt1s and freely pursue their economic, social
and cultural development.
3. Inadequacy of political, economic, social or educational preparedness should never serve as a pretext
for delaying independence.
4. All armed action or repressive measures of all
kinds directed against dependent peoples shall cease
in order to enable them to exercise peacefully and
freely their right to complete independence, and the
integrity of their national territory shall be respected.
5. Immediate steps shall be taken, in Trust and
Non-Self-Governing Territories or all other territories which have not yet attained independence, to
transfer all powers to the peoples of those territories,
without any conditions or reservations, in accordance
,with their freely expressed will and desire, without

*

67

any distinction as to race, creed or colour, in order to
enable them to enjoy complete independence and
freedom.
6. Any attempt aimed at the partial or total disruption of the national unity and the territorial integrity of a country is incompatible with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
7. All States shall observe faithfully and strictly
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
present Declaration on the basis of equality, noninterference in the internal affairs of all States, and
respect for the sovereign rights of all peoples and
their territorial integrity.
947th plenary meeting,
14 December 1960.
1592 (XV). The situation in the Republic of the
Congo

The General Assembly,
H<Wing considered the item entitled "The situation
in the Republic of the Congo",
Noting that the previous resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly on this subject are
still in effect,
Decides to keep this item on the agenda of its resumed
fifteenth session.
958th plenary meeting,
20 December 1960.

*

*

Note
Appointment of the Peace Observation Commission
(item 18)

At its 960th plenary meeting on 20 December 1960, the General Assembly
decided to reappoint, for the calendar years 1961 and 1%2, the present members
of the Peace Observation Commission. The Commission is therefore composed as
follows: CHINA, CzEcHOSLOVAKIA, FRANCE, HONDURAS, INDIA, IRAQ, ISRAEL,
NEW ZEALAND, PAKISTAN, SWEDEN, UNION OF SovIET SocIALIST REPUBLICS,
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA and URUGUAY.
