United Nations

S/PV.6529

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6529th meeting
Monday, 9 May 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Laher
Mr. Parham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 3 May 2011 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2011/283)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-32875 (E)

*1132875*

S/PV.6529

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 3 May 2011 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2011/283)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Croatia,
Serbia and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Pedro
Serrano, Acting Head of the delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
I should like to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2011/283, which contains a
letter dated 3 May 2011 from the Secretary-General
transmitting the thirty-ninth report of the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I now give the floor to Mr. Inzko.

current political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the challenges that lie ahead.
(spoke in English)
More than seven months after the general
elections, there is still no prospect for the formation of
a new State Government, and many State institutions
are under serious political, institutional and economic
pressure — with a clear impact on their efficiency and
functionality. The European Union (EU) and the EuroAtlantic integration processes have come to a complete
halt, and the economy continues to suffer.
The authorities in the Federation — which forms
the larger part of Bosnia and Herzegovina — took
office only after months of obstruction of the election
of delegates to the Federation House of Peoples. The
Government formation process was stalled by lengthy
political disputes and interventions. I was forced to
intervene, with the support of the Peace
Implementation Council, when the appointment of the
authorities was disputed through various legal
challenges. In fact, there was broad consensus in the
Peace Implementation Council that taking no action
would have resulted in political and legal uncertainty,
with the prospect of the setting up of two parallel and
disputed Federation Governments, with two presidents
in place, and potentially no budget and the subsequent
dissolution of the Federation parliament, followed by
new elections. These risks have been averted, and the
Federation authorities now seem to be working
efficiently.

Mr. Inzko (spoke in French): Thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity today to
present my fifth report as High Representative and the
thirty-ninth report overall. Since my last presentation
to the Security Council in November 2010 (see
PV.6421), the political situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has unfortunately continued to develop
negatively. Today, regrettably, we are facing the most
serious and most direct challenges to the Dayton Paris
Peace Accord that we have seen since it was signed,
more than 15 years ago.

The current situation in the Federation also
comprises a philosophical dispute between ethnicitybased politics — where ethnicity is most important —
and a more civic-oriented version of politics. In that
regard, the Bosnian Croat parties of the Croatian
Democratic Union have organized a council of Croat
cantons and municipalities consisting of Croat
majorities. While there are provisions in the Federation
Constitution that foresee cooperation between cantons,
such a development 15 years after Dayton is not really
the direction in which we should be going.

It is for this reason that, in accordance with my
mandate and in addition to my biannual report, I have
submitted to the Council a special report on recent
actions undertaken by the authorities in the Republika
Srpska that clearly violate the Dayton Paris Peace
Agreement. I hope that my reports and my briefing
today will contribute to a better understanding of the

These developments would be bad enough at a
time when Governments should be redoubling their
efforts to deliver the deep reforms the country needs to
tackle the serious economic and social challenges its
citizens are facing, and, of course, to make progress
towards EU and NATO membership. However, within
this already difficult climate, the authorities in

2

11-32875

S/PV.6529

Republika Srpska have taken concrete actions that
represent the most serious violation of the Dayton Paris
Peace Agreement that we have seen since it was
signed.
The conclusions and the decision on the
referendum, which were adopted by the Republika
Srpska National Assembly in April, are not only a clear
breach of the Peace Agreement but also put into
question all laws enacted by the various High
Representatives by claiming they are in violation of the
Peace Agreement. As such, the recent actions by the
Republika Srpska, if allowed to stand, would have a
major impact on the functionality and sustainability of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The High Representatives, in
line with relevant Security Council resolutions, enacted
a significant number of decisions and laws
fundamental to the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I
would mention just a few decisions taken that are now
operational, namely, on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
passport, flag, national anthem and coat of arms and on
a single Ministry of Defence. I would remind the
Council that before the single Ministry of Defence was
created, there were three ministries of defence in
existence. There have also been other key reforms,
such as, inter alia, on border police.
The holding of a referendum on the High
Representative’s powers and on his decisions would be
a serious breach of the country’s constitutional
framework and of its international obligations. It would
also be contrary to annex 10 of the Dayton Paris Peace
Agreement and to a host of resolutions adopted by the
Security Council under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations. In other words, such a referendum
would also, in a way, challenge the authority of the
Security Council and its relevant resolutions. In
addition, the conclusions seek to undermine the entire
constitutional system of the division of responsibilities
between the State and the entities as established by
annex 4 of the Peace Agreement, as well as the
Constitution and the Constitutional Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which is an institution established by
the Peace Accord.
With regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s judicial
institutions at the State level, which are specifically
targeted by the referendum, I must point out that, under
the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the State
has exclusive competence for international and interentity criminal law enforcement. The Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Bosnia and Herzegovina’s

11-32875

Prosecutor’s Office are institutions created with a view
to enabling the State to exercise those precise Statelevel competencies.
On a technical but important point, and to avoid
any misunderstandings, this referendum would be
binding. Although there had been some statements
suggesting that the referendum would not be binding, it
would in fact be binding.
My approach to this challenge to the Dayton Paris
Peace Agreement has been clear and fully consistent
with my firm belief that dialogue should always be
given a chance. In this regard, I expect the Republika
Srpska authorities to rescind the adopted conclusions
and the referendum decision in the coming days.
Should that not happen, given my responsibilities to
uphold the Peace Agreement, I will have no choice but
to repeal the conclusions and referendum decision. In
this regard, I have strong support from the Peace
Implementation Council and the highest levels of the
European Union.
In addition to the conclusions and the decision on
the referendum, the authorities of Republika Srpska,
and in particular its President, have openly continued
to question the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Bosnia and Herzegovina by repeatedly threatening the
sustainability of the country and by frequently
advocating in favour of its dissolution. The authorities
of Republika Srpska have also continued to undermine
and question other key State-level institutions in the
country. The policy behind that is to show that these
institutions are dysfunctional and therefore not needed
at the State level. The Republika Srpska authorities
have also continued to deny that genocide took place in
Srebrenica in 1995 — a fact which has repeatedly been
confirmed by international tribunals.
Seven months after the general elections, the
overall political situation in the country remains
unsatisfactory and has made the formation of
Government at the State level almost impossible. The
legislative process at the State level remains at a
standstill, and as a result there has been no progress
addressing EU- and NATO-related reform agendas.
I believe that it would be a mistake to view these
latest developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
short-term negative trend. We have in fact witnessed a
downward trend in political stability for five years
now, following the rejection of the April 2006 package
of constitutional amendments. While we must now

3

S/PV.6529

focus on the immediate difficulties, I believe that it is
also important to take a critical look at what we need to
do to secure a functional and viable country in the long
term. It is clear that we need to support the ownership
principle in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Peace Implementation Council has continued
to express strong concern about developments in the
country, in particular about the events I have
mentioned. At the same time, the Peace
Implementation Council has noted that — with the
exception of the objective related to the Brcko
district — there has been little progress in
implementing the conditions required for closing the
Office of the High Representative.
On the State and defence property objectives,
which are the first and second objectives, there has
even been regression as the Republika Srpska
authorities unilaterally adopted an entity law on State
property in December that — had it entered into
force — would have led to all State property in that
entity being registered as Republika Srpska property.
This would have made a comprehensive negotiated
solution on State property impossible. Therefore, I had
to suspend the application of that law pending a
decision on its constitutionality by the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. On defence
property, Republika Srpska continues to refuse to grant
the State the right of ownership over defence property.
In contrast, there has been progress addressing
the outstanding conditions on the Brcko electricity
issue. I hope that we will also be able to resolve the
remaining issues soon. However, before this process
can be recommended, the Republika Srpska is required
to give proper and specific assurances on the
constitutional status and rights of the Brcko district in
the future, as well as on the terms of the Final Award,
as the Federation has done already. The Federation has
given assurances on Brcko, but the Republika Srpska
has yet to do so.
As I mentioned earlier, the entire international
community must take the deteriorating situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina very seriously. Further
erosion of the State, its institutions and the rule of law
will push Bosnia and Herzegovina into deeper crisis
and instability. This could also have negative
consequences for the entire region of South-East
Europe.

4

In this regard, allow me to say a few words on
how I think the international community should
approach Bosnia and Herzegovina in the future. We all
agree that the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina is
within the European Union and Euro-Atlantic
institutions. The EU and NATO therefore have an
important role to play in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
assisting the country to fulfil the requirements for its
aspirations to membership in both organizations. This,
by the way, is also the wish of the State Presidency.
At the same time, the need for an international
presence with an executive mandate in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is still evident. There are serious
challenges to the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina
coming from within the country, which demand the
presence of the Office of the High Representative and
the European Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina
with an executive mandate. We should have sufficient
tools to prevent attempts aimed at rolling back the
previously agreed reforms and at creating instability.
It is important that Bosnia and Herzegovina
remain on the international community’s agenda until
the job is completed. There are some who believe that
it is now time to leave Bosnia and Herzegovina on its
own; some talk about international fatigue in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It has also been repeated over the
past two years that Bosnia and Herzegovina is no
longer the focus of the international community. I do
not share this view, and believe that such moves would
open the door to those who would attempt to weaken
and eventually divide the State, which could lead to
renewed disorder.
The international community has achieved
tremendous results in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the
past 15 years. However, it is clear from the current
political situation that we have not yet achieved a
lasting and sustainable political settlement that would
ensure a durable prospect of peace. To that end, we
also enjoy very good support from neighbouring
countries, President Tadić of Serbia and President
Josipović of Croatia. One can say with some
confidence that we now have the best regional situation
of the past 20 years. This is not only about regional
cooperation; it is also about regional reconciliation.
That gives us reason to be optimistic.
Our continued attention on Bosnia and
Herzegovina is the way to get to the objective that we
all want to reach, in which Bosnia and Herzegovina is

11-32875

S/PV.6529

able to solve its problems institutionally and on its own
and move towards full Euro-Atlantic integration with
full ownership of responsibilities.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a gold mine of talent
and full of people of excellence. We have to give those
people and the country a chance. They can do it, I am
sure. They only need some time and some patience. I
am truly convinced that this can become a reality. I
will, as High Representative and with the Security
Council’s help, therefore continue to dedicate all my
efforts to assisting and supporting Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s efforts in this direction.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Inzko for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes the High Representative for Bosnia
Herzegovina to the Security Council and thanks him
for his briefing, which we have taken note of with
concern.
The Dayton Peace Accords are a peace
experiment aimed at achieving, as President Clinton
said at the time, “unity in diversity”. In
commemorating its fifteenth anniversary last
November, Secretary Clinton in her statement
reminded us that
“the Dayton Agreement is a cornerstone of peace
and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina today. It
has provided a framework for rebuilding the
nation’s infrastructure, returning refugees and
displaced persons to their homes, and helping
citizens resume a normal life.”
These are assessments that my delegation agrees with
and strongly supports.
It is therefore with deep concern that we have
taken note of recent developments in Bosnia, which
hold the potential to undermine its unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity. As the country lies at the very
heart of Europe, such a development would damage
peace and stability in the Balkans and must be avoided
at all costs.
It is our view that the peace and stability in
Bosnia are dependent on a number of elements. The
first is that all parties, including the international
community, must respect the rule of law and the legal

11-32875

instruments that underlie the political structures in the
country. It is crucial that the political leadership and
the international presence remain focused on
recognizing the balance brought about by Dayton and
the subsequent political structures, and that they exert
all efforts to ensure that this balance is respected and
maintained. This is especially important in the
completion of the Government formation process.
We are reminded of the fact that the Dayton
Accords were supposed to be replaced by a permanent
constitution in Bosnia, and we call on all parties
involved to again start focusing on constitutional
reform, which is the second element required for
sustainable peace. No one is served by actions that take
the country backwards from the constitutional reforms
already agreed. The purpose of constitutional reform is
to establish strong and representative State structures
that supersede all other structures.
The third element is the need for dialogue
between the parties, as none of what I have mentioned
can be achieved without dialogue among the various
ethnic groups and entities. Dialogue among the various
structures and the High Representative is also crucial.
Dialogue is essential for the adoption of the final
Constitution. It will also facilitate the completion of
the five objectives and two conditions, which, in turn,
is required for the High Representative to complete his
work and for Bosnians to take full responsibility for
their country. Our delegation is concerned about the
fact that no progress has been made in the
implementation of those commitments. We call on all
parties to redouble their efforts in that regard.
The fourth element is reconciliation. This should
be the ultimate aim of continued dialogue. Essential for
reconciliation is the commitment by all parties to fight
impunity by brining to justice those accused of
committing war crimes. This process must be executed
in an impartial manner and by the judicial instruments
agreed to by the various parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Reconciliation is undermined by rhetoric
and inflammatory actions aimed at undermining the
Bosnian State.
In conclusion, I want to quote President Clinton’s
statement when the Dayton Accords were completed, in
1995. He reminded us that
“After so much bloodshed and loss and so many
outrageous acts of inhuman brutality, it will take
an extraordinary effort of will for the people of

5

S/PV.6529

Bosnia to pull themselves from their past and
start building a future of peace”.
This is the final element that my delegation wants to
highlight, namely, political will. We want to encourage
all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to recommit
themselves to the full implementation of their
commitments under the Peace Accords and agreements.
South Africa will remain dedicated in its task as a
member of the Security Council to support Bosnia in
those efforts.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome High Representative Inzko back
to the Security Council and to thank him for his
comprehensive briefing and for his service on behalf of
the international community.
Let me also acknowledge the dedicated service of
Bosnia and Herzegovina on the Security Council,
which demonstrates its commitment to playing a
strong, responsible role in the international community.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s term on the Council has also
demonstrated that cooperation and consensus among
the leaders of its constituent groups is possible, even
on complicated matters of international peace and
security. This, in turn, gives us hope that those leaders
can find ways to work together to overcome their
internal political difficulties.
More than 15 years ago, the international
community came together with Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s leaders to end the terrible conflict and
forge a blueprint for the way forward. The hard work in
Dayton, Ohio, paved the way for the lasting peace from
which Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to benefit.
But today the foundations of that historic Agreement
are being challenged, threatening to undercut many of
the gains that the country has achieved since Dayton.
The United States urges the parties to make every
effort to work together across ethnic and party lines to
maintain peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and throughout the region.
Let me make four points in reaction
Ambassador Inzko’s report (see S/2011/283).

to

First, the United States would like to reiterate our
full support for the authority of the High
Representative under the Dayton Accords. His
authority has been repeatedly affirmed in numerous
Security Council resolutions. We agree that the recent
conclusions adopted by the Republika Srpska National

6

Assembly present a fundamental challenge to the
Dayton Accords and constitute the most serious of a
disturbing pattern of actions by the Republika Srpska
in violation of the Agreement. These actions raise
serious questions about the Republika Srpska’s
commitment to the rule of law and to Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s path to membership in the European
Union (EU). They represent a setback to progress made
on the 5+2 agenda towards closing the Office of the
High Representative. And they will have a chilling
effect on the Republika Srpska’s ability to attract much
needed foreign investment, complicating the already
difficult road to economic recovery. The High
Representative has our complete support in
condemning these unwarranted and unlawful
challenges to his authority. He will likewise have our
full support in steps he takes to uphold Dayton and
defend and preserve Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We are in the
process of considering our own measures in support of
Dayton and Bosnian State institutions, should they
become necessary.
Secondly, we are extremely concerned about the
absence of a State-level Government more than seven
months after the general elections. The political
stalemate impedes progress on crucial reforms that are
a first step towards membership in the EU and NATO.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders must assemble a
strong coalition Government that is capable of making
the necessary reforms, or risk seeing Bosnia and
Herzegovina fall behind on the path to integration.
Progress is possible if politicians are prepared to set
aside narrow ethnic and personal political agendas and
work towards common goals. The increased
coordination among members of the tripartite
presidency provides us with optimism that this can
happen.
Thirdly, the United States remains concerned
about divisive and chauvinistic rhetoric. Hate speech,
including deeply troubling denials of the Srebrenica
genocide, severely undermines trust and has led to
increased tension between citizens and their political
representatives. All groups have the right to address
their grievances, but calls for secession and territorial
reorganization are unrealistic and destabilizing. They
serve only to deepen ethnic mistrust and division.
Fourthly, let me again emphasize the importance
of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s continued cooperation
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former

11-32875

S/PV.6529

Yugoslavia. The country’s law enforcement and
judicial collaboration with regional partners to
apprehend suspected war criminals across borders is a
step forward. We encourage Bosnian authorities to
build on that progress and further advance stability in
the region by creating an institutional mechanism for
such cooperation.
We welcome the EU’s decision to enhance its
representation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also
welcome the contributions of the European Union
Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which remain
necessary for maintaining stability, in particular given
the difficult political situation.
The United States is fully committed to the
Dayton Accords and fully supportive of the High
Representative. We remain hopeful that the elected
leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina will forge a
consensus around defence, constitutional and other
reforms necessary to peace and stability, and ultimately
for EU and NATO integration.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
also like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
introduction of the report under consideration (see
S/2011/283). We take note of the hopeful note in which
he concluded his statement, just as we have taken note
of the progress highlighted in the report in the area of
security and of the difficulties that are unfortunately
hampering the comprehensive implementation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement. I would like to take this
opportunity, on behalf of Gabon, to once again
commend Mr. Inzko and his team for their efforts on
the ground to implement the Agreement, as well as in
connection with the reforms aimed at contributing to
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s integration into Europe.
As we underscored at our previous debate (see
S/PV.6421), Gabon fully supports the efforts made by
the international community to establish the rule of law
in Bosnia and Herzegovina on the basis of stable and
lasting institutions. We reiterate our support for the
implementation for the Dayton Agreement, which is
the foundation for the political process in the country.
The report that has just been introduced to us provides
a new opportunity to evaluate both the implementation
of the Agreement as well as the current political and
security situation.
With regard to security, my country welcomes the
central role that the European Union Force in Bosnia

11-32875

and Herzegovina (EUFOR) continues to play in
ensuring a stable environment in the region in spite of
an increasingly tense political situation. We also
welcome the decision taken recently by senior Bosnian
officials to suspend the issuance of licences for the
export of weapons and military material.
We are also pleased to note that current political
developments are marked by improved cooperation
among the three members of the new Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. That original mechanism
makes it possible to lay the foundation for breaking the
political deadlock and to begin to establish an agreed
transitional Government.
My Government also welcomes the fact that the
general elections held in October 2010 were conducted
smoothly and that the European Union has lifted visa
requirements for Albanians and Bosnians in the
Schengen area.
However, the gains made in the context of the
Dayton Agreement are today at risk, and the
international community must endeavour to preserve
them. We are concerned at the persistence of several
obstacles that are hampering the political process and
the establishment of normally functioning institutions.
I refer here to the difficulty of establishing a federal
Government; the absence of an agreement on State
property and on defence; and the challenge involved in
ensuring the effective rule of law and the fiscal
management of public finances. These are
preconditions for the consolidation of peace and the
building of a democratic State in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
We remain convinced that it is only through
dialogue and political agreement that the parties will be
able to achieve reconciliation in a situation
characterized
by
two
diametrically
opposed
approaches: that of a multi-ethnic, democratic and
Euro-Atlantic society, and that of shared power among
three nationalist oligarchies.
We urge all parties to engage in dialogue and to
display
tolerance,
which
are
indispensable
requirements for reconciliation and inter-communal
unity. We condemn any calls for division or for a
reassessment of the Dayton Agreement. We call on all
parties to strengthen their cooperation with the High
Representative, EUFOR, NATO and the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

7

S/PV.6529

We would also note that EUFOR has played a
vital role in improving the security situation. The
international community in its turn must increase the
aid it provides to the parties in order to achieve the five
objectives pursuant to the Dayton Agreement and the
two
conditions
established
by
the
Peace
Implementation Council. Respect by the parties for
those requirements will facilitate the transition process
whereby the Office of the Special Representative will
replace that of the High Representative. Given current
conditions, the mandate of the High Representative,
which was extended until 31 August 2011, should be
further extended. In that respect, we await the
conclusions of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council in July.
The building of Bosnia is first and foremost the
responsibility of the people of Bosnia. We call on the
political parties and actors to reject division and
intolerance so as to construct a common destiny, one
that reflects their deepest aspirations in a united
resolve to live together with newfound unity.
Lastly, I should like to conclude by once again
expressing our support for the work of the High
Representative and for the recommendations he has
made regarding future action.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today’s meeting of the Security Council is
taking place without the traditional participation of the
Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We know that Mr. Radmanović
underwent an operation that prevented him from
coming to New York. We would like to wish him a
speedy recovery.
We listened closely to the statement made by the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Inzko. Unfortunately, his statement contained more
emotion than objective analysis of the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. That also applies to the two
reports presented by the High Representative to the
Security Council.
In order to gain a more objective view of the
processes under way in Bosnia and Herzegovina, we
recommend that members of the Council read the letter
sent by the President of the Republika Srpska,
Mr. Dodik, to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council in response to the High
Representative’s accusations that the leadership of the
Serb entity had violated the Dayton Agreement. We

8

hope that that document will be transmitted by the
President to members of the Council.
The main task of the international community at
this stage of a Bosnian settlement is, in our view, the
transfer of responsibility for the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the Bosnians themselves. In practice,
that means replacing the Office of the High
Representative with that of the European Union
Special Representative and, to that end, returning to the
implementation of the 5+2 agenda set forth by the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council.
The process of forming a new Government
following the elections of 3 October 2010 is facing
serious complications. We believe that the current
crisis is caused by the shakeup of State institutions by,
first and foremost, the Bosniak leaders. Moreover, a
significant share of the responsibility lies with the
High Representative, whose measures, taken on the
basis of the Bonn powers, have consistently heightened
tensions in the country and hindered the quest for an
internal compromise. The main problem, in our view, is
the unwillingness to take into account the views of the
Serb and Croat representatives. We believe that only
the representatives of those parties that were victorious
in the elections from each of the peoples would fully
reflect the choice of the population. Accordingly, the
formation by the ruling party of a coalition that does
not include the Serb party the Alliance of Independent
Social Democrats, the Croatian Democratic Union and
the Croat Democratic Union 1990, which is what the
Bosniak leaders are trying to achieve, could lead to a
violation of the interests of the Serb and Croat peoples
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We have witnessed with concern the unilateral
actions taken by the Bosniak side to form a new
leadership of the federation that does not include the
leading Croat parties. This approach violates if not the
letter then the spirit of Dayton and is counterproductive
and dangerous. The legitimacy of these steps is not
only disputed by the Serbian and Croat political leaders
but was also rejected by the Central Election
Commission of Bosnia and Herzegovina. For all intents
and purposes, the process of forming a new
Government has been undermined.
With respect to the decision taken by the
Parliament of the Republika Srpska
to hold a
referendum on the legitimacy of the actions taken by
the High Representative — the subject of the special

11-32875

S/PV.6529

report — we do not see a direct violation here of the
Dayton Agreement. The reference by the High
Representative to violations by the Serb entity of
annexes 4 and 10 to the Dayton Agreement is not
justified. Annex 4 does not contain any reference to a
court and prosecutor in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
annex 10 grants the High Representative only the
functions of interpreting the Dayton Agreements; it
does not give him the authority to impose any changes
which would interfere in the political process.
Moreover, the President of Republika Srpska
spoke very clearly about the absence of separatist
thought in the Serb entity. We believe that at this stage
the actions of the Republika Srpska leadership do not
go beyond their jurisdiction or violate the Agreement.
On that basis, we cannot agree with the decision
taken by the High Representative on 27 March that
overruled the Central Election Commission’s decision
on the formation of a new Government by the Bosniak
entity. We see it as putting pressure on the leadership
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in favour of one of the
sides. The representative of the International Crisis
Group, Ms. Arbour, spoke about this very clearly,
saying that it was her view that the High
Representative had shattered State institutions and the
rule of law.
The continuing arbitrary use by the High
Representative of the Bonn powers is unacceptable.
Our principal position is that the application of the
emergency mechanism is justified only in exceptional
circumstances involving grave violations of the Dayton
Agreement that threaten to destabilize the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina; the current actions cannot be
characterized in that way.
We call on the partners in the Steering Board not
to dramatize the situation with the referendum but to
focus on encouraging dialogue between the sides,
which would take into account the concerns of the
Serbian side about the activities of the Court and the
Prosecutor. We know the validity of the comments and
the dissatisfaction by the Serbian side with the
activities of the Bosnian courts, which have long
remained deaf to the international presence. Of the
overall number of convictions by the Bosnian courts,
80 per cent have been in cases against Serbs. We are
convinced that any vitally important decisions
regarding the future of the country should be taken by
the Bosnians themselves, on the condition that

11-32875

agreement be reached among the three State peoples of
Bosnia and Herzegovina: Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats.
In this context, we consider any attempt to impose any
sort of constitutional reform on the Bosnian sides from
the outside unacceptable. Such unilateral actions could
worsen the situation in the country, as shown by the
sadly well known case of the Butmir initiative.
In our view, the only way to find a solution to the
political crisis is through dialogue leading to mutual
concessions by the sides. We believe that decisions on
the key questions of a settlement should be taken in the
international forums we have agreed upon, namely, the
Security Council and the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I express our
thanks to the High Representative for his frank and
dispassionate report. The United Kingdom strongly
supports his ongoing work in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and shares his deep concerns about the situation there
and its deterioration over the past few months.
Seven months after elections, there is still no new
State-level Government. This has blocked progress on
reforms that are essential if Bosnia and Herzegovina is
to function properly and move towards a future in the
European Union (EU) and NATO. Nationalist rhetoric
across the Federation continues to challenge the
institutions and integrity of the State. Political leaders
must urgently engage in negotiations to create a new
State-level Government that is focused on, and able to
deliver, crucial reforms. The Dayton framework
requires political representation from all constituent
peoples. Without flexibility and concerted effort,
Bosnia and Herzegovina will remain stuck on the
European Union accession track while its neighbours
continue to move ahead.
We are concerned in particular by conclusions
adopted by the Republika Srpska National Assembly
on 13 April. Those conclusions, including the proposal
to hold a referendum on the authority of State-level
judicial institutions and the decisions of the High
Representative, represent a clear breach of the Dayton
Agreement. The conclusions are a direct attack on the
High Representative, whose authority has been
endorsed in numerous Security Council resolutions,
most recently last November (resolution 1948 (2010)).
The Republika Srpska’s actions threaten Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s overall stability. The Security
Council cannot ignore or downplay the current

9

S/PV.6529

challenge. This is not a technical issue. As the report of
the High Representative (see S/2011/283) highlights,
these decisions must also be seen in the broader
context of repeated rhetorical attacks by the Republika
Srpska on State-level institutions and a policy of
obstructing, undermining and questioning their
authority. Alongside this, President Dodik has
questioned the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, repeatedly questioned the
sustainability of the country and, on occasions, openly
advocated its dissolution.

In this context, I would also draw the attention of
the Security Council to the conclusions of the
European Union Foreign Affairs Council in March,
which expressed clear support for proposals from EU
High Representative Ashton for possible EU restrictive
measures. The EU now has a full range of tools and
measures at its disposal to tackle challenges in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The March Council decision states
that restrictive measures may be imposed against
persons who undermine the sovereignty, integrity or
security of Bosnia and Herzegovina or undermine the
Dayton Peace Agreement.

We have seen the letter from the Republika
Srpska
authorities
that Ambassador
Churkin
mentioned. We fundamentally disagree with the legal
argumentation of the Republika Srpska authorities and
firmly support the High Representative’s analysis. The
United Kingdom’s view is clear: the High
Representative derives his authority from the Dayton
Peace Agreement, which has been endorsed by the
Security Council under Chapter VII. It is therefore
clearly inappropriate to make this authority the subject
of a referendum. The Republika Srpska referendum
question explicitly states that the State court and
Prosecutor’s Office were unconstitutionally formed.
This fact has been refuted by the Constitutional Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in three separate decisions.
As the Republika Srpska acknowledges, the
Constitutional Court’s authority is established in the
Dayton Agreement, and is therefore in the Bosnian
Constitution. Its decisions are final and binding, and a
challenge to the Bosnia and Herzegovina State Court
that ignores those decisions represents a challenge to
the Dayton Agreement. Republika Srpska state law
should not touch on matters outside its own
jurisdiction. Legally speaking, the status and powers of
the High Representative are matters arising under the
Dayton Peace Agreement and international law, which
therefore do not fall within the purview of Republika
Srpska.

Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to join my
colleagues in thanking the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina for his comprehensive and
frank briefing. We welcome the significant contribution
made by the Office of the High Representative to
stability, peace and sustainable development in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

We therefore welcome all efforts to persuade the
Republika Srpska to withdraw its referendum proposal
and instead engage in constructive dialogue. If,
however, there is no decision of this nature by
Republika Srpska authorities within the clear time
frame set by the High Representative, the United
Kingdom will strongly and firmly support the High
Representative in taking whatever action he deems
necessary to protect and uphold the United Nationsendorsed Dayton framework.

In particular, Germany is concerned by the
announcement by the Republika Srpska that it will hold
a referendum on key State-level judicial institutions.
The attempt to undermine the judiciary is alarming.
Disrespect for the rule of law damages Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s potential for EU accession. We should
be clear and unequivocal about that.

10

Finally, the risk of spillover from the worsening
political climate into the security situation has
increased in recent months. As the High Representative
makes clear in his report, the presence of the European
Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR)
continues to reassure citizens that they are safe despite
the tense political situation. EUFOR’s executive
military mandate remains a crucial safeguard for
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union
(EU).
We are pleased to see that the security situation
continues to be stable. However, the past few months
have seen few positive political developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. On the contrary, unilateral
attacks on the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its
institutions have increased. There is a disconcerting
lack of readiness to compromise and to overcome
nationalist agendas.

11-32875

S/PV.6529

Germany welcomes and fully supports the current
initiatives taken by the European External Action
Service, the European Commission and the Office of
the High Representative to find a solution to the issue
of the referendum. If those endeavours fail, further
measures have to be considered. The High
Representative has Germany’s full support. The
initiative to hold a referendum is an assault on the
political consensus rooted in the Dayton Accords, to
which we are all committed.
Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to form an
inclusive State-level Government as a matter of the
utmost priority in order to tackle the reform priorities
ahead. Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot afford to lose
more time if it does not want to fall behind in the EU
integration process. We will have to adapt the
cumbersome structures of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
Constitution and to bring them into line with the
European Convention on Human Rights and the
requirements of the EU integration process. Bosnia and
Herzegovina needs to be able to speak with one voice
when negotiating with the EU and in other
international forums. Germany will continue to provide
its support to Bosnia and Herzegovina in that field.
The current political crisis has again brought to
the fore the fact that some politicians in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are unwilling to place compromise and
the wellbeing of the country and its citizens above their
own nationalist agendas. Since Dayton, the policy
approach of the international community has
apparently not been sufficient to create incentives for
compromise in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Dayton must
remain the foundation of the State; But Bosnia and
Herzegovina needs to build a European house on it.
The Foreign Ministers of the EU have therefore
decided to reinforce the EU presence. That will create
positive incentives and leverage for the integration
processes, and will help it to react when Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s stability is intentionally undermined.
Let me be very clear. For the EU, respect for the
rule of law and the stability of potential candidate
countries are crucial. We will not accept any
fundamental shortfall of such requirements. In March,
the EU’s Foreign Affairs Council took a decision on
restrictive measures against individuals putting the
stability and integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina at
risk. If talks fail, the EU might feel obliged to consider
the application of such measures.

11-32875

Finally, let me raise an issue relevant to the future
work of the Office of the High Representative and
other international organizations. To safeguard the
footprint of the Office in stabilizing Bosnia and
Herzegovina, a sustainable solution for the immunity
of present and former Office personnel needs to be
found.
A stable,
economically
prosperous
and
democratic Bosnia, irrevocably proceeding along the
path of EU integration, is the best guarantor of
peaceful development in the region. Germany will
continue to provide assistance to such development.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I, too, would like to
welcome High Representative and European Union
(EU) Special Representative Mr. Valentine Inzko and
to convey to him Portugal’s appreciation and support
for his work in the interests of peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In that context, we also thank him for his
recent report (see S/2011/283) and for today’s
presentation, all of which deserve our full support.
Portugal aligns itself with the statement to be made
later today by the European Union representative.
Today’s debate finds Bosnia and Herzegovina
facing a particularly difficult political situation that
may have dire implications for national, regional and
international peace and security. We appeal to the
leaders of all three constituent peoples to work together
constructively and to refrain from using divisive
rhetoric in order to overcome the general political
deadlock in that country, and in particular to urgently
form a Government at the State level. The current
stalemate harms the prospects of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s future prosperity and the region’s
stability.
The decision taken unilaterally to hold a
referendum in Republika Srpska on an issue that
pertains to national sovereignty and the powers of the
High Representative is a serious threat to political
balance within the country and a challenge to the
established constitutional order. The international
community is rightly concerned by that threat to the
Dayton framework, and the options available to deal
with it are well known to all parties. In that context,
Portugal reaffirms its support for the High
Representative’s authority. It is our belief that the
national interests of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
country’s territorial integrity and sovereignty must be
preserved.

11

S/PV.6529

Today is Europe Day, and Portugal strongly
believes that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s future is with
the European Union. It is our conviction that tangible
progress at both the political and the technical levels is
in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s best interest, as it is a
precondition to Euro-Atlantic integration. The EU’s
role in Bosnia and Herzegovina in general and in
relation to the current situation is vital. It reflects a
consistent political and economic commitment and
deserves the international community’s full support.
Portugal is proud to have participated in the
international community’s efforts to bring peace to the
Balkans and to Bosnia and Herzegovina. Fifteen years
of hard work and costly sacrifice by the Bosnian
people and the international community should not and
will not be reversed. The Bosnian people deserve peace
and prosperity. Portugal trusts that the international
community will continue to be fully engaged in
working for a united, independent and peaceful Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I would like to
join other colleagues here in welcoming the High
Representative and to thank him for his extensive
briefing. We have also gone through his reports and
would like to express support for his efforts in the
work that he is doing.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a novel experiment in
building a new nation from the rubble of civil war that
the people of the former Yugoslavia had to endure
during the 1990s. It is never easy to build a multiethnic, multilingual, multicultural and multireligious
country. The problems that the High Representative has
reported to us today are bound to be encountered on
the path of building a nation inhabited by people of
different faiths, ethnicities and languages. Representing
a country of more than 1.2 billion with arguably the
largest diversity, I commend the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for their determination to form a nation
based on unity and diversity, and wish them success in
their endeavours. Our experience has convinced us
that, although the path is long and arduous, the fruits
are well worth the efforts.
The resolution of the problems facing the
Bosnian people call for patience, determination and
mutual accommodation. Unilateral actions, mutual
suspicion and violation of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace will only vitiate the political and
social atmosphere and delay the achievement of their

12

goals. We would like to congratulate Bosnia and
Herzegovina on the successful and smooth conduct of
elections in October 2010 to elect the members of the
Presidency in the three Parliaments at the national level
and one each for the two entities. The Parliament at the
entity level has begun to function. We hope that the
stalemate in the formation of the Federation House of
Peoples will also be resolved and that the
Parliamentary Assembly will be able to convene soon.
The display of flexibility on the part of the parties and
the avoidance of divisive rhetoric would contribute
towards that goal.
In that context, we welcome the High
Representative’s assessment that the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is operational and that
cooperation among the three members has improved in
comparison to the previous mandate. We are glad to
note that the European Union Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has been able to maintain a safe and
secure environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we
support the view of the High Representative that its
executive mandate should be extended.
India’s relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina are
cordial and friendly, dating back to the decades of
friendship that we enjoyed with all the constituents of
the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. In
India, there is enormous goodwill for the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, who share common values of
respect for plurality, diversity and democracy. In the
early 1990s, we extended assistance as part of the
United Nations mission to observe law and order,
including the dispatch of police observers. Recently,
we have been cooperating in the establishment of an
information technology centre. We stand ready to help
in any other way that we can in the process of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s nation-building.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Let me welcome and
thank the High Representative, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for
his update on developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina
since his last briefing (see S/PV.6421).
We are pleased that the security situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has remained calm. We note
with satisfaction the positive developments, including
the implementation of the decision to abolish shortterm visa requirements for Bosnia and Herzegovina
citizens holding biometric passports and the improved
cooperation among the members of the Presidency. We
welcome the further progress on rule of law issues, as

11-32875

S/PV.6529

well as improved
neighbours.

relations

with

the

country’s

In spite of such improvements, we note that
several difficult challenges remain, including the
persisting climate of distrust among the political
leaders and the lack of political will in implementing
the Dayton Peace Agreement. Those misgivings are
responsible for the limited progress on key reforms
required for Euro-Atlantic integration and the
completion of the five objectives and two conditions
for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative. We encourage political leaders to
commit to the necessary reforms and the entire
international community to support the country’s
efforts in that regard.
There is an urgent need for political leaders to
refrain from nationalistic and anti-Dayton rhetoric,
surmount their differences and demonstrate their
resolve to address those differences through dialogue.
It is also essential to promote national reconciliation
and engender political trust, and for political leaders to
be doggedly determined to remain united as a single
entity, despite all odds.
We appreciate the valuable work of the High
Representative and support his efforts to promote the
entry of Bosnia and Herzegovina into the European
Union and to facilitate the implementation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement.
We commend the role of the European Union
Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in collaboration with
the armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
ensuring a safe and secure environment in the country.
We welcome the contribution of regional and
international partners in support of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s efforts to sustain peace, stability and
economic progress in the country. We are convinced
that, with diligence and the necessary support of the
international community, including this Council,
Bosnia and Herzegovina will realize the vision of a
stable, peaceful and prosperous country.
Finally, only political will to make concerted
efforts at flexibility, consultative dialogue and respect
for the various commitments made will ensure the
sustainability of the progress built over the past few
years.
Mr. Yang Tao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank High Representative Inzko for his

11-32875

briefing. China welcomes the progress made in Bosnia
and Herzegovina in such fields as security sector
reform, enhancing the rule of law and economic
recovery. We hope that all ethnic groups in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will proceed on the basis of the long-term
interests of the country in a spirit of mutual
understanding and compromise; effectively implement
the Dayton Peace Agreement; settle their differences
through dialogue and negotiations; and increase mutual
political trust to enhance national reconciliation. China
looks forward to the formation of a new, broad-based
Government in Bosnia and Herzegovina at an early
date so as to ensure further progress in various aspects
of national reconstruction.
China respects the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well
as the choice of all peoples of the country on the road
to development. The future and destiny of Bosnia and
Herzegovina lie in the hands of all of its peoples,
whose right to self-determination should be duly
respected.
China supports the international community’s
constructive role in resolving the question of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. At the same time, the issues there are
very complex and sensitive, involving not only Bosnia
and Herzegovina itself, but also long-term peace and
stability in the entire Balkan region. We hope that all
parties concerned will settle their issues appropriately
through dialogue and negotiations in a spirit of
reconciliation and cooperation, avoid any escalation of
tensions, and adopt effective measures to consolidate
the achievements in the country’s political process.
Together with the international community, China
will continue to support and assist in efforts to achieve
sustainable peace, stability and development in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Inzko, for his
comprehensive briefing and his report (see S/2011/283)
on developments in the country.
We reiterate our support for Bosnia and
Herzegovina in its endeavours to complete the
implementation of the Dayton Accords and to achieve
the goals set by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council, which will lead to the closure
of the Office of the High Representative.

13

S/PV.6529

The quiet and peaceful conduct of the general
elections in October 2010 was followed by a period of
semi-paralysis in the formation of a Government and
an increase in political rhetoric. That is regrettable. We
hope that more attention will be paid in the days to
come to the formation of a representative Government
that will promote the necessary reforms and conduct an
open dialogue to achieve reconciliation.
We are concerned at the conclusions issued by the
National Assembly of the Republika Srpska on
13 April, in which it challenged the role of the
country’s legal institutions and the prerogatives of the
High Representative, thereby violating the letter and
spirit of the Dayton Accords, the country’s Constitution
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, and
negatively affecting coexistence.
We therefore call on the Republika Srpska
authorities to abide by the letter and spirit of the
Dayton Accords. In that connection, we reaffirm our
backing for the independence and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is also important for all
parties to refrain from taking measures, be they
through constitutional reforms or the formation of new
bodies of authority, outside the scope of the Dayton
Accords or the country’s Constitution. That would be
counterproductive for all parties. All parties must enter
into dialogue, negotiate on controversial issues and
make mutual concessions with a view to arriving at a
compromise acceptable to all parties. We realize that
such an approach is complex, yet it provides a safety
valve in multicultural societies. Local actors should
play a leading role.
In conclusion, we fully support Bosnia and
Herzegovina in its efforts to entrench the pillars of the
State while achieving the requisite reforms to bring
about stability and improve the welfare of its citizens.

endorsed by the Security Council in a number of
resolutions adopted pursuant to Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations. I also recognize the
valuable contribution of the Permanent Mission of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to the work of the Security
Council.
My delegation reiterates its support for the
Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement on the establishment of
the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We call on
the parties to strictly fulfil their obligations thereunder.
Similarly, we share and confirm the commitment of the
Security Council to remaining vigilant to situations
that could threaten international peace and security in
the case of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We are convinced that Bosnia and Herzegovina is
a nation that has overcome difficult periods in its
history and is attempting to consolidate its political,
judicial and administrative institutions. That is why, on
21 January, we duly supported the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2011/2) on the theme “Post-conflict
peacebuilding:
institution-building”,
given
our
understanding that its guidelines can be applied to
nations seeking to resolve their problems peacefully
and to ensure the well-being of their peoples in the
wake of conflict. We recall that, in that presidential
statement, the Council stresses
“the importance of institution-building as a
critical component of peacebuilding and
emphasizes the importance of a more effective
and coherent national and international response
to it, so that countries emerging from conflict can
deliver core Government functions, including
managing political disputes peacefully, providing
security and maintaining stability, protecting their
population, ensuring respect for the rule of law,
revitalizing the economy and providing basic
services, which are essential to achieving durable
peace.”

Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would first like to express its thanks for the
update report (see S/2011/283) on the events in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We underscore our support for the
work of the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, in overseeing the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement and
coordinating the activities of the civilian organizations
assisting the parties in that endeavour.

Additionally, the Security Council emphasized
that, in countries emerging from conflict, the principal
responsibility for successful peace falls on the national
Governments and entities, including civil society, and
that the United Nations can play a fundamental role in
supporting the development of national institutions. It
therefore stated:

We also support his decisions in the context of
annex 10 of the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which have been

“The Council acknowledges the need for
continued improvement in the delivery of support
in the immediate aftermath of conflict in order to

14

11-32875

S/PV.6529

help stabilize the situation, whilst at the same
time starting the longer-term process of
institution-building, including those institutions
that promote democratic processes and foster
economic and social development, with a view to
sustainable peace.”
We therefore emphasize that the primary
responsibility for the due implementation of the peace
agreement falls to the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In this respect, we call on all the parties
involved to support a political solution to the conflicts
emerging from the former Yugoslavia, and to preserve
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States in
the area within their internationally recognized
borders.
Colombia calls on the parties to overcome their
differences and to consolidate a central Government
and a Government of the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to strengthen its institutions, in
accordance with the “5+2” agenda. We also believe it
important that there be a frank dialogue between the
High Representative and the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to resolve their differences.
Lastly, our delegation expresses its gratitude for
the commitment of the European Union as a
stakeholder in the region and for the work carried out
by the
European Union Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I wish to join previous
speakers in welcoming High Representative Valentin
Inzko and in thanking him for his briefing.
We are concerned by recent developments that
could threaten the prospects of stability and peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Brazil reiterates its
commitment to the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
constitutional framework of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
All efforts should be made to strengthen the State at
the national level and, at the same time, to preserve the
rights and prerogatives of all communal entities.
Challenges to the Dayton Peace Agreement and
its institutional arrangements, as well as divisive
rhetoric, must be avoided. The future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a stable, prosperous and united country
hinges on strict respect for the pertinent international
and domestic legal provisions regarding the division of
powers among the different levels of Government.

11-32875

All actors must respect the authority of and
cooperate with the High Representative. We call on all
parties within Bosnia and Herzegovina to work
constructively together to put an end to internal
disagreements and build a country that reflects its
multi-ethnic richness. We remain confident that all
actors will continue to value the achievements of the
past 15 years and uphold the General Framework
Agreement for Peace. Bosnia and Herzegovina can
prosper only if it remains united. All Bosnian parties
should acknowledge that principle and refrain from any
action that would undermine it.
We call upon the international community to
continue to support Bosnia and Herzegovina as it
strives to achieve sustainable political stability and
socio-economic development. As multiculturalism
increases all over the world, Bosnia and Herzegovina
can set an example of how ethnic and cultural diversity
can be managed and indeed become an asset. We are
sure that, with the support of this Council, Bosnia and
Herzegovina will overcome the present challenges and
move towards a lasting political settlement that ensures
durable peace.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I thank Mr. Inzko, High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Special Representative of
the European Union, for his presence and his briefing
to the Council. I welcome the contribution of the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the work
of our Council.
The European perspective, which has for many
years been offered to all States of the Western Balkans,
is not an empty promise. The liberalization of visas for
all Bosnian citizens, which took place at the end of
2010 thanks to the efforts of political leaders, is
evidence of this.
However, in spite of this hand extended by the
European Union and of all the progress made over the
past 15 years, the political situation in the country is
seriously deteriorating. First of all, the lack of a
Government is delaying reforms that would enable
progress towards the European path. We therefore call
on all Bosnian leaders to make the necessary
compromises to form a Government.

15

S/PV.6529

Moreover, France is concerned by the questioning
of the judicial institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and of the authority of the High Representative. We
warn the Republika Srpska against any initiative that
would contravene the Dayton Peace Agreement and
threaten the stability of the country. We call on the
Republika Srpska to respect the peace accords, which
are the foundation for the institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. More generally, the leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina must return to dialogue, overcome their
divisions and work towards creating a State.
France reaffirms its full support for the High
Representative, the guarantor of the peace accords on
behalf of the international community. We support his
work, his dialogue with the Bosnian political
representatives and any decision he may take to ensure
respect for the institutions.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Starčević (Serbia): Let me, first of all,
welcome His Excellency Mr. Valentin lnzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
At the outset, I would like to reiterate the resolve
of the Republic of Serbia to fully honour the Dayton
Peace Agreement as a basis for stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the entire region of the Western
Balkans. Serbia respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a State of two
entities and three constitutive peoples.
My country has no intention of interfering in the
internal affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Instead, it
is fully committed to continuing, through cooperation
with it and other neighbouring countries, its efforts
aimed at bringing about reconciliation in the interest of
achieving lasting stability in the region. We believe
that the improvement of relations among the countries
of the Western Balkans will lead to the achievement of
our common goal of joining the European family of
nations.
The position of Serbia is that a solution can be
achieved only through dialogue and compromise
between the two entities and the three constitutive
peoples. We believe that the international community
should treat the relations between the three constitutive
peoples in Bosnia and Herzegovina with great care and
respect for their mutual interests. Rather than calling

16

into question the integrity of the country, every
solution for Bosnia and Herzegovina should contribute
to its peace and stability. Serbia encourages all parties
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to make additional efforts
to reach sustainable solutions to all open questions.
My country is opposed to any imposition of a
solution, because solutions should be taken only by the
legitimately elected political representatives of
citizens. We consider the idea of suspending the
representatives of certain peoples to be dangerous.
Serbia is against divisions in principle, but also against
the disqualification of some actors from political
processes. Serbia supports the quest for a solution to
start reform processes in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
believe that this quest would be helped by the closure
of the Office of the High Representative and the
cancellation of the so-called Bonn powers, because the
legitimately elected representatives of all peoples and
entities have the ability and capacity to assume
responsibility for the independent conduct of affairs of
State.
We consider that the announced referendum of
the citizens of Republika Srpska on the Court and the
Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
nothing to do with the territorial integrity of the
country and is not in contravention of the Dayton
Peace Accords. Without any intention to interfere in the
internal affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina, we believe
that legislative initiative belongs only to competent
assemblies formed by the legitimately elected
representatives of citizens and that there are no powers
on the basis of which it could be taken over by other
governmental organs in Bosnia and Herzegovina or by
the international presence.
Serbia welcomes the earlier decision taken by the
European Union (EU) on the liberalization of the visa
regime, which we see as an important step on Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s road towards membership in the
European Union. We are of the opinion that additional,
concrete encouragements from the EU are needed for
further stabilization of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, bearing in mind that EU membership is
the common denominator for the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
We have special parallel ties with the Republika
Srpska but, at the same time, we are very interested in
deepening our relations, particularly economic
relations, with the Federation of Bosnia and

11-32875

S/PV.6529

Herzegovina. Serbia participates in regular trilateral
and regional meetings. It hosted some of them recently,
at the highest level. We believe that such meetings are
a contribution and an impetus to the further promotion
of good-neighbourly relations and intensification of
regional cooperation, all of which will certainly help
speed up the process of European integration.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the European Union.
Mr. Serrano (spoke in French): Thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU).
(spoke in English)
The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Iceland and
Montenegro, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Albania
and the European Free Trade Association countries
Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the European
Economic Area, as well as Ukraine and the Republic of
Moldova, align themselves with this statement.
I would like to join other speakers in welcoming
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and
European Union Special Representative Valentin Inzko
back to the Council and to reiterate the European
Union’s full support for his Office and his work.
The European Union shares the concern of the
High Representative about the current political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. More than seven
months after the elections of October 2010, we are still
waiting for the formation of a Government at the State
level. In addition, we have since seen a further
deterioration of the political climate and little progress
in key reform areas. It is crucial that a State-level
Government be formed without further delay, that it
restart the reform process and put the country on the
road towards European Union integration. The
European Union encourages the Security Council to
send a message of strong concern, urging all political
actors to find common solutions within the framework
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In that context, we deem the recent decision by
the Republika Srpska to hold a referendum challenging
the authority of State judicial institutions within that
entity and rejecting the authority of the High
Representative as a step in the wrong direction. In

11-32875

recent meetings between EU officials and political
representatives of the Republika Srpska we have made
clear our strong concerns and our expectation that the
referendum will not be held. While concerns related to
the functioning of State institutions may be legitimate,
they but must be expressed through appropriate
mechanisms. It is clear that only mutually agreed
reforms would be acceptable.
The European Union regularly encourages
political representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
act with a greater spirit of compromise, to step up
consultations and to work for the long-term interests of
the country. The European Union has now called on
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to engage
in a constructive, structured political dialogue on legal
issues and the judiciary. We also stand fully behind the
authority of the High Representative. Moreover, we
underline once more our firm commitment to the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and urge all to refrain from divisive
rhetoric and actions that harm the interests of the
citizens.
It is the prime responsibility of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s political leaders to achieve concrete and
tangible progress, including on the road towards EU
integration, on the five objectives and two conditions
for the closure of the Office of the High Representative
and on constitutional reform. The European Union
believes that, as a matter of priority, Bosnia and
Herzegovina needs to bring its Constitution into
compliance with the European Convention on Human
Rights. The fulfilment of the obligations under the
Interim Stabilization and Association Agreement with
the European Union would demonstrate commitment to
the EU integration process, be a key element for a
credible membership application and avoid Bosnia and
Herzegovina falling further behind the region on its
way towards European Union accession.
The European Union is in the process of further
strengthening its engagement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina so as to support its progress towards EU
accession through a comprehensive approach and
significant financial assistance and expertise. It will
soon enhance its political presence through a
consolidated single EU representative. In addition, the
European Union maintains two crisis management
missions on the ground — the European Union Police
Mission and the European Union Force Althea —
which, as the Foreign Ministers of the European Union

17

S/PV.6529

member States reaffirmed in March this year, are
important elements of the overall EU strategy for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Operation Althea supports
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s efforts to maintain a safe
and secure environment and provides training to the
Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, while the
Police Mission’s activities centre on supporting the
fight against organized crime and corruption.
The recent high-level visit to Bosnia and
Herzegovina by the President of the European
Commission, José Manuel Durão Barroso, underlined
our unequivocal commitment to Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s
European
perspective
and
the
preparedness of the EU to assume the leading role in
that regard. Fifteen years after the signing of the
Dayton Paris Peace Accord, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
citizens deserve a qualitative step forward for their
country on the path towards European integration. As
the successful visa liberalization shows, when there is
political will and readiness to reach compromise,
Bosnia and Herzegovina is able to carry out reforms
and to deliver on commitments. With this in mind —
and on Europe Day 2011 — we encourage and appeal
to its political leaders to put Bosnia and Herzegovina
firmly on the way towards the European Union.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Müftüoğlu (Turkey): We join others in
warmly welcoming High Representative Inzko and we
thank him for his insightful briefing and for sharing
with us his candid assessment of the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which we fully share.
We believe that the Balkans continue to represent
the essential test case for lasting peace and stability on
the European continent. Sovereign, democratic, stable
and functional States in the Balkans are indispensable
for a free and integrated Europe, and we are
encouraged by the developments in many parts of the
Balkans towards that end. However, we are greatly
concerned by the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which faces its worst crisis and most serious risk of
instability since 1995. While the international
community anticipates ever more steadfast and
ambitious steps towards the consolidation of an
effective, stable and viable State within its
internationally recognized borders, as foreseen in the
Dayton Peace Accords, we are faced with a political
system that is deadlocked, with a disturbing increase in

18

nationalist and divisive rhetoric, including calls for the
establishment of a third entity.
It has been seven months since the holding of the
general elections, but a State-level Government has
still not been formed. Unfortunately, due to the
uncompromising positions of political leaders, there is
not much room for hope that that will be done soon. At
the level of the Federation, it has only recently been
possible to form the new Government and assemble the
Federation Parliament. While we regret that the
Government and the Federation may not be optimally
representative, despite local and international efforts,
we welcome the fact that there is finally a Government.
We hope that all stakeholders will now act responsibly
and avoid blocking the functioning of the institutions
or attempting to form parallel ones.
The main focus must now be on the formation of
the State-level Government. Without Governments and
parliaments, there can be no progress in the reform
process and thus no progress towards European Union
or NATO membership. It is of crucial importance that
the State-level Government be formed as a broadbased, inclusive and representative administrative
structure that is strong enough to lead the country
towards Euro-Atlantic integration and materialize
much-needed reforms. We therefore call on all political
stakeholders to be flexible and look for compromises
in order to achieve a breakthrough.
Most worrisome in the general deterioration of
the political climate in Bosnia and Herzegovina are the
outright challenges of the Republika Srpska to the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, its State institutions and its
constitutional order. Calls such as those of the
Republika Srpska’s President for the dissolution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina or the conclusions by the
Republika Srpska National Assembly to hold a
referendum questioning the authority and powers of the
High Representative, the Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Prosecutor’s Office are
unacceptable. These types of calls and unilateral
actions amount to clear violations of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace, are the most
dangerous steps for the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and thus must be absolutely avoided. It is
our expectation that a way will be found to repeal the
conclusions and the referendum decision. Any
legitimate concern must be expressed through

11-32875

S/PV.6529

appropriate mechanisms, and compromise solutions
must be sought.
Turkey is a member of the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board and thus feels a special
responsibility towards the Office of the High
Representative. It has been more than three years since
the Steering Board set five objectives and two
conditions for the transition of the Office of the High
Representative. While we are encouraged by the
important progress made on some issues, we regret that
the political stalemate in the country prevents progress
on the outstanding ones. We firmly believe that the full
implementation of the “5+2” agenda is absolutely
necessary for the closure of the Office and for Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s Euro-Atlantic integration.
In this context, let me also underline that we are
firm and resolute in our support for the High
Representative. We ask him to continue his efforts. We
expect him to make the decisions that he believes are
required and to use the powers granted to him by the
Council as needed to enforce those decisions. We do
not agree that the actions of the High Representative
and the personnel of his Office are unlawful, and we do
not see such claims as helpful.
Turkey considers itself a good friend of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We have excellent bilateral ties and
maintain close relations with all stakeholders in the
country. In this vein, our Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Davutoğlu, visited Bosnia and Herzegovina twice
after the elections, and during his most recent visit he
met with Bosniak leaders in Sarajevo, Mr. Dodik in
Banja Luka and Croat leaders in Mostar.
Believing also that regional cooperation is an
essential tool for normalizing relations between
countries, we have established trilateral consultation
mechanisms among Turkey, Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Serbia, and Turkey, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Croatia; these have proven to be effective and resilient
cooperation schemes. The second Trilateral Balkan
Summit among Turkey, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Serbia was held in Karadordevo, Serbia, on 26 April
and provided the leaders of the three countries with the
opportunity to discuss all issues of common interest
and look for joint solutions.
We believe in the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and are doing our utmost to assist it in
taking its rightful place in the European family of
nations. For that reason, we call on all political leaders

11-32875

in Bosnia and Herzegovina to act with the long-term
interests of the country in mind. What is needed is
common vision and joint action, not the pursuit of
narrow ethnic interests.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Allow me to extend my
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative and Special Representative of the
European Union (EU), and to thank him for his
briefing and his report (see S/2011/283). Croatia aligns
itself with the statement of the European Union, but
allow me to make an additional statement in my
national capacity.
The report presents a worrisome picture of a
post-electoral Bosnia and Herzegovina where virtually
no reforms have been implemented and progress
towards EU and NATO integration has been effectively
stalled. The situation has been further exacerbated by
the use of nationalistic and divisive rhetoric. In this
context, we agree with the assessment that it would be
premature to close the Office of the High
Representative this year.
Let me stress that the sustainable stability of
South-East Europe is in Croatia’s strategic interest. A
clear Euro-Atlantic perspective is necessary for the
whole region, and we believe that progress towards
Euro-Atlantic integration is a precondition for the
long-term stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
countries in South-East Europe. We firmly support
Bosnia and Herzegovina in implementing the necessary
reforms, and we have invested a lot of effort in offering
our assistance and experience on its EU and NATO
integration path. We believe that membership of the
European Union represents the most suitable
framework for the overall development of all countries
of South-East Europe.
Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina maintain a
close relationship as two neighbouring and friendly
countries that have common interests in many different
areas. This fact has been exemplified by a series of
high-level visits, the most recent of which occurred
three months ago when the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina visited Zagreb and held meetings with
President Ivo Josipović and Prime Minister Jadranka
Kosor. In addition, the Croatian President and Prime
Minister issued three joint statements in which they
emphasized Croatia’s support for Bosnia and

19

S/PV.6529

Herzegovina on its Euro-Atlantic path and confirmed
its responsible policy towards Bosnia and Herzegovina
as a neighbouring sovereign country in which Croats
are a constitutive people.
These joint statements and high-level visits of
Croatian leaders represent a strong encouragement to
Bosnia and Herzegovina and to the principle of the
equality of all constituent peoples and citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Croatia also supports the
return of refugees to the country, primarily to the
Republika Srpska.
Croatia has expressed concern at the ongoing
political crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
threatens to aggravate relations in the Federation and
block the formation of a Government at the State level.
Croatia regards the country’s territorial integrity, its
sovereignty and the equality of its three constitutive
peoples as the basic preconditions for Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s stability and sustainability. Therefore,
Croatia believes that, notwithstanding the current
impasse in the formation of a Government, all parties
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the international
community should strive to agree on a set of
constitutional amendments that would move the
country forward towards Europe, while preserving the
full equality of all constitutive peoples and all citizens
throughout the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We are concerned by the fact that the political
option, which at present enjoys the support of the vast
majority of Bosnian Croats, is not represented at all
political levels. It is hard to imagine lasting
constitutional reform that would make Bosnia and
Herzegovina more effective and functional without the
political option enjoying the widest popular support of
one of the three constitutive peoples of the country.
There should be no alternative to a structured political
dialogue, and no effort should be spared to reach
legitimate solutions. All important decisions in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, especially those with potentially farreaching consequences, should be made through the
consensus of all three constitutive peoples. Otherwise,
we may witness the emergence of two entities, each
dominated by a single people and increasingly drifting
apart. There is also the potential that precious time to
implement the needed pro-European reforms will be
lost.
In this regard, we agree with the previous
speakers who have expressed serious concern about the

20

unilateral decision of the Republika Srpska to hold a
referendum on challenging the authority of State
judicial institutions and rejecting the authority and past
decisions of the High Representative. We believe that
this decision should be reversed, as it undermines the
constitutional structure of the country and could undo
the positive developments achieved since the entry into
force of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
If the referendum moves forward, it may foster
new tensions in the country and the region. Croatia
underscores that all parties should respect the Dayton
Peace Agreement and the actions of the High
Representative undertaken with the approval of the
Security Council, acting under the authority of Chapter
VII of the United Nations Charter.
Finally, the fight against impunity for war crimes
is crucial to the normalization of the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The two remaining fugitives,
Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic, indicted for the most
atrocious crimes committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Croatia, must be brought to justice. If they are not,
the mandate of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and its legacy in the region cannot
be declared complete.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I, too,
want to thank the High Representative for his briefing.
I feel the need to express my gratitude to all speakers
who have expressed firm support for the process of
State-building and the integration prospects of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in the European Union.
However, after 15 years, instead of considering
how we could stop discussing Bosnia and Herzegovina
in the Security Council, we are again discussing certain
aspects of peace and security in the country. It must
therefore be understood that, for me and my
delegation, it is quite a personal and emotional issue.
We nevertheless feel the need to express both our
gratitude and certain concerns.
Allow me to note that, when we discuss the
situation in Bosnia, we have to be aware that we are
not discussing the situation that prevailed 15 years ago.
The current situation is one in which a lot has been
achieved. My country is dealing with issues that were
not a part of the problem 15 years ago, but are
preventing the country from entering a new phase of
integration and prosperity. In that regard, it is
important to say that a lot has been achieved. The
State- and institution-building processes, the return of

11-32875

S/PV.6529

refugees and the overall building of the State have been
achieved and have been successful. In the current part
of the process, domestic parties have played a major
role, in cooperation with the international community.
As a member of the Security Council, we have
had the privilege not only to discuss policies across the
world, but also to have had many lessons and examples
before us that we are using today as a reminder that
such instruments are being built on the basis of the
experience of Bosnia and Herzegovina. When we deal
with issues of post-conflict justice, we have to
remember how much has been done in that field with
regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina, the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, and the process of
building institutions within a State in order to address
the issue of justice.
For that reason, I have to express my concern
over some comments that have been made with respect
to the percentages of cases before domestic institutions
involving the various ethnic groups. The point is that
all war crimes have to be tackled, and that is the only
way we should discuss this particular issue.
In that regard, I should also like to consider the
position of the international community. The role of the
High Representative is still important in supporting the
capacities of State institutions to resolve institutional
deadlocks. Such activities of the High Representative
are aimed at the continuation of Euro-Atlantic
integration, which is the strategic goal of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Office of the High Representative, as
the executive body of the Security Council in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, not only is the main player in the
theatre, but also represents the determination of the
international community to support the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
mandate of the High Representative is defined by
annex 10 of the Dayton Peace Agreement and
confirmed by Security Council resolution 1031 (1995),
pursuant to the request of the signatories to the
Agreement to follow-up on the Agreement’s
implementation. Moreover, the Bonn powers of the
High Representative were confirmed by resolution
1144 (1997). However, that does not involve the Peace
Implementation Council, which has only a
non-obligatory advisory role defined later by an
international conference.

11-32875

Another issue that I have to address — and I
understand that it is not easy to comprehend, but is
important to stress in the light of certain comments that
have been made — is the fact that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is not solely the sum of three constituent
peoples. It is a country with a tradition of
multiculturalism and of people living together in cities
and villages and working together. When we discuss
the political situation in Bosnia, we have to be aware
of the fact that we have more than just ethnic parties
and structures; we have people working together. Thus,
when we consider the internal affairs of the country in
terms of the creation of a Government, we have to be
fully aware that we are discussing not only ethnic
groups trying to make political deals, but also political
forces in which people of different ethnic groups work
together for the common benefit of the country. I
believe that this approach should, at the very least, be
supported.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize the need for
and prospects of regional cooperation. Our Presidency
has done a lot in that regard. We have to stress that it is
necessary
to
ensure
mutual
respect
and
non-interference in our internal affairs. We truly
believe that this is a real and promising prospect.
Certainly, in recent times Bosnia and Herzegovina has
gone through a difficult political situation, but at the
same time the Government has been structured at the
entity level and at most of the local level. The
Presidency is functioning; we are taking many positive
steps in terms of working on regional cooperation, and
our caretaker Government is also functioning in a way
that is necessary to create one society.
For that reason, we believe that it is necessary for
the international community to continue, together with
domestic actors, to work resolutely to achieve the
major goals of the country: integration and Statebuilding. That is a prospect towards which we must
look together with our neighbours in the region. I
believe that this prospect is strong and the only correct
path towards a common future.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at noon.

21
