S/2018/407

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 May 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
I. Introduction and Mission priorities
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), by which the Council established the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and requested me to report at regular intervals on the
implementation of its mandate. The report covers the activities of UNMIK, and
developments related thereto, from 17 January to 15 April 2018.
2.
The priorities of the Mission remain to promote security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and in the region. UNMIK continues its constructive
engagement with Pristina and Belgrade, all communities in Kosovo and regional and
international actors. The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) continue to perform their roles under the
framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continues its presence in Kosovo, in line with the
statement by the President of the Security Council of 26 November 2008
(S/PRST/2008/44) and my report of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692). The United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes work closely with the Mission in
furtherance of the “delivering as one” initiative.

II. Key political and security developments
3.
A number of developments during the reporting period heightened tensions and
negatively impacted relations between Belgrade and Pristina. In March, shortly after
the resumption of the European Union-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, the Kosovo authorities responded negatively to a notification that the
Director of the Office for Kosovo and Metohija of the Government of Serbia, Marko
Đurić, was to travel to North Mitrovica and warned him not to visit. On 26 March,
however, Mr. Đurić travelled to North Mitrovica to attend a round-table session of
the internal dialogue on Kosovo of the President of Serbia, Aleksandar Vučić, together
with a member of President Vučić’s cabinet, three ministers of the Kosovo
government and local Kosovo leaders. Kosovo special police units entered the
building where the session was being held and, using stun grenades and tear gas,
arrested Mr. Đurić. Several people were injured, including the Kosovo Minister of
Agriculture, of the Serbian List for Kosovo and Metohija party, who was hospitalized
for three days, two mayors and journalists and bystanders. Mr. Đurić was manhandled
by the Kosovo Police down a central street in Pristina, before media and onlookers,

18-06522 (E)

020518

*1806522*

S/2018/407

and taken to a police station. After a brief court hearing, he was transferred from
Pristina and released at Gate 3 on the Administrative Boundary Line.
4.
President Vučić described Mr. Đurić’s arrest and detention as a “humiliation”, a
“brutal provocation” and against agreed protocols. The Kosovo leadership called the
action an appropriate response to ignoring their refusal to allow the visit. My Special
Representative for Kosovo described the events of 26 March as “unacceptable” and
joined the European Union and other international partners in calling for calm and
responsible leadership by all concerned.
5.
The incident had immediate repercussions. The following day, after a meeting
with President Vučić in Belgrade, the Serbian List leadership announced its intention
to withdraw from the governing coalition in Kosovo. The Serbian List also announced
that, on 20 April, it would start working unilaterally on the establishment of the
association/community of Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo, as envisaged
under the 19 April 2013 First Agreement of Principles Governing th e Normalization
of Relations. Nevertheless, on 29 March, the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Communities and Returns of the Serbian List participated in a government meeting
chaired by the Prime Minister of Kosovo, Ramush Haradinaj. At the meeting, the
Deputy Prime Minister indicated that the Serbian List remained open to meaningful
dialogue, and called on the government to launch an investigation into the events of
26 March and to proceed with the implementation of the 2013 agreement concerning
the establishment of the association/community of Serb majority municipalities.
6.
In another significant development, on 29 March the Kosovo Border Police
arrested five Turkish citizens with permanent residency status in Kosovo, allegedly
on account of their connection with the Hizmet/Gūlen movement. They were taken to
the police station in Pristina and reportedly denied access to counsel. According to
their attorneys, their residency permits were revoked, and they were expelled from
Kosovo to Turkey on the same day. A sixth Turkish citizen was also arrested in a
separate incident on 29 March and expelled to Turkey with the other five. Both
President Thaçi and the Prime Minister, Mr. Haradinaj, condemned the arrest and
expulsion of the Turkish nationals and disavowed any prior knowledge of the
operation. In response to the incident, on 30 March Mr. Haradinaj announced the
dismissal of the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Director of the Kosovo
Intelligence Agency and called for a full investigation into the expulsions, allegedly
conducted in secrecy. On 13 April, Prime Minister Haradinaj appointed Bejtush Gashi
as the new Minister of Internal Affairs.
7.
Prior to these developments, the government of Kosovo achieved an important
benchmark in the European Union integration process for Kosovo when it ratified the
agreement on territorial delineation signed with the Republic of Montenegro in 2015.
After several failed attempts to hold a ratification vote, the Assembly of Kosovo
reconvened for a vote on 21 March. Members of the opposition party Vetëvendosje
(Movement for Self-Determination) again sought to obstruct the vote, including by
throwing tear gas during the Assembly deliberations. Following a decree signed by
the President of the Assembly to secure the Assembly hall, Kosovo police escorted
13 Assembly members belonging to Vetëvendosje out of the Assembly hall; seven
Assembly members belonging to Vetëvendosje were subsequently arrested in
connection with the tear gas incidents. In the early evening of 21 March, the Assembly
was able to proceed with the vote, resulting in the ratification of the agreement by the
required two-thirds majority.
8.
Several factors positively influenced the ratification vote, including a visit on
14 February to Kosovo by the Prime Minister of Montenegro, Duško Marković, which
helped reaffirm a mutual commitment by Kosovo and Montenegro to promote
bilateral relations. Subsequently, on 16 February, President Thaçi and the President
2/19

18-06522

S/2018/407

of Montenegro, Filip Vujanović, signed a joint statement in Podgorica, in which they
agreed to the establishment of a joint working body to address any disputes
concerning the territorial delineation. In a joint statement of 21 March, the European
Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Po licy, Federica
Mogherini, the Commissioner for Migration, Home Affairs and Citizenship, Dimitris
Avramopoulos, and the Commissioner for European Neighbourhood Policy and
Enlargement Negotiations, Johannes Hahn, welcomed the ratification by the
Assembly of Kosovo of the territorial delineation agreement with Montenegro, noting
that it fulfilled a key criterion for visa liberalization for Kosovo.
9.
In other developments, following the attempt in December 2017 by 43 members
of the Assembly of Kosovo to revoke a 2015 law in support of the work on the Kosovo
Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office, on 22 January 2018 the
Assembly submitted a request for the government’s opinion on the matter. On
1 February, Mr. Haradinaj stressed that the government would follow due process
before reverting to the Assembly with its opinion. On 5 February, President Thaçi, in
his address to the government, stated that the establishment of the Specialist
Chambers was “unfair”, but that the Kosovo authorities “assumed certain
responsibilities and obligations” and “will fulfil them in accordance with the
agreements reached”.
10. On 6 February, the European Commission adopted a new strategy for European
Union engagement with the Western Balkans, entitled “A credible enlargement
perspective for and enhanced EU engagement with the Western Balkans ”. On
28 February, a European Union delegation comprising High Representative
Mogherini, the President of the European Commission, Jean-Claude Juncker, and
Commissioner Hahn, visited Pristina to discuss the role of Kosovo under the new
European Union strategy for the region, which continues to take a staggered approach
to integration. During the visit, the delegation stressed that, without effective and
comprehensive normalization of relations between Belgrade and Pristina, there could
not be lasting stability in the region, and Serbia and Kosovo could not advance on
their respective European paths.
11. On 13 February, the European Union Election Observation Mission presented
its final report on the Kosovo municipal elections of 22 October 2017. The report
contains a number of recommendations for improving future electoral processes in
Kosovo, which are being reviewed by the Kosovo Central Election Commission and
other relevant Kosovo institutions.
12. The government of Kosovo continued to advocate the transformation of the
Kosovo Security Force into an army, while accepting that this would need to be
pursued through a constitutional amendment. On 5 March 2018, at a ceremony held
at the headquarters of the Kosovo Security Force in Pristina to mark the twentieth
anniversary of the Kosovo Liberation Army, President Thaçi also advocated the
transformation of the Kosovo Security Force into an army through a constitutional
amendment, in partnership with the United States of America and the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization. The leadership of Serbia remained strongly opposed to such a
transformation, which it considers to be a violation of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999).
13. Incidents affecting non-majority communities included damage to sites of
significance to Kosovo Serbs. On 12 February 2018, a memorial plaque near the
village of Zoçishtë/Zočište in Rahovec/Orahovac municipality, dedicated to two
Kosovo Serb journalists who went missing in 1998, was forcibly removed and its base
damaged. On 1 March 2018, in the majority Kosovo Serb village of Velika Hoča/
Hoçë e Madhe in Rahovec/Orahovac municipality, the Serbian flag was removed and

18-06522

3/19

S/2018/407

the flag pole damaged at the memorial dedicated to the Kosovo Serbs who went
missing or were killed during the 1998–1999 conflict.

III. Northern Kosovo
14. The slow progress of the investigation into the murder on 16 January of the
Kosovo Serb politician, Oliver Ivanović, in North Mitrovica, coupled with the events
of 26 March described above, exacerbated resentment among the Kosovo Serb
population in northern Kosovo. Initially led by Kosovo Serb and Kosovo Albanian
prosecutors of the newly integrated Basic Prosecution of Mitrovica, the investigation
into Mr. Ivanović’s murder was taken over by the EULEX Special Prosecution Office
of Kosovo on 7 March, owing to the “complexity of the case”. At the end of the
reporting period, no progress had been reported in the investigation. Of note is that
the first information-sharing meeting on the investigation between representatives of
the interior ministries from Belgrade and Pristina took place at Gate 3 on the
Administrative Boundary Line on 13 March, over two months after the murder.
15. Approximately 5,000 people attended Mr. Ivanović’s funeral on 17 January,
which was declared an official day of mourning in North Mitrovica. On 20 January,
President Vučić, accompanied by Marko Đurić, travelled to Kos ovo, visiting various
locations north and south of the Ibër/Ibar River, including the site of Mr. Ivanović ’s
murder in North Mitrovica. Addressing the crowd at Banjska monastery in
Zveçan/Zvečan municipality, President Vučić highlighted the importance of d ialogue
between Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo Albanians in order to preserve peace and security,
but also to advance the interests of Kosovo Serbs.
16. On 18 February, flyers were posted in Zubin Potok municipality, threatening
members of the Kosovo Serb community who had joined the Kosovo Security Force
following the most recent recruitment campaign directed at members of non -majority
communities. The flyers also criticized the municipality, including the mayor, for not
preventing such recruitment. In response, KFOR conducted enhanced patrols in the
municipality, which continued until mid-March. The Kosovo Police also conducted
special operations in the municipality, including static patrols and increased foot
patrols, to provide increased protection.
17. Two round tables were organized in northern Kosovo under the framework of
the internal dialogue on Kosovo launched by President Vučić, before the meeting in
North Mitrovica that was interrupted as a result of the events of 26 March. The first
round table, with Kosovo Serb youth and students, was held in North Mitrovica on
8 March and focused on the importance of higher education for Kosovo Serbs. The
second — a televised meeting with civil society representatives held in North
Mitrovica on 14 March — addressed the departure of Kosovo Serbs from Kosovo and
challenges faced by Kosovo Serbs in obtaining personal documents. As well as the
discussions held in northern Kosovo, six additional round tables involving various
segments of Serbian society were held throughout Serbia under the framework of
President Vučić’s internal dialogue on Kosovo.
18. On 7 April, Marko Đurić attended the Orthodox Easter midnight liturgy at
Banjska monastery; this was Mr. Đurić’s first visit to Kosovo after his arrest and
expulsion on 26 March. About 400 people attended the liturgy.
19. Following the municipal elections held in Kosovo in October 2017, the
municipal assemblies of Leposavić/Leposaviq and Zveçan/Zvečan formed women ’s
caucuses, with support from their respective mayors. On 7 March, on the eve of
International Women’s Day, the municipality of Zveçan/Zvečan inaugurated the
women’s caucus with a panel discussion on the role of women in society. The event,

4/19

18-06522

S/2018/407

sponsored by UNMIK, was jointly opened by the mayor and my Special
Representative.

IV. Normalization of relations between Belgrade and Pristina
20. The European Union-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
resumed after a long hiatus. The technical negotiation teams of Belgrade and Pristina,
led by Marko Đurić and Avni Arifi, respectively, met in Brussels on 26 and
27 February and again from 19 to 21 March. The teams reviewed the implementation
of the agreements reached, including on freedom of movement, integrated boundary
management, the association/community of Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo,
the bridge in Mitrovica and energy. The teams agreed that further progress in a number
of areas would require consensus at a higher political level.
21. On 23 March, High Representative Mogherini met with Presidents Vučić and
Thaçi in Brussels to discuss, under the framework of the new phase of the dialogue,
the full implementation of all existing agreements and preparations for a
comprehensive agreement on the normalization of relations. Following the meeting,
High Representative Mogherini stressed the urgent need to start with the
establishment of the association/community of Serb majority municipalities. She also
welcomed the continued commitment expressed by both Presidents to the
normalization of relations between Belgrade and Pristina, recalling that progress on
their respective European Union integration agendas is firmly linked to progress in
the dialogue.
22. Further to the events of 26 March, High Representative Mogherini travelled to
Belgrade, where she met with President Vučić on 27 March to discuss the “latest
developments and the future of the European Union-facilitated dialogue for
normalization of relations between Belgrade and Pristina ”. In a communiqué issued
after the meeting, the High Representative reiterated the importance that the European
Union attaches to the dialogue and to the implementation of agreements reached.
23. Throughout the reporting period, Belgrade stressed that it had fulfilled nearly
all its obligations under the agreements reached under the framework of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue, while Pristina did not proceed with the establishment of
the association/community of Serb majority municipalities, which is of great
significance to Belgrade and the Kosovo Serbs. In separate addresses to the media on
25 February and 24 March, the First Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of
Serbia, Ivica Dačić, warned that Belgrade could withdraw from its commitments
under the agreements reached in Brussels, if concrete steps were not taken swiftly
toward the establishment of the association/community.
24. On 5 April, Prime Minister Haradinaj announced the resumption of efforts to
draft the statute of the association/community of Serb majority municipalities, to be
completed within four months. The Serbian List, however, characterized the proposal
as “unacceptable”, stressing that the association/community should be established in
accordance with the Brussels agreement of 25 August 2015, not the Kosovo
Constitution. In this respect, the Serbian List remained concerned that the Kosovo
authorities would insist on respecting the Constitutional Court ruling of 23 December
2015, according to which a number of provisions in the 2015 Brussels agreement are
not in full compliance with the Kosovo Constitution.

18-06522

5/19

S/2018/407

V. Returns, reconciliation, cultural heritage and
community relations
25. During the reporting period, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) recorded three voluntary returns to Kosovo by
members of non-majority communities. In total, UNHCR has recorded 27,792
voluntary returns by members of non-majority communities in Kosovo since 2000.
26. UNHCR continued to support members of the Ashkali, Egyptian and Roma
communities in Kosovo in obtaining personal documentation and resolving civil
status issues, which inter alia enables access to public services. During the reporting
period, UNHCR assisted 92 individuals to obtain civil documentation.
27. On 14 February and 15 March, UNMIK, in partnership with the Kosovo
Ministry of Communities and Returns, contributed to the organization of two
inter-municipal forums held in Pejë/Peć and in Gjilan/Gnjilane, respectively. The
forums addressed strategies for increasing returns and the role of municipal bodies in
protecting and promoting the rights of communities.
28. During the period under review, 23 municipalities south of the Ibër/Ibar River
reconstituted their respective communities committees, bringing to 28 the total
number of municipalities with such mandatory anti-discrimination and community
protection mechanisms in place. Of note is that members of non-majority
communities, including Ashkali, Croats, Egyptians, Montenegrins, Roma, Serbs and
Turks, account for approximately 53 per cent of members of the communities
committees. Members of non-majority communities were appointed to key municipal
positions in Prizren and Kamenicë/Kamenica municipalities.
29. The Implementation and Monitoring Council, established by the government of
Kosovo in February 2013 to monitor and facilitate the implementation of the Law on
Special Protective Zones, with a focus on the provision relating to the protection of
the Serbian Orthodox Church religious and cultural heritage in Kosovo, reconvened
on 13 and 23 March 2018, after three years of inactivity. At the meetings,
representatives of the Serbian Orthodox Church raised concerns about a plan of the
Deçan/Dečani municipality to build a transit road to Montenegro through the special
protective zone of the Visoki Dečani monastery. In response, representatives of the
Kosovo government reiterated their commitment to respect the special protective
zone; a formal decision on the matter, however, remains pending.
30. The Kosovo Ministry of Culture, Youth and Sports worked in cooperation with
the Prizren municipal department of urbanism to prevent further illegal demolition
activities in the protected historic centre of Prizren. A team of cultural heritage
inspectors from the Ministry cooperated with the municipal inspectorate to identify
illegal demolitions and constructions in the protected zone and handed over the cases
identified to the judicial authorities.

VI. Rule of law and human rights
31. On 5 February, three years after the adoption of the law granting legal status to
victims of sexual violence during the Kosovo conflict and establishing a legal basis
for their compensation, the government of Kosovo officially launched the application
process for wartime survivors of sexual violence to be granted legal status as a victim
of war. The Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare authorized four non -governmental
organizations specializing in this area to support the application process.

6/19

18-06522

S/2018/407

32. During the reporting period, efforts continued to ensure that the justice system
in Kosovo is in line with international and European Union standards. In early
February, the government reviewed and approved a package of key amendments to
legislation regulating the functioning of the judicial system, including the law on
courts and the law on the disciplinary responsibilities of judges and prosecutors. On
13 April, the government approved a new draft of the Kosovo criminal code, which
includes, inter alia, stricter penalties for offences related to corruption and misuse of
official duty. Presenting the bill to the government, the Minister of Justice said that
the new code would be in line with European Union standards and would enable
Kosovo to successfully fight corruption and organized crime.
33. The Kosovo court system continued to assume responsibility for presiding over
new cases hitherto dealt with by EULEX. For example, on 20 February, a case
involving a former member of the Assembly of Kosovo, Azem Syla, and 3 8 other
individuals, accused of expropriating socially owned properties in Kosovo, resulting
in damages of EUR 30 million to the government budget, was transferred from
EULEX to local judges. The charges included fraud, money-laundering, organized
crime and falsification of official documents. On 12 March, Mr. Syla was released
from custody and placed under house arrest.
34. In a separate case, on 26 February, the Appeals Court overturned the verdict of
the Basic Court of Pristina, which in November 2017 had convicted three
Vetëvendosje party members, including a member of the Assembly, of throwing a
grenade at the Assembly building in 2016. The case was sent for retrial. On the same
day, the defendants were released from detention on remand. In a separate
development, on 9 March, the Basic Court of Gjakovë/Ðjakovica acquitted, owing to
a lack of evidence, former Kosovo Liberation Army commander and current Deputy
Prime Minister, Fatmir Limaj, of war crimes in relation to the murder of two Kosovo
Albanians in 1998 in Malishevë/Mališevo municipality, where Limaj served as zone
commander.
35. On 21 March, 12 persons were arrested, 8 in Kosovo and 4 in Slovenia, in
connection with the smuggling of 300 migrants from Kosovo to Slovenia. The arrests
were the result of a joint operation involving the Kosovo Police, the Kosovo
Prosecutor’s Office in Mitrovica, the Slovenian National Police, the Slovenian State
Prosecutor’s Office, EULEX and the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement
Cooperation (Europol).
36. The appointment of the Specialist Prosecutor of the Specialist Prosecutor ’s
Office, David Schwendiman, came to an end on 31 March, with his deputy serving as
Acting Specialist Prosecutor until the appointment of a successor. In a related
development on 14 March, 40 lawyers from Kosovo and beyond were cleared to
perform defence counsel services in cases before the Kosovo Specialist Court.
37. The International Committee of the Red Cross convened a meeting on
27 February of the Working Group on Missing Persons in relation to the events of
1998–1999 in Kosovo. At the meeting, the Belgrade and Pristina delegations
highlighted the need for the Working Group to shift from a humanitari an to a justicebased approach, and to focus on finalizing unsolved cases of missing persons.
38. On 1 March, the Special Rapporteur in the field of cultural rights, Karima
Bennoune, presented her report on Serbia and Kosovo at the thirty-seventh session of
the Human Rights Council in Geneva. The report includes findings and
recommendations following the Special Rapporteur’s visit to Serbia and Kosovo from
3 to 14 October 2016. It focuses on the right to participate in cultural life, including
the right to access and enjoy cultural heritage without discrimination, and emphasizes
the need for an appropriate legal and institutional framework .

18-06522

7/19

S/2018/407

39. On 2 March, the first shelter for domestic violence victims in a non -majority
area was opened in Novobërdë/Novo Brdo municipality. The shelter will provide a
temporary home for victims of domestic violence, regardless of their ethnicity.

VII. Women, peace and security
40. On 5 March, in collaboration with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), UNMIK hosted the eighth Global
Open Day on Women, Peace and Security, which focused on women’s political
participation. The event, which was opened by my Special Representative, together
with the Vice-President of the Kosovo Assembly and the head of UN-Women in
Kosovo, brought together over 150 participants, including members of the Assembly,
government officials, civil society activists and representatives of the international
community. The event served as an opportunity to, inter alia, capture the experiences
of women candidates in the 2017 elections in Kosovo, discuss structural barriers to
women’s participation in political life in Kosovo and review the use of electoral
gender quotas. Participants identified a need to ensur e that Kosovo legislation
complies with the standards set by the Law on Gender Equality; promote women to
leadership positions within political parties; and address patriarchal norms and
stereotypes regarding women’s role in politics.
41. A number of additional events were conducted on the occasion of International
Women’s Day. On 6 March, KFOR organized a conference, bringing together
representatives of the Kosovo government, international organizations and
non-governmental organizations, focusing on challenges to women’s security in
Kosovo and the role of women as actors for peace and security. On 8 March, OSCE,
with the Embassy of France in Kosovo, organized a high-level forum on property
rights of women in Kosovo, which addressed, inter alia, traditional norms that hinder
women from claiming and owning property. Participants underlined the impact of
women’s lack of access to property and inheritance rights on socioeconomic
development in Kosovo and the need to improve mechanisms for the protection of
women’s property rights.
42. On 13 March, the North Mitrovica non-governmental organization Women’s
Rights, in partnership with the South Mitrovica women ’s rights organization
Mundësia and with support from UNMIK, held its third trust -building dialogue
session, entitled “Women in Politics”. The event, which brought together Kosovo
Albanian and Kosovo Serb women from North and South Mitrovica, highlighted that
women’s participation in politics remained low in Kosovo and hence that it was
necessary for women holding political positions to share their experiences.

VIII. Partnerships and cooperation
43. During the reporting period, UNMIK implemented two confidence -building
measures. The first supported three multi-ethnic women’s groups in Pejë/Peć,
Klinë/Klina and Istog/Istok municipalities in building women’s entrepreneurial skills
and helping women start up their own businesses. The second, in Istog/Istok
municipality, supported the establishment of a community centre and the training of
over 200 youth from different ethnic backgrounds in conflict resolution and
inter-community trust-building.
44. UNMIK also continued to implement programmatic activities in the areas of
trust-building, human rights and rule of law. During the reporting period, 36 activities
were launched, in close cooperation with the United Nations Kosovo Team, to
improve, inter alia, access to justice, the capacities of Kosovo justice and corrections
8/19

18-06522

S/2018/407

institutions to address juvenile delinquency and the capacities of law enforcement
agencies to address gender-based and domestic violence. In addition, UNMIK, in
close cooperation with the United Nations Kosovo team and other international
partners, prepared for a Kosovo trust-building forum, to be held from 6 to 8 May,
bringing together representatives from a wide spectrum of Kosovo society, including
local government, civil society, academia and media, as well as religious, youth and
women’s groups.
45. My Special Representative continued his visits to municipalities in Kosovo. On
7 March, he visited Zubin Potok and Zveçan/Zvečan municipalities and discussed
recent developments, including the security situation, with the mayors. In
Zveçan/Zvečan municipality, he also opened an event hosted by the chair of the
municipal assembly and head of the wo men’s caucus, which included a panel
discussion on the situation of women, held on the occasion of International Women ’s
Day. On the same day, my Special Representative visited the courthouse in North
Mitrovica, where the President of the Basic Court of Mitrovica highlighted challenges
related to compliance with language provisions in the law. On 14 March, my Special
Representative visited Kamenicë/Kamenica municipality, where the mayor lamented
the lack of investment and lack of employment opportunities in the municipality and
highlighted progress towards gender parity in local institutions, with 6 out of 11 of
the newly appointed municipal directors being women.
46. On 11 April in Pristina, UNMIK organized a working session of a platform
comprising youth from mixed ethnic backgrounds under the heading “Stories from
the other side”. Young women and men discussed challenges to inter-community
relations, youth inclusion in decision-making processes at local and central levels and
ways of addressing the widening education-to-employment gap, including through
capacity-building initiatives for young people.
47. UNMIK continued to provide document certification services. A total of 929
documents were processed, including 451 relating to pensions and 478 to civil status,
such as high school and university diplomas, and marriage, birth and death
certificates. UNMIK also continued to facilitate liaison between the Kosovo
authorities and the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL). During
the reporting period, UNMIK received and processed 45 requests for the issuance of
international wanted notices.

IX. Observations
48. I am concerned by signs of deterioration in the relations between Belgrade and
Pristina, particularly following the arrest of the Director of the Office for Kosovo and
Metohija of the Government of Serbia, Marko Đurić, on 26 March. I call on both sides
to avoid provocative actions and refrain from inflammatory rhetoric. I urge the
leadership in Belgrade and Pristina to continue to address issues of concern through
dialogue and to show the political will necessary to ensure full normalization of their
mutual relations.
49. The conduct of Kosovo police during a high-profile operation such as the arrest
of Mr. Đurić, which resulted in a number of injuries, is cause for concern. A thorough
inquiry is needed into the events of 26 March, with corrective action in case of failures
to uphold human rights.
50. I note, with concern, the slow pace of progress of the investigation into the
murder on 16 January of the Kosovo Serb politician Oliver Ivanović. So long as
credible answers and justice are not obtained, mutual suspicions and perceptions of

18-06522

9/19

S/2018/407

insecurity will continue to undermine efforts to build trust amongst communities
throughout Kosovo.
51. The European Union-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina seems
to have reached another standstill following its brief resumption — both at the
technical and political levels — in March. I urge both sides to provide new impetus
to the dialogue process, in order to ensure the full implementation of all agreements
reached to date.
52. I am encouraged by the ongoing efforts to operationalize an integrated Kosovo
judiciary, in line with the agreements reached between Belgrade and Pristina under
the framework of the European Union-facilitated dialogue. I call upon the Kosovo
institutions involved to provide the necessary support in order to overcome remaining
obstacles.
53. I welcome the ratification of the territorial delineation agreement with
Montenegro by the Assembly of Kosovo, an indication of the commitment of Kosovo
to its European perspective. Despite persistent efforts by some members of the
Assembly to obstruct its work, including by violent means, the Assembly managed to
conclude a matter that for too long had diverted its attention from other pressing
issues.
54. I once again reiterate my call to contribute to the trust fund which was
established further to the work of the UNMIK Human Rights Advisory Panel to
support the Ashkali, Egyptian and Roma communities affected by lead poisoning in
Kosovo. Contributions to the trust fund will support the implementation of projects
addressing the most pressing needs of these vulnerable communities, particularly in
the areas of health, economic development and infrastructure.
55. I am grateful to my Special Representative, Zahir Tanin, and to the Mission at
large for their unwavering commitment to promote progress towards long -term peace
and stability for Kosovo and the region, in cooperation with local counterparts and
international partners. I also reiterate my appreciation to the United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes on the ground for their ongoing collaboration with UNMIK
and to the long-standing international partners of the United Nations in Kosovo,
including the European Union, KFOR and OSCE.

10/19

18-06522

S/2018/407

Annex I
Report of the European Union High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy to the Secretary-General on the
activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
from 16 January to 15 April 2018
1.

Summary
On 21 March, Kosovo law enforcement authorities, together with Europol and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), supported a Slovenialed operation to apprehend migrant smugglers as part of a cross -border operation
aimed at dismantling an organized crime group on the Balkan route.
Challenges to the efficiency of the court system still remain, in particular
instantaneous adjournments of court hearings or late commencements and unduly
prolonged sessions.
Political interference and preferential treatment in the Kosovo Correctional
Service for a number of high-profile prisoners remain concerning. This includes
hospitalizations of high-profile prisoners not in compliance with the Service’s escort
regulations.

2.

Activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo

2.1.

Executive
Organized crime and corruption
On 1 February, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the Pristina
Basic Court rendered its judgment against a defendant and found him guilty of one
count of drug trafficking. The defendant received a prison sentence of six years. At
the same hearing, the defendant was acquitted of eight other charges linked to drug
trafficking, including organized crime. He was also acquitted of murder charges
owing to a lack of evidence.
On 14 March, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the Mitrovica
Basic Court announced its verdict in a criminal case against two defendants and found
them guilty of smuggling migrants. One was sentenced to four years ’ imprisonment
and the other to two years and three months’ imprisonment.
On 21 March, Kosovo law enforcement authorities, together with Europol and
EULEX, supported a Slovenia-led operation to apprehend 12 migrant smugglers as
part of a cross-border operation aimed at dismantling an organized crime group
involved in the smuggling of migrants from Kosovo to Slovenia via the Balkan route.
On 29 March, a panel of EULEX judges at the Mitrovica Basic Court acquitted
a defendant charged with organized crime and unauthorized purchase, possession,
distribution and sale of dangerous narcotics.
War crimes
Following the assassination on 16 January outside his office in Mitrovica of the
only defendant in a war crime case, the trial against him was terminated.
The main trials continued in the war crime cases “Vukotić I” and “Vukotić II”.
In addition, the war crime case “Vukotić III” is at the Court of Appeals further to an
appeal against the ruling on the indictment.

18-06522

11/19

S/2018/407

Handover of cases and case files
EULEX continued to hand over cases, case files and evidence to Kosovo
institutions. EULEX prosecutors handed over cases and case files to the EULEX
Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo and the Basic Prosecution Office of Mitrovica.
Meanwhile, EULEX judges continued to transfer cases to local counterparts.
Institute of Forensic Medicine
EULEX forensic experts identified the remains of one missing person. In
addition, they handed over 2 individual and 13 sets of remains to the respective
families.
Two Kosovo forensic doctors successfully completed an advanced course in
forensic anthropology provided by the University of Leicester and have continued, in
parallel, with their on-the-job training in forensic anthropology.
Property rights
The Kosovo Property Agency Appeals Panel adjudicated 34 cases, with 183
pending (17 of which are being translated). The Special Chamber of the Supreme
Court for privatization matters rendered 2,471 decisions in first -instance trial panel
cases and finalized 539 cases at the appellate panel level. A total of 21,329 cases are
pending before the Special Chamber of the Supreme Court.
2.2.

Strengthening
Case monitoring
Challenges to the efficiency of the court system remain, including immediate
adjournments of court hearings, late commencement and unduly prolonged sessions,
often resulting in unproductive hearings. This is due mainly to the frequent rotation
of prosecutors and unexpected reassignment of judges.
Following the assassination of the Kosovo Serb politi cian Oliver Ivanović on
16 January, EULEX monitored the situation and liaised with relevant counterparts.
On 26 February, EULEX monitored a joint coordination meeting at the Basic
Prosecution Office of Mitrovica, attended by both Kosovo Serb and Kosovo Alb anian
prosecutors and the police investigation teams. On 7 March, at the request of the Chief
Prosecutor, the Ivanović case was transferred to the Special Prosecution Office of
Kosovo, owing to the complexity of the case. On 13 March, EULEX facilitated a f irst
information-sharing meeting on the investigation between representatives of the
Kosovo and Serbian police at Gate 3 on the Administrative Boundary Line.
Following the arrest of Marko Đurić on 26 March, EULEX, at the request of
Kosovo Police, activated its role as second security responder and patrolled relevant
areas in northern Kosovo.
Judiciary
Notable challenges remain with regard to the selection processes for senior
positions in the judiciary. EULEX monitored the reselection process for the positions
of presidents of the Supreme Court and of the Court of Appeals after the original
process was challenged before the Constitutional Court, as well as the selection
process for five presidents of basic courts and supervisory judges of court branches.
Additional efforts are needed for these recruitment processes to be implemented in an
unbiased and transparent manner, with strict adherence to the rules of procedure and
fair and equal treatment of all candidates.

12/19

18-06522

S/2018/407

The selection processes for 21 prosecutors and 39 legal officers in the
prosecutorial system were positively assessed, in line with the applicable rules and
regulations, demonstrating the extraordinary commitment of the selection
commission to complete its work efficiently and within extremely tight timelines.
Of the 2016 package of laws, only two regulations remain to be adopted by the
Kosovo Judicial Council: the regulation on lay judges and the regulation on
professional associates. These have, however, been put on hold until the adoption of
amendments to the Law on Courts and the Law on the Kosovo Judicial Council. Once
adopted, all previously adopted regulations need to be reviewed again to reflect any
related changes.
Kosovo Correctional Service
Political interference in the Kosovo Correctional Service and preferential
treatment of a select group of high-profile prisoners remain issues of concern. Since
February 2018, EULEX has noted an increase in the number of hospit alizations of
high-profile prisoners, coupled with a continued lack of full compliance with Kosovo
Correctional Service escort regulations, in particular concerning prisoners from
Dubrava Correctional Centre.
In response, EULEX prepared a report for the Dubrava Correctional Centre
privileges panel with several recommendations to enhance its functioning. It also
recommended to the Kosovo Correctional Service and the Conditional Release Panel
that they ensure that, in line with the legal requirements, all prisoners receive a written
response within three days to their requests for information concerning a Conditional
Release Panel ruling. EULEX had received continual complaints from Dubrava
Correctional Centre prisoners that the Conditional Release Panel did not provide
information in case of denial of their requests, thereby depriving them of the option
of a review of their cases.
The vacancy for the position of Director General of the Kosovo Correctional
Service was opened again in December 2017/January 2018, after the previous
selection process was cancelled in July 2017. From the 11 applications received,
5 candidates were shortlisted and invited for interview. The process was steered by
the co-implementing partner of the project of the Embassy of the Uni ted Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland for assistance in recruiting senior officials in
Kosovo institutions, and monitored by EULEX, resulting in three candidates being
proposed to the Minister of Justice for final presentation of one candidate to the
government.
The Kosovo Correctional Service continues to suffer from infrastructure,
staffing and management weaknesses. Since January, staff and management at Lipjan
Correctional Centre have failed to take adequate measures to ensure the safety an d
security of juveniles in their custody, who have set cells on fire, vandalized premises
and committed self-harm. Contraband, mainly cell phones and related equipment, in
particular in Dubrava Correctional Centre, remains a problem, and the increasing
quantity of narcotics recently being found, with all its side effects, is highly
concerning and requires immediate action.
Kosovo Police
In an effort to improve its ethnic and gender balance, of the 270 vacant positions
to be filled in the recruitment drive taking place in the second quarter of 2018, the
Kosovo Police is considering assigning 30 per cent to female officers. While public
support for an increase in female representation in the police and the use of a quota
are encouraging, additional affirmative action is needed to support this initiative. The
affirmative action taken by the Kosovo Police to encourage serving officers from
18-06522

13/19

S/2018/407

minorities to apply for the Special Operations Unit Pristina -Mitrovica was a positive
development; however, to date, there were insufficient applicants.
Police Inspectorate of Kosovo
EULEX also observed with concern the ongoing undue interference and
reported pressure within and outside the Police Inspectorate of Kosovo and the
Kosovo Police Economic Crime Unit. On 5 March, the Pristina Basic Court annulled
as unlawful the selection process for 17 investigator and inspector positions at the
Police Inspectorate of Kosovo. Previous successful candidates had filed a lawsuit
against the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Police Inspectorate of Kosovo. The
Ministry of Internal Affairs has appealed the decision.
Forensics
On 2 March, EULEX, in partnership with UN-Women, facilitated the first in a
series of working-level meetings with representatives of the Kosovo Police, the Office
of the Chief Prosecutor, the Institute of Forensic Medicine and the Kosovo Forensic
Agency. The aim of the meetings is to support and strengthen cooperation among all
partner agencies on the identification, acquisition, analysis and presentation of
forensic evidence in investigations into sexual and gender-based violence, including
through the development of cross-institutional standard operating procedure.
European Union-facilitated dialogue
EULEX continued to advise Pristina and Belgrade, at the appropriate level, and
to facilitate integrated border management meetings. In addition, EULEX h as been
called upon to facilitate and to undertake follow-up enquiries on issues related to the
implementation of the integrated border management technical protocol. Finally, after
nine months of inactivity, the Minister of Internal Affairs assumed the ro le of new
Integrated Border Management National Coordinator, promising a revitalization of
the implementation of the integrated border management action plan and the
development of the Centre for Border Management. However, the Minister resigned
in April.
As regards the permanent common crossing points to be opened by Pristina,
construction work is ongoing at Merdarë/Merdare and Mutivodë/Mutivode. No
progress has been made at the common crossing point of Bërnjak/Tabalije and at the
three permanent common crossing points to be opened by Belgrade.
As regards the technical-level implementation of the freedom of movement
agreement of 2011, an expert-level meeting between the Belgrade and Pristina teams
was held in Brussels from 19 to 21 March under the framewo rk of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue. The meeting provided a good opportunity for the Pristina
team to present its progress to date. However, challenges remain regarding the
implementation of the final arrangements, as agreed in September 2016. Th ese
concern, inter alia, the implementation of the sticker regime, the registration process
for vehicles in northern Kosovo, insurance bureaus based on the insurance agreement
and the recognition of civil status documents issued by parallel structures.
On 16 March, following the advice of EULEX, the Ministry of Internal Affairs
signed an administrative instruction on registration of vehicles with KS licence plates
including two related decisions. One decision allowed for the continuation of the
process of exchanging temporary licence plates with the letters RP for plates with the
letters KS or RKS, which had closed in August 2017, despite 610 remaining vehicles
with temporary RP plates. The other decision guaranteed tax exemption for the
registration of vehicles with KS or RKS plates, for vehicle owners in possession of
Former Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY) or similar plates.
14/19

18-06522

S/2018/407

Regarding the integration of the 39 remaining former Serbian interior ministry
administrative staff into municipal civil status offices in northern Kosovo, the Kosovo
government approved a decision on funding for additional staffing. Once the decision
has been approved by the Minister of Finance, the Kosovo Ministry of Local
Government Administration can proceed with the recruitment proc ess.
Capacity-building activities
In order to strengthen the investigation and prosecution of crimes relating to
sexual abuse and domestic violence in Kosovo, EULEX, together with the Kosovo
Police and the Embassy of the United States, organized a tra ining session on forensic
and interviewing techniques for approximately 50 Kosovo Police investigators.
EULEX also held a training workshop on intelligence-led policing and strategic
planning for Kosovo Police. The training focused on the integration of i ntelligenceled policing into Kosovo Police policies, procedures and activities at the managerial
level.
EULEX, together with the Kosovo Academy of Justice and with the involvement
of international experts, organized two training courses for Kosovo prosec utors and
prosecution officials. The first, on international criminal law tools for investigating
and prosecuting war crimes under the jurisdiction of Kosovo, was aimed at enhancing
the capacity of Kosovo prosecutors to investigate and prosecute war crimes cases by
applying the legal tools of international criminal law. The second, on media
communication, was aimed at increasing the capacity of Kosovo prosecutors in
communication with media and handling of sensitive cases.
3.

Other key issues
Nothing significant to report.

18-06522

15/19

S/2018/407

Annex II
Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office
On 14 March 2018, further to a rigorous assessment of all candidates, 40 lawyers
were admitted to the lists of Specialist Defence Counsel and Victims ’ Counsel. The
response to the opening of the lists has been positive; the application process remains
open, and the Specialist Chambers continues to receive applications.
In furtherance of its mandate to ensure the rights of accused, victims and others
appearing before the court, the Specialist Chambers has continued to focus on
bolstering its accountability systems by adopting a code of professional ethics for
interpreters and translators on 13 March, continuing its work on a code of professional
conduct for counsel, and finalizing legal aid regulations, in line with best practices
for the provision of legal assistance to accused and victims.
On 15 and 16 March, Specialist Chambers’ judges convened in The Hague for
their third plenary. During the plenary, the judges were given informative
presentations and had discussions with units of the Registry directly supporting and
assisting judicial proceedings. The judges were also informed about all activities
performed by the Registry throughout the previous year and discussed milestones
ahead. Following discussions at the plenary, the President assigned a group o f three
judges to identify topics relevant for the effectiveness and efficiency of future
proceedings. А judge of the Specialist Chamber of the Constitutional Court was also
assigned to identify case law of the Kosovo Constitutional Court and of the Europe an
Court of Human Rights, where applicable, relevant to the future work of the Specialist
Chambers.
The Specialist Chambers continues to engage in close collaboration with the
host State in order to facilitate its work, including in relation to the renova tion of the
future premises of the Court in The Hague. On 25 January, the Registrar met with the
Ambassador for International Organizations of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, and
on 29 March and 11 April the Deputy Registrar participated in steering commit tee
meetings regarding the renovations of the premises.
The Specialist Chambers continues to prioritize its outreach activities to ensure
that its mandate is understood and to foster direct communications with affected
communities. In January, a grant agreement was signed with the Government of
Switzerland to increase the outreach activities of the Specialist Chambers and
Specialist Prosecutor’s Office in Kosovo over two years, enabling the Specialist
Chambers to expand upon its outreach work and add to originally planned activities.
From 5 to 8 February, the Specialist Chambers held consultations with civil
society in Kosovo on future outreach activities. On 6 February, the Head of the
Defence Office and the Head of the Victims Participation Office met wi th members
of the Kosovo Bar Association in order to provide technical information on
applications and admissions to the list of counsel. In March, the Specialist Chambers
Head of Public Information and Communication Unit and the Head of the Victims
Participation Office held meetings on outreach activities with 115 representatives of
women’s groups from the Kosovo Women’s Network and with members of civil
society in North Mitrovica.
On 21 March, the Deputy Registrar, in cooperation with the nongovernmenta l
organization the Humanitarian Law Centre, held a panel discussion in Pristina, at
which representatives of the Specialist Chambers briefed non -governmental
organizations, lawyers and members of the diplomatic community on the mandate and
structure of the Chambers. In February and March, representatives of the Specialist
Chambers also held numerous individual meetings with representatives of civil
16/19

18-06522

S/2018/407

society, journalists, international organizations and diplomatic representatives in
Pristina; and the Specialist Chambers continues to host group visits through its
visitors’ programme.
The Specialist Chambers further reinforced its communications with European
Union and international partners. On 29 January, the Registrar and Chef de Cabinet
of the President briefed delegates of the European Union Council Committee for
Civilian Aspects of Crisis Management on the activities of the Registry and
Chambers. On 19 March, the European Parliament Rapporteur for Kosovo, Igor
Šoltes, met with the principals of the Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor ’s
Office in The Hague. On 21 March, the Specialist Chambers hosted a visit by the
European Council Working Party on the Western Balkans Region. The Specialist
Chambers’ engagement with individual European Union Member States, third
contributing States and other states remains ongoing, and is h ighly focused on
garnering support for cooperation on witness protection and enforcement of
sentences.
In accordance with its mandate as set out in the special law adopted by the
Kosovo Assembly in August 2015, the Specialist Prosecutor ’s Office has continued
the investigation into the allegations contained in the report of January 2011 of the
Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly entitled “Inhuman treatment of people
and illicit trafficking in human organs”, which it took over from the Special
Investigative Task Force in September 2016. In recent months, the Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office has also been carrying out a systematic review of all evidential
holdings, in compliance with requirements under the Rules of Procedure and
Evidence.
David Schwendiman, who was appointed Specialist Prosecutor in September
2016, stepped down on 31 March 2018, when his fixed -term appointment as a Senior
Foreign Service Officer in the United States State Department came to an end. Since
Mr. Schwendiman’s departure, Kwai Hong Ip, the Deputy Specialist Prosecutor, has
been serving as Acting Specialist Prosecutor with the same authorities as the
Specialist Prosecutor, and there has been no interruption in the work of the Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office. The special law gives the Specialist Prosecutor, among other
things, the authority to call upon Kosovo institutions to assist him. When it has been
in the interest of the investigation, assistance has been requested and that assistance
has been provided to date. The Specialist Prosecutor will continue to seek assistance
from any person and any institution, domestic or international, to advance the
investigation and to ensure that it is done objectively, professionally, impartially,
thoroughly and well. Assistance from authorities in Belgrade and Pristina, as well as
from the European Union and the wider international community, is essential. The
Specialist Prosecutor’s Office requires the continued engagement and full support of
the international community, international organiza tions and individual states in all
its activities.

18-06522

17/19

S/2018/407

Annex III
Composition and strength of the police component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 April 2018)
Country

Number

Austria

1

Bulgaria

1

Finland

1

Germany

2

Hungary

1

Russian Federation

2

Turkey

1

Total

9

Composition and strength of the military liaison component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 April 2018)

18/19

Country

Number

Czechia

2

Poland

1

Republic of Moldova

1

Romania

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

2

Total

8

18-06522

S/2018/407

18-06522

19/19
