A/RES/59/72

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
10 December 2004

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 65 (u)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 3 December 2004
[on the report of the First Committee (A/59/459)]

59/72. Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical
Weapons and on Their Destruction
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject of chemical weapons, in
particular resolution 58/52 of 8 December 2003, adopted without a vote, in which it
noted with appreciation the ongoing work to achieve the objective and purpose of
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and
Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction, 1
Determined to achieve the effective prohibition of the development,
production, acquisition, transfer, stockpiling and use of chemical weapons and their
destruction,
Noting with satisfaction that, since the adoption of resolution 58/52, nine
additional States have ratified the Convention or acceded to it, bringing the total
number of States parties to the Convention to one hundred and sixty-seven,
Reaffirming the importance of the outcome of the First Special Session of the
Conference of the States Parties to Review the Operation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention, including the Political Declaration, 2 in which the States parties
reaffirmed their commitment to achieving the objective and purpose of the
Convention, and the final report, 3 which addressed all aspects of the Convention and
made important recommendations on its continued implementation,
1.
Emphasizes that the universality of the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction1 is fundamental to the achievement of its objective and purpose,
and acknowledges progress made in the implementation of the action plan for the
universality of the Convention, and calls upon all States that have not yet done so to
become parties to the Convention without delay;

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1974, No. 33757.
See Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, document RC-1/3.
3
Ibid., document RC-1/5.
2

04-48058

A/RES/59/72

2.
Underlines that the Convention and its implementation contribute to
enhancing international peace and security, and emphasizes that its full, universal
and effective implementation will contribute further to that purpose by excluding
completely, for the sake of all humankind, the possibility of the use of chemical
weapons;
Stresses that the full and effective implementation of all provisions of the
3.
Convention is in itself an important contribution to the efforts of the United Nations
in the global fight against terrorism in all its forms and manifestations;
Also stresses the importance to the Convention that all possessors of
4.
chemical weapons, chemical weapons production facilities or chemical weapons
development facilities, including previously declared possessor States, should be
among the States parties to the Convention, and welcomes progress to that end;
Notes that the effective application of the verification system builds
5.
confidence in compliance with the Convention by States parties;
6.
Stresses the importance of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons in verifying compliance with the provisions of the Convention
as well as in promoting the timely and efficient accomplishment of all its objectives;
Urges all States parties to the Convention to meet in full and on time
7.
their obligations under the Convention and to support the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in its implementation activities;
Reaffirms the undertaking of the States parties to foster international
8.
cooperation for peaceful purposes in the field of chemical activities of the States
parties and the importance of that cooperation and its contribution to the promotion
of the Convention as a whole;
Notes with appreciation the ongoing work of the Organization for the
9.
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to achieve the objective and purpose of the
Convention, to ensure the full implementation of its provisions, including those for
international verification of compliance with it, and to provide a forum for
consultation and cooperation among States parties, and also notes with appreciation
progress made in the implementation of the plan of action regarding the
implementation of article VII obligations;
10. Welcomes the cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons within the framework of the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations and the Organization, in
accordance with the provisions of the Convention;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction”.
66th plenary meeting
3 December 2004

2
