62

General A1eembly-Seventh Session

( c) That, whenever any Committee contemplates
making a recommendation for the adoption by the
General :Assembly of any amendment to the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, the matter shall,
at some appropriate stage of its consideration by that
Committee, be referred to the Sixth Committee for
advice on the drafting of such amendment and of any
consequential 3:mendment ;
( d) That, when a Committee considers the legal
aspects of a question important, the Committee should
refer it for legal advice to the Sixth Committee or propose that the question should oe considered by a joint
Committee of itself and the Sixth Committee;
2. Directs:
(a) That the terms of the foregoing recommendations shall be embodied as an annex to the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly;
·( b) That the said annex shall also set out, verbatim, paragraphs 19, 20, 29, 30, 35, 36, 37, 38 and 39
of the report of the Special Committee.
391st plenary meeting,
6 November 1952.
685 (VII). Request to the International Law Commission to give priority to the eodification of
the topic "Diplomatic intercourse and immunities"
The General Assembly,
Recalling the purposes of the United Nations and
the provision of the Preamble of the Charter according
to which the "peoples of the United Nations" are, determined "to practice tolerance and live together in
peace with one another as good neighbours",
Expressing its desire for the common observance by
all governments of existing principles and rules and
recognized practice concerning diplomatic intercourse
and immunities, particularly in regard to the treatment
of diplomatic representatives of foreign States,
Considering that early codification of international
law on diplomatic intercourse and immunities is necessary and desirable as a contribution to the improvement of relations between States,
Noting that the International Law Commission has
included the topic "Diplomatic intercourse and immuniues" in its provisional list 8 of topics of international law selected for codification,
Requests the International Law Commission, as soon
as ii considers it possible, to undertake the codification
of the topic "Diplomatic intercourse and immunities",
and to treat it as a priority topic.
400th plenary meeting,
5 December 1952.
686 (VII). WaylJ and mean1 for making the J!Vi•
denee of customary international law mol'e
1-eadily available
The Gen.eral Assembly,
Considering the report• of the Secretary-General on
3

See Official Records of the General As.sembly, Fourth Ses-

sion, S11.pplement No. 10, para. 16.
4 See document A/2170.

ways and means for making the evidence of customary
international law more readily available submitted in
pursuance of General Assembly resolution 602 (VI)
of 1 February 1952,
Having regard to the detailed plans in the report
as to the form, contents and budgetary implications of
certain publications referred to in the aforesaid resolution and to the conclusions of the Secretary-General
stated in the report,
1. AHthorizes the Secretary-Gen~ral to undertake,
as soon as feasible, the publication ot :
(a) A list of treaty collections, to be compiled
taking into account the suggestions made during the
debate in the Sixth Committee ;
( b) A repertoire of the practice of the Security
Council;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and
circulate to the governments of Member States a comparative study of the extent to which developments in
the field of customary international law and selected
legal activities of the United Nations can usefully be
covered by an expansion of existing United Nations
publications, by the launching of new special publications of limited scope and by a United Nations juridical yearbook; such study shall cover form, contents
and budgetary implications.
400th plenary meeting,
5 December 1952.
687 (VII). International criminal jurisdiction
The General Assembly,
B,a,-ing in mind that, by resolution 489 (V) of 12
December 1950, the General Assembly established a
Committee on International Criminal Jurisdiction, consisting of representatives of seventeen Member States,
charged with the task of preparing one or more preliminary draft conventions and proposals relating to
the establishment of an international criminal court,
Recalling that, by the same resolution, the General
Assembly requested the Secretary-General to communi<:ate the report of the Committee to the governments of Member States so that their observations
could be submitted not later than 1 June 1952, and
to place the question on the agenda of the seventh session of the General Assembly,
Noting that the Committee, meeting in August 1951,
has prepared a report 5 containing a draft statute
for an international criminal court and that the Secretary-General, by a letter of 13 November 1951, has
transmitted the Committee's report to the governments
of Member States requesting their observations
thereon,
Considering, however, that the number of States
which have given their comments and suggestions is
very small,
Considering that there is need for further study of
problems relating to an international criminal juris•
diction,
5

See document A/ AC.48/4. annex I.

Reeolution11 adopted on report11 of the Sixth Committee
1. Expresses to the Committee on Int~rnational
Criminal Jurisdiction its appreciation for its valuable
work on the draft statute ;
2. Urges the Member States which have not yet
done so to make their comments and suggestions on the
draft statute, in particular if they are of the opinion
that further action should be taken by the General
Assembly with a view to the establishing of an international criminal court;
3. Decides to appoint a Committee composed of
one representative each of seventeen Member States,
which States shall be designated by the President of
the General Assembly in consultation with the Chairman of the Sixth Committee; and directs that this
Committee shall meet at the Headquarters of the United
Nations in 1953, the exact 4te to be determined by the
Secretary-General, with the following terms of reference:
'
(a) In the light of the comments • and suggestions
on the draft statute submitted by governments, as well
as of those made during the debates in the Sixth
Committee,
( i)
To expMre tht: implications and consequences
of establishing an international criminal
court a,:iq_of the various methods by which
this m1ght be done ;
(ii) To study the relationship between such a
court and the United Nations and its organs;
(iii) To re-examine the draft statute;
( b) To submit a report to be considered by the
General Assembly at its ninth session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
the necessary services and facilities for the meetings
of the Committee.
400th plenary meeting,
5 December 1952.
In accordance d-ith the terms of resolution 681 (VII) above,
the President of the General Assembly announced, at the 401th
plenary ',Meting o,s 19 December 1952, that, in consultation
-with the Chairman of the SixJh Committee, he had designated
the following Member States as members of the Committe,:
ARGENTINA, AUSTRALIA, BF.LGIUM, CHINA, DENMARK, EGYPT,
FRANCE, ISRAEL, THE NETHERLANDS, PAKIST.\N, PANAMA, PERU,
THE PHILIPPINES,. THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
NORTHERN IRELAND, THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, VENEZUELA AND YUGOSLAVIA.

The various forms of aggression,
The connexion between a definition of aggrC'Ssion and the maintenance of international peace and
security,
(a)

( b)

( c) The problems raised by the inclusion of a definition of aggression in the Code of Offences against
the Peace and Security of Mankind and by its application within the framework of international criminal
jurisdiction,
( d) The effect of a definition of aggression on the
exercise of the jurisdiction of the various organs of
the United Nations,
( e) Any other problem which might be raised by a
definition of aggression,
Considering that continued and joint efforts shall be
made to formulate a generally acceptable definition of
aggression, with a view to promoting international
peace and security and to developing international law,
1. Decides to establish a Special Committee of
fifteen members, each representing one of the following Member States: Bolivia, Brazil, China, Dominican
Republic, France, Iran, Mexico, Netherlands, Norway,
Pakistan, Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, to meet at the
Headquarters of the United Nations in 1953;
2. Requests the said Special Committee:
(a) To submit to the General Assembly at its ninth
session draft definitions of aggression or draft statements of the notion of aggression;
( b) To study all the problems referred to above on
the assumption of a definition being adopted by a resolution of'] the General Assembly;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to communicate
the Special Committee's report to Member States for
their comments and to place the question on the provisional agenda of the ninth session of the General
Assembly.
408th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.

689 (VII). Measure11 to limit the duration of
regular sessions of the General Assembly
A

688 (VII). Question of defining aggres11ion
The General Assembly,
Having regard to its resolution 599 (VI) of 31 January 1952,
Considering that the discussion of the question of
d~fining aggression at the sixth and seventh sessions
of the General Assembly and in the International Law
Commission 7 has revealed the complexity of this question and the need for a detailed study of :
See document A/2186 and Add. I.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session, Supplemeut No. 9, para. 35 et seq.
6

63

The General Assembly,
Having considered the memorandum 8 submitted by
the Secretary-General on measures to limit the duration of regular sessions of the General Assembly,
Recognizing the importance of adopting appropriate
measures to this end, consistent with the fulfilment of
the Assembly's functions,
Noting the observations and suggestions presented
by the Secretary-General with respect to the rulei1
of procedure,

7

s See document A/12.fXJ.
