S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6790th meeting

Monday, 25 June 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Yang Tao . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Huseynli
Mr. Quintana
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Mrs. Fries-Gaier
Ms. Bolaños Pérez
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Ms. Vaz Patto
Mr. Lukiyantsev
Mr. Mbalati
Mr. Tchagnao
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Donegan

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2012/376)

12-38825 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1238825*

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President (spoke in Chinese): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
I once again wish to remind all speakers to limit
their statements to no more than four minutes, in order
to enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Today’s debate is on the
agenda item entitled “Protection of civilians in armed
conflict”. There is little protection that we can speak
about. Instead, today we recount the subjugation,
exploitation and attempted annihilation of civilians.
The appalling images coming out every day from
Homs, Hama and Aleppo highlight our failures. The
international community is failing the helpless mothers
and children of Syria. It is failing to protect them from
their own brutal ruler. It is also failing to uphold the
most basic principles implied by a debate on the theme
“the protection of civilians”.
The people of Syria look at us with pleading eyes.
They are desperate. We, here in the Chamber, are their
only hope. Today I urge all members of the Council
to hear the voice of Hadeel Kouki, a 20-year-old
student at the University of Aleppo. She was arrested
last year by Al-Assad’s secret police for distributing
leaflets that called on Syrians to march peacefully. In
March, she spoke at the United Nations Human Rights
Council — an organization that I hope will soon begin
doing something remotely related to the protection of
human rights. She said:
“I spent 52 days in prison. I was brutally tortured.
I was raped by the security forces… They tortured
me more than usual because I am a Christian… I
want freedom. I have seen too much suffering of
fellow Syrians who spent years in prison merely for
expressing a thought.”
Voices like hers should unite the voice of the world
against the tyrannical Al-Assad regime. It is time for
us speak clearly, decisively and truthfully about what is
happening in Syria, and to speak unequivocally against
that evil regime.
Al-Assad is not alone. On his advisory board
sit Hassan Nasrallah and Mahmoud Ahmadinejad,
the Holocaust denier and the self-proclaimed human

2

rights activist with specific expertise in women, gays
and political dissidents. Those two offer Al-Assad
guidance on how to slaughter the Syrian people more
efficiently and effectively. Together they form a trio of
brutality. The future of that trio of brutality depends on
threatening the lives and crushing the hopes of millions
not just in Syria, but throughout the Middle East.
Iran’s arm extends from Syria into Lebanon. Its grip
has twisted the Lebanese State into an Iranian outpost for
terror. Today, Lebanon’s fastest-growing industry is the
smuggling of missiles. With Iran’s support, Hizbullah
has amassed 50,000 missiles that can reach all of Israel
and well beyond. Hizbullah has more missiles today
than many NATO members — all stored in civilian
areas. Hizbullah intentionally puts those missiles in the
basements of homes, in the playgrounds of schools and
in the back rooms of hospitals. Talk about priorities; the
people of Lebanon are more valuable to Hizbullah as
human shields than as human beings.
We see the same pattern of civilian exploitation
by Iran’s other terrorist proxies. In the Gaza Strip,
Hamas uses Palestinian schools to launch rockets at
Israeli schools. They use Palestinian hospitals to launch
attacks that send Israelis to the hospital. In the past
week alone, more than 125 rockets have been fired into
the heart of Israeli communities and cities. As we sit
here today in New York, daily life is paralysed for more
than 1 million Israeli civilians. Yet the Council has
not uttered a single word condemning these appalling
attacks — not one word. The silence speaks volumes.
Those who harm civilians are taught to hate and
learn to kill. Yet in this Chamber we hear very little
about the cultures of incitement around the world that
serve as the key ingredient in the recipe for violence
against civilians. Make no mistake — words can kill. It
does not matter whether they are spoken in Farsi in an
Iranian mosque that promotes jihad against the West,
written in Arabic in Hamas textbooks that dehumanize
Jews and Israelis, or taught in Korean in a North Korean
political education centre that glorifies violence against
South Koreans. The Council has a duty to speak with
one voice against those nations and organizations that
fan the dangerous flames of hatred and incitement.
The clock in the Council ticks forward from debate
to debate, but we see little progress in the protection of
civilians. By watching the hands of the clock go by, we
lend a hand to the oppressors. Some of the very nations
that ruthlessly exploit and target civilians in armed

12-38825

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

conflicts have the audacity to sit in this Chamber and
speak about their protection. They should find no refuge
here. The Security Council has a responsibility to speak
out against those who callously disregard human life,
and to speak up for all the civilians of the world. As Elie
Wiesel once said,
“[I]ndifference is always the friend of the enemy, for
it benefits the aggressor — never his victim, whose
pain is magnified when he or she feels forgotten…
[N]ot to respond to their plight, not to relieve their
solitude by offering them a spark of hope is to exile
them from human memory. And in denying their
humanity we betray our own.”
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Finland.
Mr. Viinanen (Finland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark, Iceland,
Norway, Sweden and my own country, Finland.
We thank the Secretary-General for the sober
assessment and concrete recommendations in his
report (S/2012/376), as well as all the briefers today.
We share the Secretary-General’s grave concern about
the unacceptable toll that conflicts around the world
take on civilians and about the continuing disregard for
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law on the part of many parties to conflict.
The Nordic countries condemn the continuing
atrocities in Syria in the strongest possible terms. We are
horrified by the killings of civilians, the brutal executions
of innocent children and the use of torture, including
rape and sexual violence. The continuing obstacles to
humanitarian access, despite Syria’s commitment to the
negotiated ceasefire, are unacceptable. We join the vast
majority of the international community in urging the
Government of Syria to immediately end the violence
and all attacks on civilians, and to cooperate fully with
the Joint Special Envoy for Syria, the United Nations
Supervision Mission in Syria and the commission of
inquiry mandated by the Human Rights Council. We
strongly condemn the attacks against United Nations
monitors, and recall that the Syrian authorities are
responsible for ensuring the security and safety of the
Mission.
We have taken note of the statement by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights that the indiscriminate
and possibly deliberate targeting and killing of civilians
may amount to crimes against humanity and other forms

of international crime. There must be no impunity for
those responsible for serious international crimes.
The Nordic countries call on all parties to conflict
to comply with their international obligations, and on
national authorities to take all possible measures to
provide accountability for violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. Ensuring
accountability is first and foremost a national
responsibility. Building the capacity of national justice
and security institutions also serves the broader aim
of strengthening the rule of law and respect for human
rights.
We congratulate the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and the Special Court for Sierra Leone for having
concluded landmark cases in the international fight
against impunity. The judgement in the Lubanga case
provides an important broadening of the definition for
children who participate in hostilities; the Taylor case is
the first time that an international court has convicted
a former head of State of responsibility for sexual
violence. We now encourage the Council to improve
the consistency of its practice in referring situations to
the ICC and to consider adopting a checklist to guide
its engagement with the Court, including in assisting
the Court in cases of non-cooperation and in matters
concerning the funding arrangements for such cases.
We also support the recommendations for increasing
the use of commissions of inquiry.
Finally, the Secretary-General focuses attention in
his report on increased attacks on health-care facilities
and health professionals. In Syria, we have seen doctors
and surgeons targeted directly, wounded and killed.
Ambulances have been attacked and hospitals damaged
by explosive weapons. Such threats and attacks
against health-care workers, facilities and vehicles
are becoming more frequent in conflict situations and
have devastating consequences for civilians. The direct
effects on the security of health-care personnel has a
multiplying effect on those who need their services the
most — the victims of armed violence and conflict.
It is of the utmost importance to improve the
security and delivery of effective and impartial
health care in situations of armed conflict and other
emergencies. The Nordic countries therefore fully
support the recent Health Care in Danger initiative
launched by the International Committee of the Red
Cross at the thirty-first International Conference of
the Red Cross and Red Crescent. Stronger efforts to

12-388253

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

create an environment conducive to health care in a
humanitarian crisis are needed by States. All parties to
conflict must respect and protect humanitarian relief
and medical personnel, hospitals and ambulances in
all circumstances. States must step up their efforts to
bring those responsible for attacks against health-care
personnel and facilities to justice.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the floor to
the representative of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would like to express my
sincere congratulations to China on its presidency of
the Security Council and to thank China for holding
this open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Emergency Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos, Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights Ivan Šimonović,
and Director for International Law and Cooperation of
the International Committee of the Red Cross Philip
Spoerri for their briefings.
The current state of the protection of civilians has
not improved since the last open debate of the Security
Council on the issue (see S/PV.6650). Attacks continue
against civilians, humanitarian workers and United
Nations peacekeepers. Earlier this month, seven United
Nations peacekeepers were attacked and lost their lives
during patrols to protect civilians in Côte d’Ivoire. The
Government of Japan strongly condemns such attacks.
In addition, the use of explosive weapons in densely
populated areas, as seen in Syria and the Sudan, is
of grave concern as it results in numerous civilian
casualties. It also leads to the creation of scores of
internally displaced persons and refugees, which
affects not only the epicentre of violence, but also
the neighbouring countries and regions. On the basis
of the current state of affairs, I would like to raise the
following three issues.
First, there are high demands on peacekeeping
operation missions to provide protection to civilians in a
role supplementary to the primary responsibility of host
Governments. Indeed, many missions are mandated to
do so. The implementation of the protection of civilians
mandate, which can affect the credibility of a mission,
is increasingly challenging and important, and the
lack of adequate resources is a pressing issue. In that
light, we commend efforts made by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the Department
of Field Support to produce a resource capacity matrix
and training modules, and we look forward to the

4

further improvement of those tools. In addition, we call
for efforts to improve effective implementation of the
protection of civilians mandate, with attention to the
mid- and long-term capacity-building of host countries,
as well as the efforts of local residents.
Secondly, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian
access is indispensable to protecting civilians. The
political climate, including United Nations sanctions,
often complicates negotiations on humanitarian access.
However, we stress that humanitarian assistance on the
basis of the principles of neutrality and impartiality
should not be politicized and that host countries
should cooperate in the light of their responsibility
to protect civilians. In such complex circumstances,
close communication among relevant bodies, such
as the Security Council, DPKO and the Department
of Political Affairs, as well as the leadership of the
Emergency Relief Coordinator, are critical.
Thirdly, it is crucial to seek facts and to hold
perpetrators accountable for violence against
civilians in order to prevent the further deterioration
of a situation. In that light, the Government of Japan
welcomes the resolution adopted at the Human Rights
Council earlier this month to request a commission
of inquiry to urgently conduct an inquiry into the
events in El-Houleh (A/HRC/RES/S-19/1). We urge the
Government of Syria to cooperate with the Commission
to fully implement the resolution.
The history of the issue of the protection of civilians
at the Security Council is rather short. The issue was
brought to the Council in the wake of a series of violent
incidents in a number of countries, including Bosnia
and Rwanda. That proves that the Security Council has
been strengthening its efforts to respond to the affairs
of the world as they occur. The protection of civilian
agenda is increasingly important. The Security Council
should bear in mind its important role with regard to
the issue and jointly fulfil its duty.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the floor
to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the People’s Republic of China
for having convened this open debate of the Security
Council on such an important topic.
The Security Council must remain committed to
protecting civilians in armed conflict by promoting full
respect for international law, in particular international

12-38825

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

humanitarian and human rights law, as well as to the
fight against impunity.
Argentina thanks the Secretary-General for
presenting his report (S/2012/376) and for the
recommendations contained therein. The report is clear
in its recognition that, regrettably, following the 2010
report (S/2010/579), the protection of civilians remains
weak. Every time the Security Council considers
the issue, it should be recalled that the parties to an
armed conflict are duty-bound by the basic standards
of international humanitarian law, which provides
that civilians must be protected from the effects of a
conflict. That obligation, enshrined in article 3 of the
1949 Fourth Geneva Convention, is also applicable to
non-international armed conflicts, that is to say, to
disputing non-State parties.
Argentina agrees that the first basic challenge is to
promote compliance with international humanitarian
law. The principles of distinction and proportionality
are fundamental. It should also be recalled that
non-compliance by one party to a conflict does not
justify non-compliance by the other.
Action by the United Nations is key to protecting
civilians in armed conflict, as well as to avoiding the
emergence of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity and, in the case of
such situations, to preventing them from continuing.
Argentina agrees with the Secretary-General’s
observations on the distinction between the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and the responsibility
to protect. However, it should be borne in mind
that prevention is key to preventing violations of
humanitarian law in armed conflict and the four crimes
under the responsibility to protect from occurring. To
that end, respect for international law and human rights
and humanitarian law is crucial.
With regard to action by the Security Council, my
delegation would like to underscore two points raised in
the report of the Secretary-General.
The first element is the need for peacekeeping
operations to comply with international humanitarian
law. My country is convinced of the need to continue to
include the responsibility to protect in the mandates of
United Nations missions. It is crucial to strengthen the
training of the staff of such operations in international
humanitarian law and to have the appropriate structure
to address the need to protect women and children from
violence, in particular gender-based violence.

Secondly, strict compliance with the mandates
issued by the Security Council is crucial. The report
refers to the concerns raised by resolution 1973 (2011)
with regard to the perception that its application went
beyond civilian protection. Above and beyond the fact
that Argentina believes that the use of force for the
protection of civilians must be the ultima ratio, we agree
that when the Security Council adopts authorizations or
mandates, their implementation must not only comply
with international humanitarian law, in particular with
the principles of distinction and proportionality, and
with international human rights law, but must also be
strictly limited to ensuring the protection of civilians.
With regard to humanitarian assistance, parties
to a conflict must make every effort to ensure that
humanitarian assistance reaches the affected civilians.
We are concerned by the fact that there are not only
attacks and actions that block or place obstacles in
the way of humanitarian assistance but also deliberate
attacks on hospitals and other means of assistance.
A further element in the report with which my
delegation agrees as to its importance is fact-finding.
In addition to the ad hoc commissions of inquiry that
can be established, including those by the Human
Rights Council — there is the recent example following
the adoption of a resolution on Syria — there are also
ways to carry out investigation by an impartial entity
into acts that could be serious violations of the Geneva
Conventions, such as the International Fact-finding
Commission, established under Protocol I to the 1949
Geneva Convention. Furthermore, in resolution 1894
(2009), the Security Council recognized the option of
turning to the Commission for that purpose. We call on
the Council to take that fact into account.
Likewise, with regard to justice, we must note
that individuals who commit crimes — war crimes,
genocide or crimes against humanity — are responsible
for the most serious crimes and must therefore be held
fully accountable before criminal justice. Currently, we
are heading towards an international criminal justice
system for the most serious crimes, including war
crimes, centred in a permanent court, the International
Criminal Court. In March 2012, the Court issued its
first judgement, finding Thomas Lubanga guilty of war
crimes for recruiting children under 15 years of ago to
engage in hostilities in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. However, several International Criminal Court
indictees are still at large. We call on all States parties
and non-parties to the Rome Statute to cooperate with

12-388255

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

the Court, in particular in relation to the execution of
arrest warrants.
I would not like to end without reiterating that
attacks of any kind targeting civilians or other
protected persons in armed conflict and the recruitment
of children and in any way impeding the provision
of humanitarian assistance constitute violations of
international law. Therefore, I conclude by calling once
again for full compliance with the obligations arising
under The Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907, the
four 1949 Geneva Conventions and their 1977 Protocol,
general international law and the decisions of the
Security Council.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The acceding country Croatia, the candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and Montenegro, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his introduction to the debate today, as well as
Under-Secretary-General Amos, Assistant Secretary­
General Šimonović and Mr. Spoerri.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/376) and his recommendations. As he states,
the reality on the ground continues to be characterized
by the frequent failure of parties to armed conflicts
to comply with their obligations under applicable
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and refugee law to respect and protect
civilians. We call on all parties to armed conflict to
respect their obligations.
Recent striking examples of failure are numerous
and have recently been reported, for instance, in the
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict. The EU shares the Secretary-General’s grave
concern for other situations, including in Afghanistan,
South Sudan, the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Somalia and elsewhere, where civilian
populations, and in particular women and children,
continue to be subject to various forms of extreme

6

violence, causing grave humanitarian crises with huge
displacements of population. In particular, we share
the Secretary-General’s concern for the continuous
attacks against health care and the increase in threats to
journalists. We continue to be very concerned about the
humanitarian impact of the use of weapons in densely
populated areas. We take note of the view expressed by
the International Committee of the Red Cross that the
use of explosive weapons with a wide impact area be
avoided in densely populated areas.
With regard to Syria, we condemn the Syrian
Government’s violent activities as a whole, starting
from suppressing peaceful protests by force and ending
up in several reported massacres of civilians, including
increased use of targeted assassinations and arbitrary
detentions, as a means of repressing the opposition.
The European Union calls on all parties, including the
armed opposition, to cease all violence and provocation
to violence with immediate effect. The European Union
also reiterates the importance of full and unhindered
access for independent humanitarian actors so that
assistance may be provided to those in need in line with
humanitarian principles.
During the reporting period, the Security Council
has taken decisive action in situations where civilians
have faced continuous escalating violence. In Côte
d’Ivoire, the Council authorized the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire to use all necessary means
to carry out its mandate to protect civilians. In Libya,
the Security Council acted upon its responsibility to
protect civilians; the implementation of resolution 1973
(2011) was undertaken to prevent civilian deaths and
injury and was fully in line with resolution itself and
international humanitarian law.
As the Secretary-General rightly points out in his
report, there are fundamental differences between the
concepts of protection of civilians in armed conflict and
the responsibility to protect. Both are important and
relevant, and it is necessary to enhance our collective
understanding of both subjects and how they are related
in their implementation.
Strengthening accountability is an important
element in enhancing compliance by the parties to
armed conflict with their international obligations.
National authorities have the primary responsibility to
provide accountability for violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. Where national
authorities fail to take the necessary steps to ensure

12-38825

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

accountability, the Security Council can, as appropriate,
play a more proactive role.

organizations undertaking complementary protection
activities.

We see merit in the increased use of commissions
of inquiry and fact-finding missions and the referral of
relevant situations to the International Criminal Court.
Where applicable and when appropriate, we encourage
all parties to consider drawing on the services of the
International Fact-Finding Commission established
pursuant to Additional Protocol I to the Geneva
Conventions.

At the same time, the host country continues to bear
the primary responsibility for protecting its civilian
population. We have therefore focused on contributing
to enhancing the capabilities of host nations to build
and maintain their own capacities. Activities in that
regard should seek to support the establishment of
an environment in which all persons, institutions and
entities are held to account, according to laws and
procedures that are consistent with international human
rights law and standards and applicable international
humanitarian law. We advocate the active participation
of all States in the ongoing endeavours by the
International Committee of the Red Cross, as mandated
by the thirty-first Red Cross Conference, to strengthen
compliance with international humanitarian law.

Regarding other encouraging developments, the
upcoming United Nations Conference on the Arms Trade
Treaty will provide us with an opportunity to address
the arms trade and availability and misuse of weapons.
Furthermore, we welcome the fact that the need for
improved recording of casualties is gaining increasing
attention. The African Union Mission in Somalia’s
commitment should be followed, as appropriate, by a
more systematic approach to reinforcing capacities in
that regard.
The mandates of many peacekeeping missions
currently include protection of civilians activities.
Challenges to the implementation of those protection
mandates often relate to establishing effective
early-warning mechanisms, ensuring the provision of
adequate human and logistical resources to monitor,
prevent and respond to incidents, and building the
capacity of the host States to ensure that they are also
increasingly able to fulfil their primary responsibility
to protect civilians. We need to do more collectively to
ensure that missions are put in a position where they
can carry out their protection mandates. We welcome
the establishment of protection-of-civilians training
modules to better prepare peacekeepers for that task.
In order to make progress, it is up to Member States to
ensure that their peacekeepers receive proper training
before deployment.
We must ensure that shortfalls in equipment, such
as in helicopters, are dealt with and that missions are
properly resourced, with due priority given to civilian
protection activities. The success of a peacekeeping
mission is often judged by its ability to protect civilians.
The protection of civilians by the United Nations
peacekeeping missions mandated to do so is thus central
to the legitimacy and credibility of the United Nations
system. That also requires effective interaction between
protection-mandated missions and humanitarian

The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the floor
to the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I congratulate China on its
initiative in promoting this timely debate. I would
like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his very informative briefing and for his report
(S/2012/376). I also thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator Valerie Amos for her presentation. Our
appreciation also goes to Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights Ivan Šimonovič and the Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Philip Spoerri, for
their briefings.
Protecting civilians is one of the most important
ways through which the United Nations can give
specific shape to its ultimate objectives, as set out in
the Charter. Today’s meeting demonstrates renewed
commitment in our efforts to advance the conceptual
framework and the tools for the protection of civilians
and to prevent the horrendous atrocities described in
the Secretary-General’s report.
The plight of innocent civilians who remain victims
of the horrors of conflict demands that we reflect on
why effective implementation remains a challenge,
in spite of progress on the protection agenda. Brazil
believes that the five core challenges identified by the
Secretary-General in 2009 (see S/2009/277) remain
critical and must be the primary focus of our attention.
We also believe the additional recommendations made

12-388257

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

by the Secretary-General in his 2012 report deserve the
careful attention of the Security Council.
In that context, we stress the importance of the
Council calling for respect for and adherence to
international humanitarian law in a consistent and
non-selective manner. The work of peacekeeping
operations and other protection actors in assisting
Governments to build the necessary capacity to perform
their primary responsibility to protect their citizens is
vital. It is also very important to express recognition for
the work of protection actors on the ground.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support, for example,
have developed a protection-of-civilians resource
and capability matrix to assist missions in applying
resources and capabilities to the implementation of
protection mandates. Furthermore, training modules
on the protection of civilians have been finalized.
In addition, there has also been commendable work
developed by other actors, such as humanitarian
organizations, including the International Committee
of the Red Cross and various non-governmental
organizations, which have played a long-established
and critical role in seeking to enhance the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

In that regard, let me conclude by commending the
Secretary-General for the initiative to designate 2012
as the Year of Prevention. Other relevant initiatives,
such as the Group of Friends of Mediation, can be seen
to fall into the same spirit of pursuing the protection of
civilians through diplomacy, dialogue, negotiation and
prevention. In line with the principles and purposes
of the San Francisco Charter, it can never be stressed
enough that the international community must be
rigorous in its efforts to value, pursue and exhaust
all peaceful means available for the prevention and
resolution of conflicts. That will certainly be the best
expression of our commitment to the protection of
civilians.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Greece.
Mr. Mitsialis (Greece): We welcome the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/376) and the
statements made today by Under-Secretary-General
Amos and on behalf of High Commissioner for Human
Rights Pillay. Moreover, Greece aligns itself with the
statement just made on behalf of the European Union.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate on
the report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts and for your kind invitation
to my delegation to participate in it.

In its presidential statement dated 22 November
2010 (S/PRST/2010/25), the Council, with the support of
Brazil, expressed its deep regret that civilians accounted
for the vast majority of casualties in armed conflict.
Long-term protection can be ensured only if we can
contribute to sustainable solutions to conflicts. Helping
States move along the path of political reconciliation
and development is, ultimately, the best contribution
on the part of the United Nations to the long-term
protection of civilians. In that sense, the Council should
strengthen the importance of that dimension when
drafting peacekeeping mandates.

Developments during the 18 months that have elapsed
since the previous report of the Secretary-General on
the protection of civilians (S/2010/579) have clearly
demonstrated that the volatility of the international
environment has led to political unrest and conflict.
Thus, the Secretary-General’s report is a comprehensive
account on one of the most pressing issues that needs
to be addressed, the safety of people in time of conflict
and the challenges the international community faces
with regard to that problem.

Brazil believes that the protection of civilians can
best be achieved in the end if we prevent conflicts from
happening. That requires an emphasis on diplomacy
and cooperation that reduces the risks of armed conflict
and the human costs associated with it. That is why
Brazil, through the concept of responsibility while
protecting, has called on the international community
to demonstrate renewed commitment and strengthened
confidence in its capacity to make use of the tools set
forth in the United Nations Charter for the prevention of
conflicts and the peaceful settlement of disputes.

Despite some encouraging developments duly
highlighted in the report, such as the landmark
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011) on Libya, there
is reason for grave concern. Civilians account for the
majority of casualties during a conflict. The death and
injury of civilians, conflict-related sexual violence,
the impeded provision of humanitarian assistance and,
more important, the lack of accountability are alarming
realities that must be immediately addressed, along
with the worrying dimensions of the displacement of
populations.

8

12-38825

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

Aggression against civilians can no longer
be tolerated. Respect for and compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights law lay
the foundations for the protection of civilians from the
horrific consequences of conflict. In that respect, it is
imperative to work to reduce the still unacceptably high
level of impunity for perpetrators of attacks against
civilians.
At the same time, we would like to commend the
efforts of all actors involved in the protection of civilians.
Governments and non-governmental institutions have
taken important steps towards full compliance with the
international legal framework and have been working
to set up mechanisms for conflict prevention and
post-conflict reconstruction. Many challenges remain,
but we believe that through enhanced international
cooperation we can achieve better results.
However, for the purpose of preventing atrocities
and in order to ensure multilateral involvement on the
subject of the protection of civilians in areas of conflict,
we need to have accurate and independent information
on the situation on the ground. That is where the role
of journalists — and hence their protection in armed
conflicts — comes in. Journalists are not only the
voice of truth in conflict areas; above all, they are
civilians themselves, and, as the relevant provisions of
humanitarian law stipulate, they must be protected as
such.
In his report, the Secretary-General seized the
opportunity to highlight the relevance of resolution
1738 (2006) and the call contained therein to all States
to prevent attacks against journalists in armed conflicts
and prosecute those responsible. Five years after the
adoption of resolution 1738 (2006), media professionals
continue to be the victims of violence, as we have all
witnessed lately. Greece has consistently stressed the
importance of their role during armed conflicts and the
necessity of protecting them. In that light — and on
the occasion of the celebration of World Press Freedom
Day — Greece and France, along with UNESCO,
organized last May a round-table discussion on the
challenges and possible solutions to this threat against
the right of expression.
Considering the multitude of cases of serious
violations of those rights that have taken place around the
globe in the past 18 months, and assessing the challenges
ahead, we firmly believe that an intensification of
international cooperation would be conducive to a

more efficient response on the part of the international
community towards this problem. The United Nations
plan of action on the safety of journalists and the issue
of impunity, as endorsed by the Chief Executives Board
for Coordination last April, constitutes a praiseworthy
effort in the direction of combating the phenomenon
of attacks against journalists. Proposed actions
such as strengthening United Nations mechanisms,
consolidating partnerships among organizations,
raising awareness and fostering safety initiatives are
incremental steps in the process of ensuring the safety
of journalists and need to be put into practice.
Having drawn the necessary lessons from the past,
our goal should be to chart a new course forward in
order to provide media professionals and their assisting
staff with safeguards that ensure their protection
and to create a safe environment for them. That will
ultimately ensure that the flow of information is free
and unobstructed and the international community
duly informed.
In concluding, I would like to reiterate that Greece
will continue to be at the forefront of this struggle,
supporting all positive initiatives and actively involved
in the fight against impunity for the perpetrators of
such acts against journalists.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg wishes to thank the Chinese presidency
for having convened today’s open debate, which allows
States that are not members of the Council to express
their views on an issue that, unfortunately, remains very
topical: the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
While fully associating myself with the statement
to be made by the observer of the European Union,
I would like to make some remarks in my national
capacity.
I would like to focus, as did many of the speakers
who preceded me, on the crisis in Syria. Innocent
civilians are, alas, its principal victims. Over the course
of more than 15 months, the crisis has claimed thousands
of lives among the Syrian civilian population.
What are the means at the disposal of the Council
to contribute to protecting civilians in the context of
that crisis? Some may argue that the conflict in Syria
is not an armed conflict in the strictly legal sense of
the term, which would rule out the application of the

12-388259

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

Geneva Conventions. But let us not delude ourselves:
the violence in some regions of Syria has reached such
a level of intensity, and the use of heavy weapons,
artillery and tanks in urban areas and of explosive
devices of all types has reached so high a level that
there can no longer be any doubts about the situation.
As the international community and as defenders of
international humanitarian law, we cannot shy away
from the responsibility of finding ways and means of
contributing to the protection of civilians in Syria,
whose lives are threatened on a daily basis.
By adopting resolution 2042 (2012), on 14 April
2012, the Security Council endorsed the six-point
proposal put forward by Kofi Annan, Joint Special
Envoy for the United Nations and the League of Arab
States. The second point of his six-point plan calls on
all parties to
“commit to stop the fighting and achieve urgently
an effective United Nations-supervised cessation
of armed violence in all its forms by all parties
to protect civilians and stabilize the country”
(resolution 2042 (2012), annex).
As confirmed by the reports of the United Nations
Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
(UNSMIS), which was created by resolution 2043
(2012), of 21 April 2012, the Syrian Government has
not yet fulfilled one of the main conditions for the
implementation of the Annan plan to begin: that is, to
“end the use of heavy weapons in population centres”
(ibid.).
Given the deterioration of the situation on the
ground and the non-implementation of the Annan
plan, a process of reflection is under way concerning
a modification of the mandate of UNSMIS. Some are
now calling for a reduction of the Mission or even its
withdrawal. But let us recall what happened after the
withdrawal of the observers of the League of Arab States
in January of this year: the crisis only intensified. The
international community and the Security Council in
particular must not shy away from their responsibilities.
Luxembourg supports the recommendations
put forward by the Secretary-General in his recent
report aimed at ensuring more effective protection
for civilians in armed conflict by responding to
the five core challenges: enhancing compliance by
parties to conflict with international law, enhancing
compliance by non-State armed groups, enhancing
protection by United Nations peacekeeping and other

10

relevant missions, enhancing humanitarian access and
enhancing accountability for violations of the law.
It is urgent to respond to the challenge posed by the
growing number of attacks and other acts specifically
aimed at health-care services. It is equally imperative
to continue to fight against impunity for those who
have violated international humanitarian law or the
fundamental rights of civilians in times of conflict.
In line with the recommendations of the workshop
co-organized last November by the Permanent Mission
of Portugal and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs on the contribution of the
Security Council to ensuring accountability, at which I
had the honour of presiding over one of the panels, we
remain convinced that the establishment of international
commissions of inquiry or fact-finding missions and
referrals to the International Criminal Court have a
deterrent and preventive effect. The appropriate use of
those measures is an important element of the Security
Council’s toolkit for the effective protection of civilians.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan): It is
my honour to speak on behalf of the Human Security
Network, namely, Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece,
Ireland, Mali, Norway, Panama, Slovenia, Switzerland,
Thailand, with South Africa as an observer, and my
own country, Jordan. The Network is a cross-regional
group of States that advocates a people-centred, holistic
approach to security.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
one of the priorities of the Network, and we engaged
constructively in the Security Council debates on the
issue as early as 2002. We encourage the Security
Council to continue to advance the agenda on protection
and separate this important issue from other political
discussions that could undermine the potential of this
framework of action.
We thank the Secretary-General for his latest report
(S/2012/376) and, in particular, for his presentation
today. We also very much welcome the briefing by the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the practice established in 2011 of inviting it to brief the
Council on country-specific situations. We encourage
the Council to use all the information generated by
the different organs of the United Nations to better
implement the international norms and obligations for

12-38825

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

the protection of civilians. Our thanks are also due to
the Director for International Law and Cooperation of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
for his insightful comments, in particular in view
of the annex to the report regarding constraints on
humanitarian access, as well as to Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
We recognize that some progress has been made
not only in providing peacekeeping missions with the
necessary tools to implement the protection of civilians
mandates, but also in the consideration of protection
issues in the situation-specific resolutions and in the
use of targeted sanctions. We are also encouraged
by the recent verdicts of the International Criminal
Court and the Special Court for Sierra Leone and by
the forthcoming United Nations Conference on the
Arms Trade Treaty. However, the members of the
Network are deeply concerned by the fact that, since the
adoption of the most recent statement by the President
of the Security Council on the protection of civilians
(S/PRST/2010/25), the difficult situation on the ground
generally has shown little change. We concur with the
Secretary-General on the need to strengthen our efforts
to respond to the five core challenges identified in his
past two reports and welcome the recommendations
therein.
With regard to the lack of compliance with
international human rights and humanitarian law, we
would like to stress the need to pay further attention
to the dangers faced by journalists and other media
professionals. They play a crucial role by reporting
on the situation of civilians in armed conflict and on
violations of humanitarian law and human rights.
Further action is needed in order to implement resolution
1738 (2006). We also call for the implementation of
the Secretary-General’s recommendations for a more
proactive role of the Security Council on attacks against
health-care facilities, including the collection of data.
Furthermore, we share the Secretary-General’s concern
about the use of explosive weapons in densely populated
areas and welcome his recommendations on this issue.
We would like to highlight the importance
of focusing on the consequences for civilians if
engagement with non-State armed groups does not
take place. On the issue of strengthening the protection
provided by United Nations peacekeeping and other
missions, it is very important that the missions
continue to assist in creating protective environments,

including by supporting the establishment of effective
rule of law and security institutions, in addition to the
physical protection they provide. We also recognize the
protection role of other humanitarian actors, including
the ICRC and non-governmental organizations.
Our countries are especially thankful for the
important information shared about the constraints
on humanitarian access on the ground. It is clear
that obstacles to the deployment and movement of
humanitarian workers can significantly affect the
humanitarian response and the possibility to reach
affected people, in particular the most vulnerable
groups, including women and children. We should all
cooperate in order to implement humanitarian activities
from the outset and for the duration of an emergency.
We remain deeply concerned about violence against
humanitarian workers and wish to draw attention to the
fact that building acceptance for humanitarian action
among the communities and the parties to conflict
remains the best way to gain safe and sustained access
to people in need. As members of the Human Security
Network, we strongly agree with the warning about
the dangers of the “bunkerization” of humanitarian
operations and the use of armed guards and escorts, as
noted in paragraphs 20 and 21 of the annex to the report.
Last but not least, we welcome the follow-up
on the issue of accountability, which is vital for the
protection of civilians and for achieving sustainable
peace. First of all, as the international community,
we should do more in order to help build national
capacities to ensure accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
As stated in the report, international commissions of
inquiry and fact-finding missions have also proved
useful in encouraging national authorities to provide
for accountability. Furthermore, their findings provide
a basis for remedies for the victims and grounds for
possible referrals to the International Criminal Court.
We support the Secretary-General’s recommendation
urging the Council to play a more proactive role in
ensuring an appropriate international response when
national authorities fail to take the steps necessary to
ensure accountability, and reiterate the call for greater
regularity and frequency in the use of fact-finding
missions by the Council. We also stress the need for the
Security Council to consider thoroughly and follow up
on the recommendations of the commissions of inquiry
established in the past months by the Human Rights
Council. We are concerned by the difficulties in taking

12-3882511

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

action to ensure the protection of civilians in those
situations, in particular with regard to Syria.
The members of the Network value the
recommendations of the workshop organized by the
Permanent Mission of Portugal and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on this issue and
call for their consideration by Member States and by
the Council, including the proposal for the development
of a checklist for engagement with the International
Criminal Court.
Finally, we consider it extremely important that
the Council continue to consider this issue periodically
and with the appropriate inputs, including from the
Secretary-General and from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): Estonia welcomes this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflicts
and thanks the presidency for organizing it.
Estonia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union.
We thank the Secretary-General for his timely report
(S/2012/376) and for the recommendations contained
therein. The Secretary-General rightly underlines the
need to focus greater attention on the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts and the need to take more
decisive action in that regard. We welcome the positive
developments, which are based on the results of the
Secretary-General’s previous reports. At the same time,
as the current report acknowledges, the situation on the
ground continues to be characterized by the frequent
failure of parties to armed conflict to comply with their
obligations under applicable international humanitarian
law and human rights law.
In many regions and countries in crisis, as well
as in the numerous long-lasting “frozen” conflicts,
civilians, especially the most vulnerable groups — such
as women and children — are still the main victims of
armed conflict, hence the hundreds of thousands of
refugees and persons suffering forced displacement.
With that in mind, Estonia condemns all forms of
violence, including sexual violence, and especially
the violence committed against children. By the same
token, we welcome the Council’s ongoing contribution
to the protection of those groups and continue to
support the enhancement and empowerment of the

12

invaluable work conducted by the Secretary-General’s
Special Representatives, Ms. Margareta Wahlström and
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy.
Estonia acknowledges that the primary responsibility
to protect their people lies with the States themselves.
At the same time, international humanitarian and
human rights laws must be obeyed not only by national
authorities but by all parties involved. The international
community can do more in enforcing compliance, both
at the national and international levels. We consider the
increased use of accountability mechanisms to be one
of the most important tools to enhance compliance with
international law by all parties to a conflict. Estonia
commends the Secretary-General for dedicating a
substantial part of his report to accountability.
Where national authorities fail to protect their
own people and hold perpetrators accountable, the
international community must take responsibility
in order to save lives and provide justice and redress
to victims. The Security Council bears a special
responsibility under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations and should take a more active stance
in ensuring an appropriate international response,
including referring situations to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) when appropriate. Estonia
supports the Secretary-General’s recommendation of
establishing commissions of inquiry into situations
where international law, especially international
humanitarian law, is being violated and, when
appropriate, to refer such situations to the ICC.
Recently,
the
independent
international
commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
mandated by the Human Rights Council, stated in its
report (A/HRC/19/69) that there are clear indications
that crimes against humanity are taking place in Syria.
Estonia joins the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, in calling
on the Security Council to address this issue in a more
systematic and proactive way, and to refer the situation
in Syria to the ICC.
Estonia further appreciates the Secretary-General’s
encouragement of the Security Council to develop a
checklist to guide its engagement with the ICC when
it considers the possibility of referrals. But referring a
situation to the ICC is only the first step in ensuring
accountability; the cooperation with the Court, which
should follow, is equally important. Therefore, we call

12-38825

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

upon the Council to continue to engage with situations
after their referral to the Court.
Reparations, including restitution and rehabilitation,
for individual victims and affected communities are
also an important aspect of accountability. Estonia
agrees with the Secretary-General that the Council
should consider how to support reparation payments
and national reparation programmes, given its potential
role in authorizing the use of assets frozen under the
sanctions regimes.
Estonia would also like to commend the
Secretary-General for drawing the attention of the
Council and Member States to another important
aspect, namely, humanitarian access in armed
conflicts. More than 1.5 billion people live in fragile or
conflict-affected States. It is the primary responsibility
of States to care for the victims of humanitarian
emergencies within their own borders. Yet, the survival
of millions of people, including internally displaced
persons and refugees forced to leave their homes due
to conflicts around the world today, depends on outside
humanitarian assistance. International humanitarian
law provides for safe, rapid and unimpeded access of
humanitarian personnel and delivery of supplies.
Estonia urges all parties in situations of armed
conflict, State and non-State actors alike, to comply with
international humanitarian law. Yet, access to affected
populations in need and the safety of humanitarian
workers, including locally hired personnel, continue
to be a major concern and a challenge that seriously
affects humanitarian operations. Estonia commends
the efforts of the Emergency Relief Coordinator and the
International Committee of the Red Cross to facilitate
and negotiate access to emergency areas with all
parties to a conflict, most recently in Syria, where up to
1.5 million people need humanitarian assistance.
In conclusion, I would express my sincere hope that
today’s debate will contribute to enhanced compliance
with international humanitarian law and human rights
law, including by strengthening of accountability at both
the national and international levels, and by putting an
end to impunity.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. De Alba (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, the

Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
and the representative of the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) for their very important and
informative reports.
We note that, in recent years, the normative
framework that governs the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts, particularly in the Security Council,
has improved significantly. Nevertheless, there is an
increasing gap between the progress that has been made
in terms of this normative framework and the situation
on the ground, where we witness repeated violations
of international law and international humanitarian
law, as documented in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2012/376).
The protection of civilians in armed conflict
depends on two fundamental principles: respect
for international law and accountability. In view
of the increased violations of these principles, the
Secretary-General has identified five core challenges
to the protection of civilians. Mexico reaffirms its
support for the promotion of specific measures and
actions to address these five challenges so as to ensure
effective protection of civilians. I shall briefly touch
upon a number of these actions.
First, in order to promote compliance with
international humanitarian law, it is essential that those
States that have not yet done so accede to the relevant
instruments of international humanitarian law and
recognize customary law applicable to those situations.
It is critical that we adopt measures to incorporate the
contents of those treaties within our national legislation
and practices.
It is also particularly worrying that, in current
armed conflicts, indiscriminate use has been made
of weapons, more in some cases than in others, such
as wide-area explosive weapons in densely populated
areas, as reflected in the Secretary-General’s report.
Therefore, we endorse the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that the use of these devices be
banned in such situations. In particular, we support
the Secretary-General’s call on the Security Council to
play a more active role in that regard.
We agree with the Secretary-General and Ms. Amos
about the timeliness of the Diplomatic Conference to be
convened at the end of July to adopt an effective and
robust arms trade treaty to control irresponsible trade
in conventional weapons, which has a severe impact on
civilians in armed conflicts. Mexico has participated

12-3882513

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

actively in the preparation for the negotiation of the
aforementioned treaty to establish high standards to
prevent the trade in arms when there is a substantial
risk that they will be used to commit or to facilitate
serious violations of international humanitarian law or
grave and systematic violations of international law of
human rights.
We are also disturbed by the increased number of
attacks perpetrated against health and medical assistance
services in conflict situations, as we heard this morning
from the representative of the ICRC. Attacking or
impeding the provision of health services, as well as
imposing a blockade on humanitarian assistance, are
clear violations of international humanitarian law that
must be duly condemned and sanctioned.
At the same time, it is necessary to ensure
accountability in all cases where of non-compliance with
international norms. The primary responsibility falls
upon States to bring to justice those deemed responsible
for the commission of international humanitarian law
violations. In turn, the International Criminal Court
is an indispensible tool for contributing to curbing
impunity, as it is empowered to try the perpetrators of
these crimes when a State is unable or unwilling to do
so.
We therefore call on those States that have not yet
done so to ratify the Rome Statute and to fully cooperate
with the International Criminal Court. The power of the
Security Council under the Statute to refer situations
to the Court is crucial to efforts to prevent future
international humanitarian law violations. The Security
Council must closely follow up on situations referred to
the Court and on the States involved to cooperate fully
with the Court in order to ensure that its work can be
brought to a successful conclusion.
The Security Council undoubtedly plays a
fundamental role in the protection of civilians
in situations of armed conflict. However, I must
underscore that inaction on the part of the Security
Council undermines not only its own legitimacy, but
also the entire United Nations system, thereby giving
rise to greater impunity, which comes at a high human
cost, as we all know.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.

14

Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): Allow
me, Mr. President, to thank you for the opportunity to
speak.
(spoke in English)
Canada commends the Secretary-General for his
most recent report on this important topic (S/2012/376).
The report highlights for us all that respect for the
protection of civilians is non-existent in far too many
contexts.
In Syria, civilians are massacred by their
Government. Around the world, women and girls
continue to be victims of sexual violence, including
through rape as a weapon of war. Hospitals and
health-care workers are subject to attacks, and people
in desperate need are denied lifesaving humanitarian
assistance. In such circumstances, Member States,
and particularly the Security Council, must redouble
their efforts to protect the world’s most vulnerable and
ensure that those responsible for violations are brought
to justice.
More than a year ago, the Council made clear
its concrete support for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict by adopting resolution 1973 (2011),
which authorized decisive action to protect civilians
and civilian populated areas in Libya. Canada took
critical political and military actions in support of that
Council-endorsed effort to protect civilians against a
cruel and oppressive regime. Through its firm response
to the threat in Libya, the Council demonstrated its
commitment to protecting civilians both in principle
and in practice.
Yet for every success there are many examples
where more could be done. In Syria, hundreds of men,
women and children have been massacred in Houla and
Hama. The use of heavy weapons in population centres,
the excessive use of force, including firing from
helicopters, the lack of respect for medical services
and the denial of humanitarian access are of grave
concern. While we hope that agreement to the Syria
response plan will bring improvements in the ability
of humanitarian actors to assist those in need, the plan
cannot resolve the crisis in Syria. The Security Council
must act swiftly and decisively to ensure compliance
with Joint Special Envoy Annan’s six-point plan, or
move to implement other diplomatic solutions to the
crisis. We urge the adoption of tough and targeted
sanctions against Al-Assad and his regime.

12-38825

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

(spoke in French)
While the crisis in Syria is perhaps the most prominent
example of current challenges to the protection of
civilians, it is far from unique. The Secretary-General’s
report also highlights the deplorable effects of violence
and conflict on women and children, including the
prevalence of sexual violence in many emergency
situations. Canada is, for example, deeply concerned
by the deteriorating security situation in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the abuses faced
by vulnerable populations there, including killings of
civilians and sexual violence. We must be persistent
in denouncing violence directed against women and
girls and in promoting their empowerment. While all
civilians deserve equal protection, it is important that
efforts toward international protection take into account
the particular vulnerabilities and capacities of targeted
individuals and groups. What is more, as recognized in
resolution 1325 (2000), ensuring that women are full,
active and constructive participants in peace processes
can significantly contribute to the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security.
Furthermore, we must take action to defend the
rights of vulnerable religious minorities who are
persecuted for their beliefs in situations of armed
conflict. Canada is in the process of establishing an
office within Foreign Affairs and International Trade
Canada that will promote the protection of freedom of
religion worldwide. In that regard, we encourage key
United Nations stakeholders to develop strategies that
allow them to better take into account the persecution
of religious minorities with a view to preventing their
displacement.
(spoke in English)
In far too many contexts, humanitarian access
is politicized and constrained. Civilians in need of
assistance are held hostage to the whims of Governments
and non-State armed groups.
The Secretary-General and the International
Committee of the Red Cross have highlighted the fact
that health-care providers and facilities continue to
come under attack in situations of conflict and violence.
In too many contexts, hospitals are routinely targeted,
and the wounded choose not to seek treatment for fear
of detention, torture or death. Humanitarian workers,
including medical volunteers, have lost their lives in the
performance of their duties.

The Council must continue to exercise the full
range of options at its disposal to prevent and put an
end to violence against civilians in armed conflict.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Austria.
Ms. Juen (Austria): At the outset, let me thank the
Secretary-General for presenting his report (S/2012/376)
and
Under-Secretary-General
Amos,
Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonovič, and International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) Director Spoerri
for their instructive briefings.
Austria aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf of the European Union, the Group of Friends
on the protection of civilians and the Human Security
Network.
The Secretary-General’s most recent report on the
protection of civilians is a very good basis not only for
stock-taking but also for discussing topics that have been
identified as emerging protection issues and that should
receive more attention in the Council’s deliberations.
Austria welcomes the report’s highlighting of
the dangers for journalists in conflict situations. We
underline the obligation of all parties to conflict to
ensure the protection of civilians, including journalists
and other media workers and professionals. The
Council has unequivocally condemned such attacks
in resolution 1738 (2006), and we encourage Council
members to consider the situation of journalists in
armed conflict in a more proactive and systematic
manner in country-specific discussions, including by
calling on parties to put an end to such attacks.
As impunity continues to be widespread, Member
States should constantly be reminded of their obligation
to prosecute those responsible for violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
In order to ensure accountability for serious crimes,
such as in the present situation in Syria, the Security
Council should promote and make use of the full
range of justice and accountability mechanisms at the
national and international levels, including referrals to
the International Criminal Court.
The fight against impunity and the prevention of
future crimes, including through the sharing of best
practices and lessons learned, will be key elements of
the resolution on the safety of journalists that Austria
intends to submit to the Human Rights Council this fall.

12-3882515

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

With regard to the use of explosive weapons in densely
populated areas, we share the Secretary-General’s
concern about their humanitarian impact. Austria
welcomes the Emergency Relief Coordinator’s appeals
in that regard and supports the ICRC view and the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that explosive
weapons with a wide-area impact should be avoided
in densely populated areas. Under international
humanitarian law, their use is not prohibited as such,
but the heightened risk of indiscriminate harm and the
appalling civilian suffering they cause when used in
such areas should be reason enough for us to consider
this issue more in depth, including the possibility of
developing stronger international standards. More
systematic data collection, the refinement of national
policies on the use of explosive weapons and conducting
post-strike analysis are important in that respect.
Let me also mention that, in order to improve
our understanding of protection challenges and to
effectively respond to them, civilian casualty recording
by parties to conflict should receive more attention. The
practice of offering amends to civilians harmed during
armed conflict, which may range from the recognition
of the harm caused and public apologies to assistance
to victims, has increased recently, and we welcome the
efforts made by the International Security Assistance
Force and the African Union Mission in Somalia in that
regard.
With a view to the imminent negotiations on an
arms trade treaty, Austria would like to underline its
full support for an outcome that should set robust,
ambitious and legally binding norms for the regulation
of the international trade in arms. It should prevent
international transfers of conventional arms, inter
alia, if there is a substantial risk that those arms will
be used to commit or facilitate serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law,
including the perpetration of gender-based violence.
Let me conclude by stressing the importance of
appropriate predeployment training of peacekeepers, as
reflected in resolution 1894 (2009). Two new missions
with protection of civilians mandates were established
by the Council last year, among them the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), which was faced
with an outburst of inter-communal ethnic violence
in Jonglei state at the turn of the year. As the Force
Commander of UNMISS highlighted before the Council
last week (see S/PV.6789), early-warning activities and

16

assistance by the Mission to the host Government were
decisive in preventing a further escalation of violence.
In that regard, it is important to emphasize our
common responsibility to provide missions with
key resources and to prepare peacekeepers in the
implementation of protection mandates. We welcome
the protection of civilians training modules prepared
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support and encourage troop- and
police-contributing countries to make use of them.
Austria has committed itself to proactive
implementation of resolution 1894 (2009) and is
currently developing an interdisciplinary training
course on the protection of civilians that will be open to
national and international participants who are senior
decision-makers of armed forces, police and civilian
administration, as well as other civilian stakeholders
and experts.
The President (China) (spoke in Chinese): I now
give the floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Let me join previous
speakers in thanking the Permanent Mission of
China for convening this important debate. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, the Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights, and the
representative of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their presentations.
The Secretary-General’s ninth report on civilians in
armed conflict of 2012 (S/2012/376) states that the five
core challenges for the protection of civilians continue
to remain urgent. It states that despite some progress,
the ground reality has not qualitatively improved.
Particularly worrying is that gender-based violence,
including sexual violence, attacks against children,
schools, health facilities, impeded humanitarian access
to affected populations, inter alia, continue unabated.
We welcome the clarification in the report of the
principles, misconceptions and misinterpretations
relating to the protection of civilians and the
responsibility to protect. I quote:
“[T]he protection of civilians is a legal concept
based on international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law, while the responsibility to
protect is a political concept, set out in the 2005
World Summit Outcome (see General Assembly

12-38825

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

resolution 60/1) … there are important differences
in their scope. The protection of civilians relates to
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law in situations of armed conflict. The
responsibility to protect is limited to violations that
constitute war crimes or crimes against humanity
or that would be considered acts of genocide or
ethnic cleansing.” (S/2012/376, para. 21)
Further on, the report states:
“Sparing civilians from the effects of hostilities
requires compliance by parties to conflict with
international humanitarian law and, in particular,
the principles of distinction and proportionality. It
requires parties to take all feasible precautions both
in attacking and in defending. The law is also clear
that under no circumstances do violations of these
rules by one party justify violations by any other
party.” (ibid., para. 32)
We hope that the clarifications provided in the
Secretary-General’s report will contribute to the
application of those principles in a considered and
non-political manner, without the ever too present
overlay of emotion and propaganda. We also welcome
the recommendations in the report, especially the focus
on displacements and increased attacks against health
facilities.
Ad hoc approaches that we have seen far too
frequently will not achieve the noble underlying
goals of those principles. Global principles, if they
are to be respected, must be applied consistently and
non-selectively.
Furthermore, the protection task cannot be held
hostage to purely theoretical analyses. It requires us to
be conscious of a multiplicity of different underlying
factors, ranging from political realities, socio-economic
influences, basic individual rights, proliferating small
arms and the sophistication of terrorists, particularly
in mobilizing the media. The reliance on modern
technology and propaganda methods by rebel groups,
in particular terrorist groups and their networks of
sympathizers, and the agitated media, are becoming
an increasing concern. Many a time, reality has been
drowned out by clever propaganda.
Practical realities that have been based on the
experiences of Member States, particularly those that
have successfully countered terrorism, must be seriously
examined instead of relying on a theoretical application

of a one-size-fits-all humanitarian framework. The
use of civilians as human shields and bargaining
chips by rebel groups and terrorist groups has made
the application of the those principles a nightmarish
challenge.
The protection of civilians is not a static concept
and it has relevance in immediate and medium-term
post-conflict situations. My country, Sri Lanka, has
seriously taken account of the principles underlined
in the Council’s thematic resolutions since 1999. Its
commitment was demonstrated in the manner that
Sri Lanka addressed the needs of civilians and their
protection during and after the conflict with the terrorist
group Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam. Throughout
the final phase of the armed conflict, from 2006 to
2009, Sri Lanka engaged with the United Nations and
its agencies, the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) and representatives of the international
community and civil society, both in Sri Lanka and
outside.
The difficulties that Sri Lanka faced in protecting
its civilians and providing humanitarian assistance
were a challenge to the State itself and to its institutions.
Sri Lanka highlighted a unique situation where
successive Governments had continued to maintain
the supply of essential food and services — including
educational and health services to terrorist-controlled
areas — unimpeded during the entire period of its
protracted conflict. The Consultative Committee on
Humanitarian Assistance, whose members include
key United Nations agencies and representatives of the
donor community, meticulously monitored the flow
of essential food and medicine to the rebel-controlled
areas.
My delegation hopes that the Council’s discussion
on the protection of civilians will facilitate practical
outcomes based on ground realities — realities that
differ from situation to situation.
We must invest greater efforts in preventing
conflicts in the first instance and their recurrence, and
respond practically and proportionately to situations
affecting civilian populations.
Allow me to share the observations of the head of
the UNICEF Executive Board delegation, following a
visit to Sri Lanka in March 2012. He said,
“a lot of times we find that countries that have a
middle-income status tend to drop off the priority

12-3882517

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

list of UNICEF. In fact, Sri Lanka illustrates why
UNICEF needs to remain engaged. It is in these
countries that lessons can be learned in ways
in which they can be transferred to other, less
developed countries much more rapidly”.
The President (China) (spoke in Chinese): I now
give the floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
commend and congratulate you, Mr. President, for
convening this timely open debate. I would also like
to thank the representatives of the Secretariat and of
the International Committee of the Red Cross for their
presentations made this morning.
I would like to begin by also thanking the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/376), in
particular for the clear and unambiguous manner by
which a number of the most sensitive issues relating
to the protection of civilians have been addressed. In
that regard, I would like to take this opportunity to
add Uruguay’s voice to those that have emphasized
the importance and necessity of redoubling efforts to
strengthen consensus and restore confidence in the
concept of the protection of civilians, which is based
on respect for universally accepted standards of
international law and international humanitarian law,
human rights and the rights of refugees.
We deplore the continuing violations of human
rights and humanitarian law, reflected in the
Secretary-General’s report, that have occurred in
various armed conflicts, as well as the increase in
the number of victims among civilian populations
through various acts of violence, including sexual
violence, displacement, forced disappearances, the
torture of civilians, attacks on schools and hospitals,
the recruitment and exploitation of children, the
indiscriminate use of explosive weapons in densely
populated areas, and the impunity that the perpetrators
of such acts continue to enjoy.
Given that backdrop, the five challenges laid out
in the Secretary-General’s report remain fully valid in
the situations of armed conflict existing today. In that
context, it is worth reiterating the continuing urgent
importance of facilitating access for humanitarian
personnel and of ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law on the part of all parties involved
and in every situation, in order to provide the security
conditions that will allow them to carry out their work.

18

I believe this is also an opportunity to recall the
references that the Secretary-General includes in
his report to various areas that are in need of further
attention and from which the protection of civilians
could benefit, such as the importance of improving
the record of victims. We are very conscious of the
importance of this activity, in line with the principles
of humanitarian law; first because of its relationship to
some of the values most intrinsic to human dignity, and
also because of its potential practical effects, since that
such a record could also shed light on the causes of the
harm done to civilians and on the measures necessary
to end it and prevent its recurrence.
Similarly, we agree that the forthcoming United
Nations Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty represents
an extremely important opportunity to address the
human cost of the lack of regulation of the arms trade
and the wide availability and improper use of arms.
The treaty should rightly prioritize the humanitarian
dimension by, for example, including criteria that
would forbid the transfer of weapons when there is an
evident risk that they would be used to commit serious
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights norms.
The protection of civilians continues to pose a
significant challenge to the United Nations system,
and in particular to its peacekeeping system. Under
its mandates for protecting civilians that system has
not only one of the most delicate tasks there is but
also one of the activities by which the international
community judges the effectiveness of the United
Nations. As a country that contributes troops who
are deployed in some of the most difficult situations
under highly complex mandates, we understand the
importance of progressing towards a thorough and
inclusive conceptual and operational analysis of the
implementation of mandates for the protection of
civilians in peacekeeping operations, considering the
gap that exists between what the Security Council
mandates, the resources available to implement it and
the legitimate expectations of the affected civilian
populations.
In that regard, despite the fact that the challenges
remain enormous, it should be acknowledged that in
the past three years the United Nations system has
made significant strides forward in achieving more
consistency in the implementation of its mandates, in
diagnosing the problems and existing limitations, as
well as in seeking solutions, or at least remedies, that

12-38825

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

focus on situations most urgently in need of protection
due to the imminent threat of physical violence. While
it is essential that such situations be addressed, at
the same time it is equally important to ensure that
such protection can be sustained once missions have
withdrawn.
In that regard, based on the cardinal principal
that the primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians falls to the host country, the United Nations
system, including through its peacekeeping operations,
should conduct a more thorough analysis of how it
might contribute to strengthening national institutions,
particularly those that deal with providing security and
implementing the rule of law. Moreover, this should go
hand in hand with the comprehensive vision needed to
sustain the protection of civilians, including from the
perspective of development.
Finally, I would like to reiterate that Uruguay views
the issue of the protection of civilians as constituting
a multidimensional agenda that is informed by more
specific and closely linked themes, such as those of
children in armed conflict and of women and peace
and security, among others. It is therefore crucial that
progress be made with the greatest coordination possible
in order to generate synergies, avoid the duplication of
efforts and make the most effective use possible of the
instruments that the Organization can deploy on the
ground. That will enable better coordination between
all stakeholders involved, leading to more coherent
responses in the area of the protection of civilians,
particularly for those groups in vulnerable situations,
who are most exposed and require grater efforts to
ensure their effective protection.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having chosen the protection of
civilians in armed conflict for our consideration in this
open debate.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms
its support for the importance of protecting civilians in
armed conflicts. We wish to recall that such protection
should always be based on international humanitarian
law, particularly the Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols. Venezuela believes that the
subject of the protection of civilians refers to those
measures that are taken in order to protect civilians

in time of war, and recognizes its ties to international
humanitarian law, refugee law and international human
rights law.
The Security Council has been addressing the
topic of the protection of civilians since 1999, with
an emphasis on women, children and humanitarian
workers. Those issues are inspired by noble goals.
Diplomacy and dialogue are the most appropriate
means for protecting civilians and the best guarantee
for ensuring international peace and security. The
protection of civilians in armed conflict must therefore
be achieved peacefully. The use of military force is
neither the best, nor the only, option for the protection
of civilians. That alternative should be resorted to only
in extreme cases, while always respecting the principle
of proportionality.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
commendable goal. There cannot be indifference to the
violation of humanist principles and practices in times
of war. All civilians on all continents require protection.
International law on the protection of civilians, for
example, as enshrined in the Fourth Geneva Convention
and other international instruments, represents a
milestone on the age-old path in pursuit of the dignity
of the individual. Sovereign Governments bear the
primary responsibility to protect their citizens. It is an
exclusive responsibility, which cannot be replaced or
manipulated by interventionist political agendas.
The inequality, poverty, hunger, unemployment
and inequities that arise as a result of the unjust global
capitalist system and through foreign domination and
occupation are the primary reasons for, or root causes of,
armed conflict in countries around the world. In order
to prevent armed conflict, developing social justice
policies that make it possible to eliminate poverty and
inequality among countries must be a priority. Such
policies must be part of international cooperation and
diplomacy based on solidarity.
The issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict cannot be addressed selectively or on a
discretionary basis. We emphasize that the Security
Council has acted in that manner on several occasions
by choosing the civilians who merit or do not merit
protection. In addressing the matter, it is not uncommon
for imperialist Powers with neocolonial aims to resort
to double standards. That is a strategy to reconquer and
recolonize similar to that of past centuries that sought
to topple the sovereign status of developing countries.

12-3882519

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

What hope do the peoples of the world have that the
protection of civilians in armed conflict be applied
universally and impartially?
Some Member States of the Security Council
promote resolutions seemingly to protect civilians,
but what they seek is a hegemonic foothold over
countries of the South. That practice undermines the
noble principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. In that
way, such practices degrade the humanism and noble
goals of civilian protection.
Under the guise of protecting civilians, the Security
Council adopted resolution 1973 (2011), which provided
NATO with a pretext to destroy much of Libya’s civilian
infrastructure, causing the deaths of thousands of
civilians, including women and children, and leading to
regime change and the brutal assassination of the head
of State. The International Criminal Court seems to be
concerned only with alleged or actual crimes against
civilians when they are committed by African leaders
or individuals.
The concept of civilian protection is therefore
controversial. In its name, regime change and
overthrowing sovereign Governments of countries of the
South are promoted so as to set up puppet Governments
that favour the interests of transnational corporations
and imperialist Powers.
Why is civilian protection not invoked when
American drones kill dozens of civilians in Afghanistan,
Yemen and Pakistan? What about the war in Iraq,
where hundreds of thousands of civilians have died.
What about the sanctions imposed on Iraq before the
invasion, which caused the deaths of at least 1 million
people according to the press and international analysis?
Where were the ardent advocates of civilian protection
when those atrocities were being perpetrated?
As some Security Council members have said, the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/376) ignores
the Middle East and African countries and alludes to the
alleged lack of cooperation of the Syrian Government
with regard to the protection of civilians, while it
forgets the suffering of civilians subjected to the Israeli
occupation. Nor does it address the situation in Libya.
If we wish to protect civilians in Syria, we must contain
those who seek to promote violence and terrorism from
abroad, fuel sectarian and religious tension and arm
terrorist groups.

20

Venezuela supports the initiative of the Russian
Federation to convene an international conference on
Syria, with the participation of key actors with influence
in the Middle East, in order to help promote a political
dialogue between the parties by way of achieving a
peaceful and lasting solution to that conflict. Any such
initiative, proposed by whomsoever, that gives rise to a
peaceful outcome and the reconciliation of the Syrians
must be supported.
The protection of Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese
civilians suffering under the Israeli occupation must
be a fundamental component of an international effort
for the full and fair implementation of the mandate to
protect civilians in armed conflict. While sanctions
regimes are imposed on Governments and peoples
of countries of the South, there is silence over the
unpunished and massive human rights violations
committed by the State of Israel. Why are Palestinian
civilians not protected from those who systematically
violate their human rights?
The concept of the responsibility to protect
re-establishes the former imperial political theories in
new forms. Today, it is a lethal weapon of neoliberalism
and brutal capitalism that seeks to violate the
sovereignty of States. Former Western Powers claimed
a civilized superiority in order to invade or to conquer
subjugated peoples. They disguised their intentions
with the fallacy that they were acting out of altruism.
From that shameful history was borne the international
protectorate system, established by the League of
Nations. Acts of neocolonial aggression that violate
international law and international humanitarian
and human rights law have been perpetrated under
the responsibility to protect. While the concept of
the responsibility to protect rejects the protection of
civilians in times not only of war, but also of peace,
those harmful precedents to which I have referred in
our statement must be borne in mind when considering
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Allow me to conclude by reaffirming that the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela advocates with
determination for the protection without discrimination
of each and every civilian afflicted by armed conflict in
any part of the world and condemns the unscrupulous
use that imperialist Powers have made of that noble
humanitarian goal.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.

12-38825

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): The Security Council
has considered the issue of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict for more than a decade. It is time
that we reflect on the achievements and on the
improvements that can bring about greater tangible
results in the protection of civilians affected by armed
conflict. Indeed, the international community has
achieved progress in setting up a robust international
normative framework, provided a wealth of experience
and generated best practices on the issue. However, the
reality on ground remains characterized by the concern
as to whether people are being adequately safeguarded.
One very difficult point in the protection of
civilians is the still-vague meaning and distinction
among armed groups, combatants and civilians.
That lack of clarity has cost civilian lives in various
conflicts by both mistake and design. The situation
is confounded by the proliferation and fragmentation
of non-State armed groups. Some of those non-State
actors reject the premise of civilian protection. Another
key issue is the asymmetric nature of armed conflict
in various regions where the principles of distinction
and proportionality are being violated. Such challenges
underline the need for reinvigorated commitment and
determined comprehensive action in dealing with
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. In that
connection, the Indonesian delegation wishes to make
a few observations.
First, Indonesia is cognizant of the fact that the main
failure in the protection of civilians in armed conflict
stems from a lack of compliance and accountability by
parties to conflict with their moral and legal obligations.
Regrettably, vested interests and power politics often
ride roughshod over moral and legal imperatives.
We do note the constructive developments in
favour of strengthening compliance and ensuring
accountability through building national capacities,
which is an essential aspect in effectively preventing
potential atrocities against civilians. It also goes
without saying that all States have the responsibility
to ensure that adequate measures are taken to control
and eliminate non-State armed groups and those
perpetuating organized crime whose threat to people is
often accentuated during conflicts.
Secondly, it is crucial that adequate focus be placed
on developing tools and supporting and strengthening
national capacities and resources, which enables
effective systems for the well-being of civilians. Due

regard should also be taken of the special needs of
women and children.
Member States’ role in promoting compliance and
accountability, including through domestic legislation
and legal means, is critical to preventing violations. In
that regard, every State has the responsibility to not only
undertake its requisite national steps but to support the
furthering of a global culture that ascribes the highest
value to the protection for civilians in armed conflicts.
Thirdly, many United Nations peacekeeping missions
have been entrusted with the protection of civilian
mandates. As one of the leading troop-contributing
countries, Indonesia has sent its troops and police to
several United Nations peacekeeping operations with
that mandate. It should be ensured that, in addition
to Blue Helmets being provided with clear goals and
guidelines, they should also be properly equipped and
supported in performing their mission goals.
We appreciate the Security Council’s efforts to that
end. An initiative has been undertaken to prioritize
the protection of civilians in decisions concerning
the use of available capacity and resources in the
implementation of mission mandates. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2012/376) has also specified the
challenge posed by the limited degree of cooperation
from host States and their capacity to act, which affects
the discharge of mandates by peacekeepers.
Undertaking continued meaningful consultation
among all peacekeeping stakeholders, including
troop-contributing countries, throughout various stages
of a peacekeeping mission is extremely important to
the effective accomplishment of the mandate. For its
part, Indonesia is committed to enhancing capacities
for training military, police and civilian components.
The newly inaugurated Indonesia Peace and Security
Centre will serve to cater to that important need.
There is indeed nothing better than the prevention of
a conflict. Resolution 1265 (1999) explicitly expressed,
inter alia, the need to address the causes of armed
conflict and to enhance the protection of civilians on a
long-term basis. All international actors must play their
role, cooperate and collaborate to generate the needed
political synergy and support, which equitably mitigates
conflicts and helps conflict-affected countries to take
effective measures to protect civilians.
Finally, I would like to stress that enabling
humanitarian access in a conflict situation is critical.

12-3882521

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

Parties to conflict should cooperate fully with the
United Nations and other humanitarian agencies to
ensure safe and unhindered access of humanitarian
personnel, supplies and equipment to affected areas.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for organizing this meaningful open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
I am sure that, under your able stewardship, today’s
debate will serve as a timely occasion to continue the
progress made on the issue. My appreciation also goes
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his thorough and
insightful ninth report (S/2012/376).
Since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), the
protection of civilians has come to occupy a prominent
place on the agenda of the Security Council. The Council,
with cooperation from all the relevant agencies and
Member States, has been making significant progress
on the issue in a variety of ways, including diversifying
different aspects of the protection of civilians by
incorporating the specific and unique protection needs
of women and children, addressing the scourge of sexual
violence, ensuring the necessity of accountability and
overcoming constraints on safe, unimpeded and timely
humanitarian access. Nevertheless, the international
community is still suffering from a basic failure to
protect civilians in many parts of the world who, caught
up in the horrors of wars, are in desperate need of
greater protection.
My delegation believes that the most important
principle is enhanced compliance with international
human rights and humanitarian law. In other words, no
violation of international human rights and humanitarian
law should go unpunished under any circumstances.
Indeed, when there is no escape for a violator, regardless
of the status of the parties in conflict, compliance
with international human rights and humanitarian
law will be accordingly enhanced. In that connection,
the punishment, in 2012, of Charles Taylor, former
President of Liberia, and two non-State armed groups
in Sierra Leone represents important steps forward
for international justice and the greater fight against
impunity. We also note with appreciation that, in his
report, the Secretary-General has highlighted attacks
against and interference with, health-care facilities and
providers, as well as the need to prevent displacement.

22

In particular, sexual violence against women and
girls in armed conflicts is one of the most horrible
forms of violence against civilians and civilization
itself, and it deserves our special attention. Women and
girls are most vulnerable, and sexual violence has a
devastating and corrosive effect on society as a whole.
My delegation is pleased that the Security Council has
made significant progress in deterring egregious sexual
violence, including through its adoption of resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010). As such,
my delegation hopes that the Security Council will
continue to strengthen its efforts to address that issue
through increased coordination with UN- Women, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and other
concerned organizations in order to better confront
those atrocious crimes and ensure a brighter future for
women and girls around the world.
Access for civilians affected by armed conflict to
humanitarian aid and basic safety and security also
needs to be guaranteed. Unfortunately, we have seen
many cases where humanitarian personnel and supplies
have failed to reach those in urgent need owing to the
interference of certain parties in armed conflicts. Such
acts are clearly a violation of humanitarian norms and
rules, and those involved in such crimes must be held
accountable. As the Secretary-General recommends,
Member States should be encouraged to consult
closely with humanitarian actors and to facilitate
humanitarian access in a safe and sustainable manner,
while the Security Council, on the basis of the relevant
resolutions, including resolution 1894 (2009), should
deliberate further on the issue.
My delegation also believes that efforts to protect
civilians should be an integral part of all United Nations
peacekeeping missions. United Nations peacekeeping
operations are a supplementary tool to the States’
primary responsibility for civilian protection, but they
are taking on more responsibilities to support and
provide security to civilians at great risk. As has been
highlighted in the Security Council’s recent meeting
with United Nations Force Commanders last week
(see S/PV.6789), there is a vital need to strengthen
peacekeeping mandates related to civilian protection
in view of the complex challenges we face today.
Troop-contributing countries should also do their part
by providing predeployment preparation and training to
equip the peacekeepers with the range of skills required
to operate in that regard.

12-38825

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

My delegation shares the deep concerns over
systematic, flagrant and widespread violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law,
which all seriously affect civilians. In that regard,
the Republic of Korea fully supports the continued
attention that the Security Council is devoting to this
issue. My delegation is also committed to rendering our
full support.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
congratulating China on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of June. I also
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting. Allow me also to express our sincere thanks
to the Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General
Valerie Amos, Assistant Secretary-General Ivan
Šimonović and the Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, Mr. Philip Spoerri, for their briefings this
morning.
I welcome the Secretary-General’s latest report on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict contained in
document S/2012/376. The Secretary-General provided
five recommendations, namely, enhancing compliance
with international law, enhancing compliance by
non-State armed groups, the protection of civilians
by United Nations peacekeeping and other missions,
humanitarian access and accountability.
The concept of the protection of civilians is founded
in the universally accepted rules of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, which are
set out in a range of international legal instruments,
in particular the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their
1977 Additional Protocols, containing specific rules to
protect civilians. In situations that are not covered by
those international agreements, in particular internal
disturbances, civilians are protected by the fundamental
principles of humanitarian law, by most religious values
and ethics and by human rights law. Ironically, however,
a large number of civilians continue to be exposed to
the atrocities of conflict.
My delegation condemns all violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law. In
many situations, women and children especially continue
to be subject to various forms of violence. Attacks and
other interference against health-care facilities and
providers are of serious concern in several conflicts,

despite the special protection afforded by international
humanitarian law to medical staff and transport,
hospitals, clinics and the like. We stress the need to
combat impunity, safeguard access for humanitarian
assistance and protect the safety of humanitarian aid
workers. For example, the total disregard and rejection
of humanitarian and international laws and values
demonstrated for years by occupation forces in the
occupied territories of Palestine are a disgrace for
humankind.
It is a welcome step that the Security Council
established two new peacekeeping operations in 2011
with protection-of-civilians mandates, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei, while
terminating another one, the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan. At present, eight out of a total of 16 United
Nations peacekeeping operations have mandates to
protect civilians under imminent threat of physical
violence. Three of those eight peacekeeping missions
with a protection mandate — the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur — have developed
comprehensive
protection-of-civilians
strategies,
whereas one mission, UNMISS, is in the process of
drafting such a strategy as requested by the Council in
resolution 1894 (2009).
With regard to the Secretary-General’s reporting
on the protection of civilians, we see that the Secretariat
has yet to finalize new guidance for United Nations
operations and other relevant missions on protection
reporting, with a view to streamlining such reporting
and enhancing the Council’s monitoring and oversight,
as requested by the Council. It appears that work on
developing such guidance is still ongoing, and I hope it
would be finalized soon.
To ensure the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, my delegation would like to highlight a few
issues.
First, special attention should be given so that
there is minimum misuse of the protection-of-civilians
mandate.
Second, protection relates to prevention and the
building of a culture of peace. The preventive capacity
of the United Nations must be enhanced, and Member
States need to take steps to inculcate the values of

12-3882523

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

peace, tolerance and harmony, which contribute to
long-term prevention.
Third, the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, which are among the important
tools available to the United Nations to protect civilians
in armed conflict, should be enhanced. AS one of the
largest troop-contributing countries, we believe that
there needs to be a closer dialogue between the Council
and troop-contributing countries, as they can provide
valuable information about the situation on the ground.
We also feel that in peacekeeping missions, the issue of
resource gaps should be adequately addressed, so that
there is motivation and commitment on the job.
Similarly, it should also be kept in mind that United
Nations Blue Helmets cannot be seen as the only
instrument for protecting civilians in such situations.
The host country has the primary responsibility for
protecting its civilians. I will also add here that the
presence of uniformed female personnel may also play
a pivotal role in a State’s ability to protect its citizens.
I take this opportunity to refer to the efforts of the
all-female Bangladeshi formed police units working
in peacekeeping missions in Haiti and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Fourth, there should be strengthened protection
mandates and compliance by United Nations
peacekeepers.
Fifth, compliance with international legal
obligations by parties to a conflict needs to be enhanced,
and accountability mechanisms should be strengthened.
Sixth, international efforts that include the use
of force should be deployed as a last resort, while
respecting the relevant provisions of the United Nations
Charter. If peaceful means and the use of mediation
have been exhausted, force could be used with proper
authorization by the Security Council or, in exceptional
circumstances, by the General Assembly, in line with
resolution 377 (V).
Seventh, considering that all civilians affected by
armed conflict deserve help, enhanced humanitarian
access by the States and parties concerned should be
ensured.
Eighth, it should be recalled that, in assigning such
a mandate, adequate provisions should be made for the
security and safety of peacekeepers.

24

Finally, my delegation urges all parties to conflicts
to comply with the letter and spirit of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, and
to ensure the protection of the lives and property of
civilians and unimpeded access to humanitarian aid. We
call on parties to conflicts to strengthen the protection
of civilians through heightened awareness at all levels,
particularly through training, orders and instructions
issued to armed forces.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his introduction, as
well as Under-Secretary-General Amos and Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović, who spoke on behalf of
High Commissioner Pillay.
Civilians continue to account for the majority
of casualties in armed conflicts. Turkey condemns
any and all deliberate attacks on civilians and deaths
resulting from the indiscriminate and excessive use
of force. We are aware that the primary obligation to
protect civilians lies, as always, with States. However,
the international community also has a responsibility to
help protect civilians in situations where States openly
fail to do so. Therefore, we need to build a collective
awareness of the importance of that responsibility and
must be able to agree on the fundamental guidelines.
We should not fail to recall the plight of the
Palestinian people. Whether in Gaza or the West
Bank, Palestinians continue to suffer under measures
related to the illegal blockade and occupation, and
their fundamental rights are being denied. The illegal
blockade of Gaza, serving as a collective punishment
against civilian Palestinians in Gaza, entered its sixth
year this month. Statistics compiled by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) clearly
show the devastating effects of the blockade and the
occupation on the daily lives of the Palestinian people.
As was also recently noted in the outcome document
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, the occupation continues to adversely
affect the economic lives and social development as
well as the environment of the Palestinians living in
the occupied territories. The obstacles created by
the occupation are incompatible with the dignity and

12-38825

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

worth of the human person and must be combated and
eliminated.
As regards the situation in Syria, the Syrian
Government has primary responsibility for the
protection of its people and should immediately end
the violence, which has led to thousands of deaths and
a humanitarian tragedy that has affected 1.5 million
people so far, according to OCHA statistics. The
international community must display its resolve to put
an end to the cycle of violence and the deepening crisis
in Syria and to take the necessary additional measures
to that effect. Turkey, together with the rest of the
international community, will continue to support the
six-point plan of Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan.
We have carefully read the Secretary-General’s
latest, and ninth, report on the issue. While sharing the
Secretary- General’s ongoing and emerging concerns, I
would like to underline three issues.
The first relates to dialogue with non-State armed
groups. We understand the rationale of ensuring
humanitarian access to civilians. However, Turkey
believes that in doing so, we should be extremely
careful not to extend any sense of legitimacy to terrorist
organizations. Terrorist organizations in various
parts of the world could attempt to exploit such a
humanitarian approach to gain international acceptance
and recognition. On the other hand, if engagement with
non-State armed groups is contemplated, the consent of
the State in question is necessary.
The second point is that we should make a clear
distinction between the counter-terrorism efforts of
law-enforcement agencies and armed conflict. We
strongly condemn all acts of terrorism in all their forms
and manifestations. As indicated in the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2010/19) adopted by the Security
Council on 27 September 2010, during Turkey’s
presidency of the Council, and in other relevant United
Nations resolutions, terrorism continues to pose a serious
threat to the enjoyment of human rights and social and
economic development, and undermines global stability
and prosperity. Therefore, Governments have not only
the legitimate right but also the obligation to effectively
combat terrorism and to fully and effectively cooperate
with other States.
Lastly, we believe that United Nations
documents should not contain positive references to
non-governmental organizations that are known to have
become the instrument of terrorist organizations.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
cause that the international community must pursue
with unwavering determination. We believe that in
order to ensure the long-term and lasting protection of
civilians, human rights, the rule of law, democracy and
good governance should be strengthened. We should
also ensure that the perpetrators of violence against
civilians are held fully accountable for their actions, for
sustainable prevention and protection will be possible
only if there is no impunity.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Tagle (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to commend you, Sir, on your country’s
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of June and to thank you for the invitation to
participate in this important debate. I should like
also to thank the Secretary-General for his important
report (S/2012/376) on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, as well as Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Ivan Šimonović,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights; and
Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, for their briefings. My delegation also welcomes
the presence among us today of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Guatemala, Mr. Harold Caballeros.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of Jordan, speaking
on behalf of the Human Security Network, of which
Chile is a member.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
one of my country’s concerns in that it touches on the
protection of human rights and the maintenance of
international peace and security, the fundamental goal
of which must always be the preservation of the life and
well-being of the human person. Following up on the
last statement (S/PRST/2010/25) issued by the Council
in that respect, on 22 November 2010, the ninth report
(S/2012/376) of the Secretary-General provides us with
an updated picture of the situation in this area.
Regrettably, and despite the fact that some progress
has been made, the overall realities on the ground
are far from encouraging. Attacks continue on the
lives, dignity, physical and psychological integrity of
civilians, with the parties almost always lacking the
will to meet the minimum standards of respect for

12-3882525

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

civilians. That lack of will is reflected in the deliberate
killing of civilians; violence, in particular sexual
violence, against women and children; attacks against
facilities housing vulnerable groups, such as hospitals
and schools; the recruitment of child soldiers; attacks
against journalists; and the displacement of individuals,
all of which leave societies powerless and in pain.
Particular attention should be paid to the massive and
indiscriminate attacks perpetrated in densely populated
areas where, in an attempt to achieve the elimination
of one or two strategic targets, dozens of deaths can
be caused as a result of so-called collateral damage,
primarily affecting women and children.
In recent months, international public opinion has
watched in horror as densely populated cities in Syria
have come under heavy bombing by the armed forces
of that country. In turn, explosive attacks supposedly
carried out by elements of the opposition have also caused
civilian victims. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/376) speaks volumes on that point. More than
9,000 civilians have lost their lives as a result of the
excessive use of force by Syrian security forces. We have
also been informed of summary executions and torture.
Once again, my Government appeals to the Syrian
Government, which bears the primary responsibility for
upholding the safety of the peoples of its country, and
also calls upon the forces of the opposition to engage
in dialogue and political negotiation in order to bring
peace, security and progress to the noble Syrian people.
In that regard, the Government of Chile reaffirms its
support for the six-point plan of the Joint Special Envoy
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States on
Syria, Mr. Kofi Annan.
In the twenty-first century, we have witnessed the
development of a whole range of new technologies,
including in the sphere of war. Among those new areas
of progress are the so-called unmanned aerial vehicles,
or drones. According to the Secretary-General’s report,
access to that form of technology is growing daily and
to date it has caused hundreds of civilian victims. No
matter how sophisticated that technology may be, it
undoubtedly jeopardizes the principle of distinction
between combatant and non-combatant, as well as the
principle of proportionality.
In that regard, my delegation supports the statement
made by the Secretary-General in his report where he
urges relevant Member States

26

“to be more transparent about the circumstances
in which drones are used and to take all necessary
precautions to ensure that attacks involving
drones comply with applicable international
law.”(S/2012/376, para. 17)
The Secretary-General aptly refers to the security
of journalists and human rights defenders, two groups
that have proven to be fundamental in order to ensure
that the international community is kept abreast of
what is really occurring in a conflict area, and for
the promotion and protection of human rights. My
country underlines the need for States and parties to a
conflict to provide due protection and prevent attacks
perpetrated against those groups, and to bring to justice
those responsible for such attacks.
Chile, a member of the Human Rights Council,
supports the commissions of inquiry that have been
established by the Human Rights Council in the cases
of Côte d’Ivoire, Libya and Syria, as we believe that
such situations require independent and impartial
investigations in order to ensure that the perpetrators
of violations of international law and international
humanitarian law are brought to justice.
Chile commends the measures that have been
adopted by the Security Council for the protection of
civilians, either by explicitly incorporating them into
the mandates given to peacekeeping operations or, in
particularly serious situations, as was the case of Libya
in the past year, through resolutions 1970 (2011) and
1973 (2011), the first of which condemns violence
against civilians and the second authorizes the adoption
of measures for the protection of civilians. However, that
case highlights the need to ensure that the application
of that principle be provided in an appropriate manner
without causing still greater harm to the civilians whom
we are seeking to spare.
In that regard, my Government recognizes the
need to establish certain common criteria for the
implementation of the authorization of the use of force
on the part of the Security Council, either through the
implementation of the principle of the protection of
civilians or the implementation of the principle of the
responsibility to protect or another principle. It also
underscores the usefulness of the criteria contained
under the responsibility to protect that were presented
by Brazil to the Council on 9 November 2011, during a
debate on this same topic (see S/PV.6650).

12-38825

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

In conclusion, my delegation believes that the
recommendations of the Secretary-General provide
a reasonable and positive guide for the protection of
civilians in the case of conflict and to ensure compliance
with international humanitarian law and the protection
of human rights.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are still
a few more speakers remaining on my list who wish
to address the Council, as well as some who wish to
make additional comments. Once again, I would like
to remind representatives to limit their statements to
four minutes so that we can expedite our work and
hopefully conclude our consideration of the item before
the Council before 6 p.m.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Philippines.
Mr. Sorreta (Philippines): The nature of conflict
over the decades has changed dramatically. In the First
World War, 90 per cent of the casualties were soldiers;
today, 75 per cent of the casualties are civilians.
Therefore, it is truly imperative that the Organization
be cognizant of this issue.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2012/376) is
worth examining. We are glad that the report discusses
in detail the global state of affairs of the protection of
civilians.
For those of us who find many of our nationals
outside of our territory and in areas of armed conflict,
the protection of civilians is of the utmost concern. We
are very grateful to the many nations that have assisted
Filipinos in areas of conflict by protecting them and
helping to take them out of harms way. As a nation, we
will always do all that we can to protect our nationals
in areas of conflict. That is a commitment that we
diligently observe in our own country. That is why we
have undertaken a comprehensive peace process with
rebel and secessionist groups, including adopting the
necessary measures to protect civilians.
The Secretary-General’s report mentions conflicts
over territories as among those that can lead to
civilian casualties. The Philippines, involved as it is,
unfortunately, in such conflicts, strongly believes that
civilians must never be hurt, regardless of the stage or
level of a territorial or maritime conflict.
Recently, a Filipino fisherman was killed and
four others remain missing in an incident in the West

Philippine Sea, also know as the South China Sea, in
an area that is subject to conflicting claims. We await
confirmation of the facts of this sad incident and will
act accordingly — of course, always in accordance with
international law.
The Secretary-General’s recommendations all
point to the need for the observance of the rule of law
at the national and international levels. The rule of law
is the bedrock upon which nations build flourishing
societies and foster strong relations. The rule of law
emphasizes the protection of rights and underscores
compliance with obligations. Those are crucial in order
to exact responsible behavior from both individuals
and States. It is in that particular context that we look
forward to the holding of the high-level meeting on the
rule of law in September.
The observance of the rule of law likewise
necessitates a robust international legal framework.
The International Criminal Court deters and punishes
violations of humanitarian law. Other international
judicial bodies play a vital role in preventing and
resolving conflicts.
We likewise need to provide support for our
peacekeepers. Efforts on the ground must be
complemented by the enhancement of the civilian
aspects of peacekeeping. The Philippines notes
with interest current efforts in that area, including
CapMatch, designed to help match the supply and
demand of civilian capacities.
Civil society also has an important role to play.
The Philippines is working very closely with Benin,
Belgium and Costa Rica in bringing attention to the
contributions of civil society.
Time and again, conflicts — ideological, political,
military and even territorial — have arisen when
the rule of law was weak. We need to continue to
work as one to prevent the escalation of conflicts
by respecting the rule of law. This year, we have the
added opportunity to reaffirm our collective desire
and obligation to settle disputes peacefully with the
commemoration of the thirtieth anniversary of General
Assembly resolution 37/10, the Manila Declaration on
the Peaceful Settlement of Disputes.
Thirty years ago, we all expressed our high regard
for law and justice when faced with actual or potential
disputes. We should renew that pledge this year and

12-3882527

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

comply with our obligations to protect civilians in
armed conflict.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): We
appreciate the convening of this open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, and thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the other briefers
for their statements today.
The upheavals in parts of the Middle East and
North Africa in the past couple of years have brought
the issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
to a prominent place on the Council’s agenda. That
fact has manifested itself in the convening of regular
open debates such as today’s, presentations of reports,
and the holding of workshops and thematic meetings
on the protection of civilians. Incidences of violence
against civilian populations in conflict situations have
allowed us to identify measures to protect civilians in
circumstances of armed conflict. Yet, the reality on
the ground has also affected the notion of and practical
measures for protecting civilians.
Despite the fact that there has been some progress
on the issue of civilian protection, there have been many
failures along the way. A large part of the reason for that
distressing state of affairs lies in the double standards
and injustices in different armed conflicts, including
the situation of territories under foreign occupation,
as well as the fundamental failure of some parties to
respect the principles of international and humanitarian
law.
The Secretary-General, in his latest report on
this issue (S/2012/376), while recalling the five core
challenges on the protection of civilians, emphasizes the
necessity of enhancing compliance with international
human rights and humanitarian law, and accountability
in the protection of civilians. He rightly points out that,
in many conflicts, to a large degree accountability
is the absent factor that allows further violations
to thrive. That became clear in the response of the
Security Council to the situation in Libya, where the
Council authorized all necessary measures to protect
civilians, but where the extent of those measures went
beyond the protection of civilians and thus raised major
concerns among Member States. For this reason, the
Secretary-General recommends that

28

“[i]n the future, in addition to complying
scrupulously with international humanitarian
law and human rights law, the implementation of
such decisions must be limited to promoting and
ensuring the protection of civilians” (S/2012/376,
para. 19).
The root causes behind many conflicts are poverty,
exclusion and marginalization, foreign interventions
and military excursions, and occupation. In addressing
the suffering of civilians in armed conflicts, we should
take stock of these causes. However, the influence
exercised by some members of the Security Council in
reaching balanced solutions to conflicts have sometimes
exacerbated them and contributed to their prolongation,
with severe impacts on peace and stability and the
protection of civilians.
In that regard, I would like to refer to the case of
Syria. We firmly believe that the current crisis should
be promptly resolved on the basis of the initiatives of
Kofi Annan and the active and constructive engagement
of all parties concerned. The prolongation of the crisis,
for whatever narrow-minded political interests, would
have dire consequences on peace and stability in the
region and for civilians in Syria.
Premeditated attacks on civilians, as the result of
the indiscriminate or disproportionate use of force or
massive terrorist operations, are gross violations of
international humanitarian law. All parties to an armed
conflict, including international coalition troops, must
bear the responsibility for their acts under international
humanitarian law. Those guilty of violations, State and
non-State actors alike, must not evade responsibility for
crimes committed.
I would like here to refer to the unpalatable yet
brutal reality of indiscriminate targeting of civilians in
Afghanistan and Pakistan during air strikes, which have
resulted in a high number of civilian casualties in many
instances. That fact has also been noted in resolutions
adopted by various organs of the United Nations, in
which serious concerns have been expressed about
the high number of civilian casualties, and which have
called for compliance with international humanitarian
and human rights law and for appropriate measures to
ensure the protection of civilians.
We hope that the international community will
take all the measures necessary for the protection of
civilians on the basis of fairness and without double
standards. Justice demands that the perpetrators of

12-38825

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

violations of the rights of the people, including those
living under occupation, be held accountable for their
deeds. That is extremely important for the credibility
of the Council. If we want our debate on the protection
of civilians to be meaningful and effective, we should
adopt a balanced and comprehensive approach and
see the causes and the effects. We hope that these
discussions will be successful and that we will take the
necessary measures, because this question is extremely
important for humans and human dignity.
Finally, once again the representative of the Israeli
regime has used this body, in the name of the protection
of civilians, to level some baseless allegations against
Iran. That criminal regime referred to arms smuggling
from Iran to Hamas and Syria. That is slander,
because the Israeli regime, in its brutal and murderous
apparatus, has excluded the civilian population in Gaza
and other occupied territories from the jurisdiction of
international law, as if those people do not deserve
the protection required under the Geneva Conventions
and international law. Some 1.5 million Palestinians in
Gaza are deprived of all their basic needs of life and
of humanitarian assistance, including United Nations
assistance.
Gaza continues to be the largest prison maintained
by the Israeli-occupying authorities. Many civilian
homes continue to be targeted by Israeli missiles, which
constitute premeditated attacks against the civilian
population and civilian objects. The crimes committed
by the Israeli armed forces in their deliberate killing
and infliction of great suffering on civilians constitute
grave breaches of international law, in particular the
Fourth Geneva Convention. The Israeli armed forces
should therefore be held accountable. Only by ensuring
accountability for serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights, as well as justice
for victims, can we expect our efforts to protect civilians
to be translated into meaningful and practical actions.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
at the outset to congratulate China on having assumed
the presidency of the Council this month, and to wish
China every success in leading the work of the Council
towards better results. I also thank you for organizing
this timely debate on this very important issue.
In his report (S/2012/376), the Secretary-General
identifies five core challenges faced by the international

community with respect to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. However, the onset of the Arab
Spring and the outbreak of armed conflict in some
Arab countries have generated new challenges. How
will totalitarian Governments respond to their peoples’
demands and not attack them? Will it be possible to
prevent those aspirations to freedom and democracy
from being transformed into an armed conflict?
The most important question now is how to
prevent tyrants from using heavy weapons to destroy
densely populated areas and kill civilians. How can we
convince United Nations Member States to refrain from
providing political and military support to dictatorships
that are killing and maiming their own civilians? Those
are the new challenges that we should all address.
Libya has had its own dire experience. We have
seen all kinds of crimes committed by supporters of the
former Al-Qadhafi regime. We have seen demonstrators
shot and killed in the streets. We have seen missiles,
tanks, artillery and helicopters used to bomb densely
populated areas and kill children, women and elderly
persons mercilessly. We have seen people collectively
suffocated and killed in shipment containers. We have
seen the wounded being evacuated from hospitals,
killed and thrown into mass graves. We have seen
people being raped; we have seen men being mutilated.
We have seen many atrocities in Libya committed
in a systematic and premeditated manner. The same
thing is taking place today in Syria in even worse
conditions. I think the situation will become clearer
with the deployment of reporters and humanitarian
workers in areas that had been blockaded by the regime
and where access was denied. Is it possible in the
current circumstances to refrain from taking action to
protect civilians and to halt crimes against humanity
under the pretext of sovereignty? Are we discussing the
sovereignty of the people, or of the regime that has lost
its legitimacy and is killing its people?
Is it morally acceptable, in the current situation,
to continue to offer weapons and political support
to the regime in Syria? Is it acceptable that the
representatives of the Syrian regime continue to be
present in international organizations in various States
and to spread lies and disinformation? Will the Libyan
and Syrian people forget that some countries, having
extended arms and political support, are complicit in
the crimes committed by Al-Assad? There are so many

12-3882529

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

questions being asked today that require immediate
answers from the Council.

enable the Syrian people to achieve their aspirations to
freedom, democracy and justice.

However, it is certain that the people will eventually
triumph, justice served and the criminals brought to
justice. It is the right of the victims of the tyrant regimes
to demand that all those who have committed crimes be
brought to justice. It is also the right of those people
to hold accountable the foreign Governments that have
in any way abetted the perpetration of those crimes. It
is only natural that, when they are finally brought to
justice, the people defending the tyrant regimes will be
seen trying to conceal their own crimes.

They cannot do so without effective measures being
taken against the regime of Al-Assad. Those efforts
could start by denying the regime the opportunity to
spread disinformation and lies; suspending Syria’s
membership in international organizations; expelling its
ambassadors and consuls around the world; deploying a
commensurate number of international observers in all
Syrian cities; and referring appropriate crimes to the
International Criminal Court.

The Security Council took action at the right time
in the crisis against civilians in Libya by adopting
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011). That set the
stage for the international community to implement the
right to protect civilians. It also saved the lives of tens
of thousands of Libyan civilians and helped the Libyans
to achieve their aspirations and to rid themselves of a
regime that exposed its people to the worst forms of
torture, quashed their aspirations, restricted their
freedom and squandered their wealth. Will the Security
Council stop at that? Will it keep its hands tied and limit
its actions to counting the growing number of civilian
victims in Syria?
Our conscience should remain alert. We should
not be insensitive to the dozens of people being killed
in the streets of Syrian cities. We should not remain
insensitive to the destruction of homes. We should
not remain insensitive to the images of children being
killed. We should not remain insensitive to the images
of thousands of displaced persons and refugees or of
those who have been wounded and or lost limbs. We
should not continue to be insensitive to the physical
and psychological suffering of women who have been
raped, of those who have been under blockade in the
Syrian cities, or of those who lack access to food and
medicine.
The Security Council should guarantee free
humanitarian access to those who require it. We should
continue to protect humanitarian workers throughout
Syria through United Nations and Arab League efforts
to strengthen monitoring and control. I believe it is time
for the major Powers to stop their political bickering
in order to allow the efforts of the Security Council to
protect civilians to go forward. It is time for the Security
Council to work as one and to express in one voice that
the atrocities carried out in Syria must end. It must

30

It is obvious, however, that the regime in Syria is
opposed to any peaceful settlement, as it has undermined
Kofi Annan’s plan and continues to believe that it is
capable of suppressing the Syrian people’s uprising.
As the regime continues to use heavy weapons against
civilians, it is time to provide the Syrian people with
such weapons so that they can defend themselves and
fulfil their aspirations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I thank you for the
opportunity to take part in this debate, Mr. President.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
the presentation of his report (S/2012/376), as well as
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
Valerie Amos, Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović
and Mr. Philip Spoerri of the International Committee of
the Red Cross for their participation and contributions.
We share the concern of many of the previous
speakers about innocent civilians in armed conflicts,
who sadly often constitute an overwhelming majority
of the victims. Women and children in particular
continue to be the most vulnerable group, subject
to various forms of extreme violence that result in
grave humanitarian crises with huge displacements of
populations in various parts of the world.
Ensuring accountability and enhancing compliance
with international legal obligations on the part of
parties to conflicts should be viewed as a key element
of the Council’s responsibility to maintain international
peace and security, and one that will require a deeper
commitment and broader vision of the future. It is
important to improve the use of established sanctions
regimes and to implement the binding resolutions that
call on all States to adopt national legislation towards

12-38825

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

the prosecution of individuals responsible for genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes.
Establishing accountability for such serious crimes
is an important matter for my delegation in the context
of resolving the conflict in Nagorno Karabakh. The
Azerbaijani authorities have the primary responsibility
to provide accountability for the violations of
humanitarian and human rights law that took place
in connection with the hundreds of thousands of
Armenians who were displaced and became refugees as
a result of ethnic cleansing and aggression on the part of
Azerbaijan in the late 1980s and early 1990s in response
to the people of Nagorno Karabakh’s exercise of their
right to self-determination. The Azerbaijani authorities
are also accountable for the hundreds of Azerbaijanis
who were massacred in the town of Khojalu by the
Azerbaijani National Front.
During those years, Armenia’s entire border area
with Azerbaijan was transformed into a battlefield.
That resulted in the destruction and occupation of
many areas of Armenian territory, including the village
of Artsvashen, as well as Shahumian, Getashen and
another 18 Armenian villages in the northern region of
Nagorno Karabakh. Those territories were invaded and
have remained under occupation by Azerbaijani armed
forces for the last 20 years. Azerbaijani aggression
also resulted in significant casualties and losses among
the civilian population. Innocent civilians in Nagorno
Karabakh and neighbouring regions of Armenia were
subjected to a barrage of heavy artillery, missiles,
shelling and bombing. The Azerbaijani army fired
indiscriminately on homes, schools, kindergartens,
hospitals and even ambulances.
During the aforementioned period when civilians
faced a continuing escalation of violence, the Armenian
side took decisive humanitarian action to mitigate the
suffering of civilians by exercising its responsibility
to protect the physical security of the population, fully
complying with international humanitarian and human
rights law. Today, we continue to be greatly concerned
about the humanitarian impact of Azerbaijan’s use
of force and weapons against independent Nagorno
Karabakh and in densely populated areas bordering
Armenia.
As the Secretary-General rightly points out in his
report, there are fundamental differences between the
concepts of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and the responsibility to protect, although both are

important and relevant in the context of protection. The
two concepts are, however, connected and in that way
share the same legal foundation of the rejection of the
use of force and of diametric opposition to rule by force
or the use of force.
Again in the context of resolving the conflict in
Nagorno Karabakh, both the Minsk Group co-Chairs of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the United Nations Secretary-General have
called on the parties to undertake confidence-building
measures, particularly those that would remove the
threats to the civilian population. To that end, the
recent statement made in the margins of the Group
of 20 Summit in Los Cabos by the Presidents of the
OSCE Minsk Group co-Chair countries — France, the
Russian Federation and the United States — underlined
that military force will not resolve the conflict and can
only prolong the suffering and hardships endured for
too long by the peoples of the region. Only a peaceful
negotiated settlement will allow the entire region
to move beyond the status quo towards a secure and
prosperous future.
We welcome the statement of the leaders of the
Minsk Group co-Chair countries and once again call
on Azerbaijan to cease all violence and provocations,
including subversive activities and the kidnapping of
civilians along the Armenia-Azerbaijan border and the
line of contact with Nagorno Karabakh. We strongly
believe that a fundamental and lasting solution to the
problem can be achieved only by peaceful means, based
on the principles of international law and within an
agreed international format.
It is important that the Council focus on the
protection of civilians within an overall process of the
peaceful resolution of disputes. Our approach must
be built on the understanding that any comprehensive
resolution should impartially and fully address the
root causes of the conflict under discussion in order to
prevent any renewal of that conflict in the future, and
should provide reliable and adequate security protection
guarantees to the population concerned, thus assuring
them of sustainable peace and development.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the floor
to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank you for convening this important
meeting, Mr. President, and for speaking on the
important topic of the protection of civilians in armed

12-3882531

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

conflict. The importance of this subject requires that it
never be addressed selectively or at anyone’s particular
discretion, since we are still seeing such a selective
approach when it comes to choosing which civilians are
worthy of protection during armed conflict and which
are not.
Nor must the aims and objectives of this noble
concept be exploited in order to compromise a State’s
sovereignty or interfere in its internal affairs by
manipulating and distorting the issue of the protection
of civilians in the service of interventionist policies and
an aggressive political agenda. Those who pay the price
of such policies are first and foremost civilians.
We feel, therefore, that the protection of the
Palestinian and Syrian civilians in the occupied Golan,
and of the Lebanese who are chafing under Israeli
occupation, must constitute a major part of this laudable
international effort in the context of the accurate and
objective implementation of the mandate envisaged
under the rubric of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Is the silence at Israel’s settlement aggression,
which threatens the very principle of peace itself, not
contrary to the most fundamental right of civilians
to live in their homeland in freedom, sovereignty and
safety? Are the Palestinians and Syrians in the occupied
Golan, and the Lebanese living under Israeli occupation
in southern Lebanon, not civilians and hence unworthy
of protection? That basic concept must be the focus of
the debate.
Jurisprudence establishes that international efforts
to protect civilians in armed conflict be undertaken in
strict respect for the principles enshrined in the Charter
that provide for the respect of the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of States and
non-interference in their internal affairs. That is in
line with the provisions of the Geneva Conventions and
international humanitarian law, since all international
instruments underscore the primary responsibility of
national Governments to protect their citizens. That
responsibility is exclusive and cannot be substituted
or manipulated to serve certain political agendas that
undermine the sovereignty, independence and stability
of entire States and peoples, manipulating the lives of
their civilian populations under the pretext of protecting
them. We therefore feel that the protection of civilians,
on the one hand, and threats to international peace and
security, on the other, should not be confused.

32

Moreover, there should be no loose interpretation
of the issues of the protection of civilians, including
of such contentious terms as the “responsibility to
protect” or “humanitarian intervention”, which would
lead, ipso facto, to compromising the credibility and
the impartiality of the United Nations, be it at the
level of the membership or the Secretariat. It would
be tantamount to undermining noble efforts to protect
civilians in armed conflict.
The report of the Secretary-General, contained in
document S/2012/376 and submitted under this agenda
item, addresses various issues and topics. It briefly
mentions the daily suffering of the Arabs under Israeli
occupation for decades. The report timidly addresses
the tragic situation of the Libyan people after 130,000
Libyan civilians were killed under the pretext of
protecting them from the former regime. Today, Libya
is governed by 2,600 armed militia rather than a central
Government administering the country’s affairs.
While we are reluctant to refer to the events in
Syria described in the Secretary-General’s report,
we would like to put on record that the report quotes
selectively and partially from the content of resolutions
2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012), in which the Security
Council required the equal commitment of all parties
in Syria to putting an end to the violence, protecting
civilians and delivering humanitarian aid to them.
The report fails to mention the Syrian Government’s
positive cooperation with United Nations humanitarian
agencies, including the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. It also disregards the adverse
effects of the unilateral sanctions imposed on Syria
and the terrorist acts of armed groups against civilians,
such as murder, forcible evacuation, the obstruction of
civilian movement and the disruption of daily civilian
life. Adding insult to injury, the Secretary-General’s
report fails to mention the daily suffering of Syrian
civilians under the Israeli occupation of the Syrian
Golan.
A
few
hundred
armed
extremists
in
Homs — Salafis, Wahhabis or Takfiris infiltrated by
Al-Qaida elements — expelled some 100,000 Christian
Syrians from their neighbourhoods and homes simply
because they were Christians. So we now have 100,000
Christians displaced from Homs and dispersed
throughout Damascus and elsewhere. Another 400,000
people have been displaced from Homs. Such issues
must be addressed by all present here.

12-38825

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

The readiness to protect civilian lives requires
those who claim to do so to stop instigating acts of
violence and terrorism in Syria, fuelling tension and
playing the sectarian and religious extremist card.
If they were sincere, they would call on all parties to
engage in a genuine national dialogue, in accordance
with Kofi Annan’s plan in order to reach an exclusively
Syrian-led political solution, without the interference
of any outside party, instead of opening the borders
of neighbouring States to armed groups to carry
out terrorist and destructive operations, perpetrate
massacres and assassinations, and destroy the country’s
infrastructure.
Civilians can be protected not by fostering
destructive scenarios, such as civil war or sectarian
conflicts, but by promoting the implementation of
the principles of international law and the rule of
law, nationally and internationally. Civilians cannot
be protected by subjecting their lives to instability
and danger. The biased foreign media focus on the
violent movements in Syria and legitimize the armed
opposition, while ignoring the voices of the national
Syrian opposition, which rejects foreign intervention
and seeks to put an end to the internal crisis through a
comprehensive national dialogue and civilized peaceful
means.
We are not against the genuine Syrian national
opposition building a democratic, conciliatory and
constitutional Syria that guarantees the security,
protection and safety of all Syrians, civilian and
military, without exception. There is no need to destroy
the country in so doing. The one issue that incites the
majority of Syrians is efforts of the enemies of the Syrian
State and people, such as the Salafis, the Wahhabis, the
Takfiris and supporters of racist, ethnic and sectarian
sedition, to divide the country and take it backwards, as
they did in Iraq and Libya.
The representatives of some States who have
referred to my country inappropriately today are
mistaken in believing that humankind has forgotten
the crimes against humanity perpetrated by States
against civilians, including in my country and in many
Members of the United Nations, during the times of
slavery, colonialism and the two world wars, or when
they invaded and occupied States Members of this
international Organization.
Is not an apology for the perpetration of such crimes
consistent with the principle of protecting civilians,

or are civilians ranked according to biased interests?
Early last century, the United Kingdom and France
destroyed the geopolitical and strategic map of the
region. To date, we have heard no apology for that. On
the contrary, both those States and others now seek to
impose another such cycle on the region’s States solely
in the interests of Israel and in order to weaken the
concept of the State in the region in support of sectarian
and religious sedition. That is an abuse of Islam, which
promotes lofty spiritual values, and distorts the image
of Muslims in the world.
It seems that Libya has not changed following the
ousting of the previous regime. Narcissism, nonsense
and the use of extremist language that contravenes
the principles of the Charter, international law and
international humanitarian law indicate that the
Libyan representative is in a state of legal and political
hysteria. I would compare the Libyan representative
today to the representative of Israel, as the political
heresy that we have heard from him serves only Israel.
I advise the representative of Libya to commit himself
to the protection of the remaining Libyan civilians
and to use his political eloquence to try to regain his
country’s sovereignty, independence and stability, as
well as the hundreds of billions of dollars plundered
from the Libyan people by the same forces that invaded
his country after manipulating resolutions 1970 (2011)
and 1973 (2011). If the Libyan representative has a
personal grudge against his own country and his own
people, then let him keep this hatred to himself instead
of projecting his betrayal of the trust that his people
have placed in him onto the events in Syria.
I did not want to be so explicit or go into such
detail, but I have been compelled to do so, and with this
I conclude my statement. Salafi and Takfiri terrorists,
financed by Qatar and Saudi Arabia, are training in
Zintan, Libya, in a special camp administered by the
intelligence agencies of those countries that invaded
and destroyed Libya, killing and displacing innocent
Libyan civilians. This camp in Zintan is also home to
armed gangs that are being trained to be dispatched to
Syria. Some of them have already been dispatched and
killed by the security agencies in Syria. Others have
been captured.
It would therefore behoove the representative
of Libya to remain silent and to stop talking as if his
country actually promotes the protection of civilians. If
it does, it does not resemble the protection of civilians
anywhere else in the world.

12-3882533

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

As for the Israeli representative, suffice it to say
that his country has accounted for more than 50 per cent
of the issues on the agenda of the Organization since
its inception. The occupation of Arab territories by
his country, its abuse of the Palestinian cause and of
the Palestinians, and its settlement campaigns have all
led directly to the exercise of the veto on 60 different
occasions by certain Powers in the Council with a view
to protecting Israeli breaches of international law. In
this sense, the statement made by the representative of
Israel is the same as the statement by the representative
of Libya.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Ms. Amos to respond to the questions and
comments by members.
Ms. Amos: The number of countries participating
in the debate today demonstrates its timeliness. I am
encouraged that the majority of States have referred
to the core challenges to enhancing the protection of
civilians and the need to redouble our efforts to ensure
compliance with the law.
I welcome the concern expressed by a number
of States regarding the need for improved casualty
reporting to address the humanitarian impact of the
use of explosive weapons in populated areas, to prevent
attacks against and interference with health-care
workers and facilities, and the need for a comprehensive
and robust arms trade treaty.
Many speakers have also underlined the importance
of ensuring accountability for those who violate the law.
Attention has also been drawn to the importance
of safe, timely and unimpeded humanitarian access.
I welcome the focus on compliance and access.
Humanitarian actors must be able to engage with armed
groups if we are to make progress on both of these
issues.
Some States have expressed concern at the
Secretary-General’s focus in the report (S/2012/376)
on engagement with non-State armed groups. There is
no one-size-fits-all approach to engaging such groups.
Engagement for exclusively humanitarian purposes is
essential to our efforts to seek improved protection for
civilians and ensure safe and sustained access.
I look forward to continuing to work with the
Council in addressing protection of civilians concerns
and issues relating to humanitarian action more broadly
as well as with individual Member States.

34

The President (spoke in Chinese): The representative
of Morocco has asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): I will
be very brief. My delegation has asked for the floor
again to make the following statement.
Morocco regrets that a State member of the Council
mentioned the question of the Sahara this morning,
drawing a dubious parallel between it and other
situations around the world. That same member State
had drawn a similar parallel in an equally inappropriate
manner during a previous debate.
I would reiterate that drawing a parallel between
the question of the Sahara and other situations is
completely unwarranted and politically motivated and
does not in any way take into account the disparate
realities of these situations. It is dishonest in both form
and substance to compare questions of a fundamentally
different nature.
Morocco respects the rule of law and has institutions
to promote and protect human rights, the credibility and
effectiveness of which are internationally recognized.
Each situation has its own unique characteristics and
thus requires tailored responses. To draw parallels
of this type is to simply display great ignorance of
Morocco’s history. It is thus wrong and careless to
seek, in spite of everything, to compare the question
of the Sahara to other situations while denying with
astonishingly bad faith the historical, legal and political
realities that distinguish them.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): I find it unbelievable that
the representative of Syria still has the audacity to
speak during a debate about the protection of civilians.
The Al-Assad regime has slaughtered more than 15,000
of its own people. Thousands more are being killed day
by day. The Syrian representative still believes that
saying the magic word “Israel” will help to hide these
appalling crimes. His desperate words say nothing
about Israel and everything about the despicable regime
that he represents.
It is no secret that the Iranian Government is
actively targeting innocent civilians day after day,
inside and outside of its country. Listening to the
Iranian representative speak during this debate on the
protection of civilians brings to mind George Orwell’s

12-38825

S/PV.6790 (Resumption 1)

novel 1984, where war is peace, freedom is slavery, and
ignorance is strength.
I do not think I need to say anything more.
The President (spoke Chinese): I give the floor
once again to the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): What is happening in my country is an internal
problem. It started about 18 months ago and has
deteriorated since THE legitimate demands for reform
were made by the Syrian people. Those demands were
accepted by my Government, but were followed by
Arab and international interference in our affairs. The
history of the crisis dates back just 18 months.
As for the Israeli crimes committed against Arab
peoples and the Israeli occupation of Arab territories,
they go back decades. In fact, they began with the
creation of the United Nations. We all remember that
the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
was first established as a result of Israel’s criminal acts,
terrorism and occupation. As a matter of fact, Israel’s
acts have led to the adoption by the General Assembly,
the Security Council and the specialized agencies of
the United Nations, of more than 1,000 resolutions
condemning its crimes, occupation and settlement
policy. Had it not been for the 60 vetoes exercised in

the Security Council, Israel’s audacity would not have
reached the level that we witness today.
Israel assassinated the first international peace
envoy, Count Bernadotte. Israel has committed many
massacres — in Qibya, in Deir Yassin, and twice in
Qana, where it slaughtered hundreds of Lebanese
civilians who had taken refuge in the United Nations
compound, mistakenly believing that the Organization’s
flag would protect them from the evil acts of Israel. It
did not. I remind the Council that a very dear part of
my country, the Golan, is still under Israeli occupation.
In 1981, the Security Council adopted resolution 497
(1981) in which it rejected the Israeli policy concerning
the Golan.
I am not going to speak at length; time is short. I just
wanted to jog our memory a little so that we remember
that the Israeli entity has perpetrated State terrorism
and political crimes since its establishment. The proof
is that all its leaders and heads of Government led
armed terrorist groups during the British mandate over
Palestine.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on my list of speakers.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

12-3882535
