S/PRST/2020/10

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 October 2020
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 8769th meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 October 2020, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Mali”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf
of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the establishment of the transitional
arrangements in Mali, including the appointment of a Transitional president,
vice-president, prime minister, and government, and the issuance of a Transition
Charter. The Security Council also welcomes the release of all the officials
detained, as per the request of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). The Security Council calls for the swift appointment of a National
Transition Council.
“The Security Council commends the continued commitment and
mediation efforts of ECOWAS over the past months in Mali, whic h
demonstrates its leadership in the peaceful resolution of the political crises
besetting the region. The Security Council takes note of the 5 October 2020
declaration by ECOWAS on the transitional arrangements and the lifting of
ECOWAS sanctions. It also takes note of the lifting by the African Union’s
Peace and Security Council of Mali’s suspension from African Union activities.
It reaffirms its support for ECOWAS mediation efforts in Mali and encourages
it to continue to accompany Mali in the implementation of the Transition
Roadmap in the forthcoming months.
“The Security Council underlines that the transition be conducted in
accordance with the Transitional Charter, leading to constitutional order and
elections, within 18 months. It emphasizes that the elections must be inclusive,
transparent, free, fair, credible, and conducted in a peaceful environment. It calls
on all Malian stakeholders to prioritize building trust, engaging in dialogue and
being willing to compromise, in order to conduct a civilian-led, consensual and
inclusive transition. It calls for the dissolution of the Comité national pour le
salut du peuple (CNSP) as called for by ECOWAS. It further calls on regional
and international actors, particularly ECOWAS and the African Union to
enhance their support to ensure Malian stakeholders build the foundations for a
more stable and peaceful country. The Security Council recognizes, in this
regard, the importance of capacity building, as well as political, institutional,
electoral, administrative, and security sector reforms, as set-out in the Transition
Charter and the Transition Roadmap, in order to address the expectations of the
Malian people. The Security Council reiterates the importance of ensuring
women’s full, equal, effective and meaningful participation in the political
processes in Mali.

20-13658 (E)

191020

*2013658*

S/PRST/2020/10

“The Security Council reiterates the strategic importance of the full,
effective and inclusive implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali (“the Agreement”). It stresses that there is no viable
alternative to the Agreement and calls for its implementation to resume without
delay. It further calls on the Malian transitional authorities to take ownership of
the Agreement and on the signatory armed groups to fulfill their commit ment to
its implementation. It urges them to take immediate and concrete action, in a
spirit of genuine cooperation, to show tangible progress in fulfilling the priority
measures referred to in paragraph 3 of resolution 2531 (2020).
“The Security Council calls on the Malian authorities to take expedited
action to protect civilians, reduce intercommunal violence, and restore peaceful
relations between communities in central Mali. In this regard, it urg es these
authorities to fulfil the priority measures referred to in paragraph 14 of
resolution 2531 (2020), namely re-establishing State presence and State
authority, and fighting against impunity for violations and abuses of
international human rights law and violations of international humanitarian law.
It also encourages these authorities, with the help of their partners to continue
pursuing sustainable and inclusive socio-economic development in central Mali,
notably through development projects on education, infrastructures, and public
health, with a special attention to youth. It calls on member states to consider
additional contributions to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to provide the key assets,
capabilities and troops needed for better protection of civilians.
“The Security Council welcomes the release, on 8 October, of Soumaïla
Cissé and three other hostages.
“The Security Council reaffirms the importance of continuing the fight
against terrorism, expresses its support for the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel, and recognizes the Malian Defense and Security Forces in this
effort. The Security Council welcomes international and regional support to
these forces, recognizes the bravery and the ultimate sacrifice their troops have
made, and further recognizes the need for continuing support to the Malian
Defense and Security Forces in their fight against terrorism.
“The Security Council also acknowledges that stabilizing the situation in
Mali requires a fully integrated response, encompassing a simultaneous pursuit
of progress on security, governance, development, reconciliation, accountability
as well as protection and promotion of human rights.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong support to MINUSMA and
requests it to continue with its priority tasks of supporting the implementation
of the Agreement, supporting stabilization and restoration of State authority in
the Centre, protecting civilians, exercising good offices and reconciliation,
promoting and protecting human rights, and contributing to the creation of a
secure environment for the safe civilian-led delivery of humanitarian assistance.
“The Security Council also requests MINUSMA, within its mandate and
existing resources, to support the political transition in Mali, particularly by
exercising good offices, confidence-building and facilitation at the national and
local levels, and by supporting, together with the United Nations country team,
the holding of inclusive, free, fair, transparent, and credible elections, conducted
in a peaceful environment, including through the provision of technical
assistance and security arrangements, consistent with the provisi ons of the
Agreement. It requests the Secretary General to include in its quarterly reports
updates on how MINUSMA supports the political transition.”

2/2

20-13658
