XVI

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE
475 (V). Majority required for the adoption by
the General Assemhlv of amendments to and
parts of proposals· rPlating to important
questions

'-;tale,-, to atti,rnl ,;('ssions of the Ceneral .<\ssemhly as an
,>bscrver

:!99th plenary meeting.
1 N01 1cmber 1950.

The General Assembly,
Considering its rc,,oJntion 362 (IV) of 22 October
1949 on the methods and procedure.~ of the General
Assembly,
Having examined the report' drawn 11p by the Secretary-General in pursuance of paragraph 7 of the
above-mentioned resolution,

1. Resolves to insert in its rules of procedure a new
rule 84 (a) WOi ded as follows :

t 78 ( V).
'f h,·

Reservations to multilateral
conventions

c;,•nera! Assembly,

'la,•iny cxm11i11cd the report 3 of the Secretary-General
reganlin 1,: res,Tvatil)ns to multilateral conventions,
,nzsid,-rint; that certain reservations to the Convenrn1 th<' ·l'n·\·e11tion and Punishment of the Crime
,,f ( ,rnocide hav(' been objected to by some States,
l

t i()n'

"New rule 84 (a)
"Decisions of the General Assembly on amemlments to proposals relating to important q1w,,tions,
and on parts of such proposals put tn t lie vote sep.t ·
rately, shall be made by a two-thirds majority of the
Members present and voting.";

2. Resolves that this new rule> ol procedure shall
enter into force as from the adoption of the prt~ent
resolution by the General Assembly.

( unsidcri11q that the International Law Commission
1,-, studying the whole subject of the law of treaties,

111cl11ding thl' qncstio11 l)f n·st>rvations,"
( u11w/ainy tk1t different views regarding reserva1irn:, lia1 ,. l,t·,·11 c~prc,;secl during the fifth session of the
1 ,c11n:tl
\,;s,·111hh. and partin1larlv in the Sixth Com:it,,
/1'"/II<'.''-' th,· l11ter11:tt1nnal Conrt of Justice to give

298th plenary meeting.
l N m•rmhrr I 95()

,,, ,,h·i·,,,n- ,,pi111t111 on the following questions:

476 (V). Reparation for injuries incurred in
the service of the United Nations

The General Assrmhly
Takes note of the report 2 of the s,.cretary-Ceneral,
pursuant to resolution 365 (IV) of 1 December 1949,
on the status of claims for injuries incurred in the service of the United Nations and on the proceedings in
connexion with th('m.

299th plenary 111,·cting.
1 .T\'m•emhcr 7950.
477 (V). Permanent invitation to the SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States to
attend sessions of the General Assembly

The General Assembly
Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations
to invite the Secretary-General of the LeaRut> of Arab
See document A/1356.
See document A/1347.
8 See Official Records of the General Assnnbly, Fifth Session, Sixth Committee, Annexes, Agenda item 56, document
A/1372.
1

'111 ,,,, Lu :1, ,,inccrns the Convention on the Prey,·11tio11 ,111,l l'u111.,lmH'nt uf the Crime of Genocirle in
tl1,· n ,·!11 , ,f :1 :-;ta!<' r:.tifying or acceding to the
( ·,,::\·,·ntion ,ul,jt'ct tll ; fl'snvation made eith('r on
.t! t!H .1till!1 "r "11 acccs,-,i,111. ()r on signature followed
rat11t,·:1ti1lll.
"I 1 ,lll t h(' r1·.sl·ni11g State be regarded as being a
party t,, the ( ·()llVl'lllion while still maintaining its
1<·.,t·rqtio11 if the rcsl'rv,1ti(l11 is objected to by one or
1:]()rc ,,f the p;utit·.s to tlw Convention but not by
, ,thcrs >
· i I If the answer to question I is in the affirmative,
wliat 1s the effect of the n'scrvation as between the
1,",('n·i11g Statt :md:

(a) The I ,:irties which object to the reservation?
, h l Those \\ hirh accept it?

·· I LI What would he the legal effect as regards the
answer to question I 1f an objection to a reservation
is madt':
• See rcsol11t 1011 260 1\ \ I I I).
'' :~cc () f/icial R,·,-urds of the (;eneral Assembly, Fifth Ses-

2

s,,m. S11{'f'lemcnt No 12, paragraphs 160-164.
1
'

74-

f/,id., Sixth Cmnmitlu, 217th-225th meetings

75

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Sixth Committee
" (a) By a signatory which has not yet ratified?
" ( b) By a State entitled to sign or accede but which
has not yet done so?";
2. Invites the International Law Commission:
(a) In the course of its work on the codification of
the law of treaties, to study the question of reservations
to multilateral conventions both from the point of view
of codification and from that of the progressive development of international law; to give priority to this study
and to report thereon, especially as regards multilateral
conventions of which the Secretarv-General is the
depositary, this report to be consider~d by the General
Assembly at its sixth session;
( b) In connexion with this study, to take account of
all the views expressed during the fifth session of the
General Assembly, and particularly in the Sixth Committee;
3. Instructs the Secretary-General, pending the rendering of the advisory opinion by the International Court
of Justice, the receipt of a report from the International
Law Commission and further action by the General
Assembly, to follow his prior practice with respect to
the receipt of reservations to conventions and with
respect to the notification and solicitation of approvals
thereof, all without prejudice to the legal effect of
objections to reservations to conventions as it may be
:-ecommended by the General Assembly at its sixth
sesston.

Determine who shall be invited;
( ,/) Make recommendations for financing, subject
to the applicable regulations, rules and resolutions of the
General Assembly ;
( c) Make such other arrangements in connexion
with the conference as it sees fit.
( c)

2. In applying rule 2, sub-paragraph (c) of paragraph 1, the Economic and Social Council shall, when it
decicks to invite non-governmental organizations, have
regard to the terms of Article 71 of the Charter. National organizations without consultative status may be
invited only after consultation with the Member of the
United ;-,; ations concerned.

3. The Council may decide to entrust the SecretaryCeneral with any of the tasks mentioned in sub-paragraphs ( /J), ( d) and ( e) of paragraph 1. It may also
authorize him to make such modifications as circumstances may require in carrying out any decision of the
l otmcil made pursuant to sub-paragraphs ( b), ( d)
and i e).
Rule 3
The Secretary-General shall notify all Members of
the United Nations of the conference and shall send
them copies of the provisional agenda. He shall also
inform each Member State of the invitations issued.

320th plenary meeting,
12 December 1950.

305th plenary meeting,
16 November 1950.
479 (V). Rules for the calling of non-governmental conferences by the Economic and
Social Council

The General Assembly,
Having considered the draft rules 7 for the calling of
non-governmental conferences by the Economic and
Social Council, which were submitted by the SecretaryGeneral after consultation with the Council,
Approves the following rules for the calling of nongovernmental conferences by the Economic and Social
Council:

Rule 1
The Economic and Social Council, after consultation
with the Secretary-General, may at any time decide to
call a non-governmental conference on any matter within its competence.

Rule 2
1. When the Council has decided to call a conference, as provided for in rule 1, it shall:
(a) Prescribe the terms of reference ;
( b) Fix the date, the place and the appropriate
duration of the conference and prepare its provisional
agenda;
1
. See. Official Re~ords of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Si%th Committee, Anne%es, Agenda item 53 document
A/1333.
'

480 (V). Designation of non-member State!- to
which a certified copy of the Revised General Act for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes shall he communicated by
the Secretary-General for the purpose of
accession to this Act
Fhe 1;encra! .·lsscmbly
f),,cidcs to defer until its sixth session co11sidcratiou of the question of the designation of non-member
States to which a certified copy of the Revised General
Act" for the Pacific Settlement of international Disputes shall be communicated by the Secrctary-Gener:i.l
for the purpose of accession to this Act.

320th plenary meeting,
12 December 1950.
481 (V). Regulations to give effect to article III,
section 8, of the Headquarters Agreement between the United Nations and the United
States of America

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the provisions of article III, section
8, of the Ag-recment between the United Nations and
the l.rnited States of America regarding the Headtiuartcrs of the United Nations, approved by General
Assembly resolution 169 (II) of 31 October 1947,
8

See resolution 268 A (III).
