United Nations

S/PV.5581

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5581st meeting
Thursday, 7 December 2006, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Qatar)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. García Moritán
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Gayama
Mr. Faaborg-Andersen
Mr. Lacroix
Nana Effah-Apenteng
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Oshima
Mr. Voto-Bernales
Mr. Shcherbak
Mr. Burian
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Manongi
Ms. Wolcott Sanders

Agenda
Security Council mission
Report of the Security Council mission to Afghanistan (S/2006/935)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-64703 (E)

*0664703*

S/PV.5581

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council mission
Report of the Security Council mission to
Afghanistan (S/2006/935)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Canada, Finland, India,
Islamic Republic of Iran, Norway and Pakistan, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhâdi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/935, containing the report of the
Security Council mission to Afghanistan.
At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by His Excellency Mr. Kenzo Oshima, Permanent
Representative of Japan and head of the Security
Council mission to Afghanistan. I now give him the
floor.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): This morning, it is my great
pleasure to report to the Security Council on the
findings of the mission that visited Afghanistan from
11 to 16 November 2006, in which I had the privilege
of serving as team leader.
The Security Council mission to Afghanistan was
the second carried out since 2002 in support of the
Afghan people. The mission noted significant efforts

2

undertaken by Afghans and the international
community during the past four years to achieve
national reconciliation and promote democratic
institutions, which the Bonn Agreement had envisaged.
The Bonn Agreement was successfully concluded one
year ago, in December 2005, with the opening of a
democratically elected National Assembly. In all 34
provinces, there are now functioning provincial
councils.
Afghanistan is set to enjoy continuing high rates
of economic growth and increasing per capita income,
expanding trade and investment with regional partners,
significant infrastructure projects in place, including
roads and power generation facilities, and programmes
in the fields of education, rural development and the
development of new Afghan security institutions. The
Afghanistan Compact — a new five-year blueprint for
cooperation between the international community and
the Government of Afghanistan — was launched in
January this year at the London Conference, with the
aim of laying firmer groundwork to ensure that
Afghanistan would embark on a period of genuine
stability and development. Those are positive
achievements and developments, and they merit high
praise.
However, progress in 2006 towards realizing the
vision set out in the Afghanistan Compact has not been
as smooth or rapid as had been hoped, owing to a
number of reasons. Among them, uneven efforts to
improve governance and establish the rule of law, the
growing Taliban-led insurgency and widespread
insecurity in the south and east of the country, an
upsurge in illegal drug production and trafficking, and
pervasive corruption in the governing systems were
noted in the briefings that the Council mission received
on the ground. Those factors, combined with the still
very fragile State institutions, feed into the
disappointment and disillusionment of Afghans and are
beginning to test the confidence of the Afghan public
in its nascent institutions and processes. The mission
also noted with grave concern that growing insecurity
in parts of the south and south-east was disrupting
rehabilitation and reconstruction work by Afghans, the
United Nations and other international partners.
It was against that background that our mission
took place. The mission recognized that Afghanistan
had to start its reconciliation and reconstruction effort
not just from the zero point, but further below, from
deep minuses, after decades of conflict. In such

06-64703

S/PV.5581

circumstances, the time frame required and the
patience needed for national healing and readjustment
and for the march forward will be different from the
ordinary. As the history and the experiences of nations
have taught us, such a process cannot be completed in
a short period of time or in linear progression. There
are bound to be some zigzags and ups and downs.
However, few can deny that Afghanistan is now
at a crossroads. The country is set to move forward
with promises of reconstruction and development
based on democratic institutions. But at the same time
it is also being confronted, in its fragility, with a host
of challenges and difficulties, including those related to
security. No one can guarantee that, without
determined efforts on the part of Afghanistan and
sustained support over the long haul from the
international community, the country will not slide
towards broader conflict once again.
The primary messages that the Council mission
wished to stress, therefore, were essentially twofold:
first, that the firm and unyielding commitment of the
international community in support of the Government
and the people of Afghanistan and their country’s
transition was unwavering; and second, that the
Afghanistan Compact, which is owned and led by
Afghans, remains the central strategic framework for
cooperation between the Afghan Government and the
international community. The Government of
Afghanistan, with the support of the international
community, must ensure its steady and faithful
implementation.
The report of the mission is before members. It
describes its findings in some detail and, on the basis
of those findings, presents several recommendations. I
already had an opportunity, in a public meeting on
22 November (S/PV.5570), to make remarks on the
activities and some of the findings of the mission.
What I intend to do here is to provide a brief
explanation of the situation that the mission
encountered and then to give a summary of its
recommendations.
First is a matter of great concern: the security
situation. Security was the dominant concern in
Afghanistan. Many of the mission’s interlocutors
expressed apprehension about the rise in violence in
parts of the country. The insurgency appeared to be
more or less confined to one third of the country.

06-64703

However, the security situation in general remained
precarious throughout the country.
After a worrying upsurge in the number of
security-related incidents throughout spring and
summer this year, some interlocutors said there were
signs that insurgent- and terrorist-related violence
might be subsiding after October. There were, however,
more cautious views on that prognosis.
The growth of the Taliban-led insurgency has
been fed in part by the failure of the Government and
the international community to provide basic services,
credible governance and security in many urban
centres and rural communities. Highlighted in that
connection were the weakness of the incipient Afghan
National Police, a lack of the rule of law and pervasive
corruption. It was also alleged that the narcotics
industry and the money it generates play an important
part in feeding the insurgency forces.
Many expressed frustration about the current
state of the Afghan National Police. Proposals had been
made to the international community to support police
expansion to meet the latest challenges of the
insurgency and the deteriorating security in some
regions. The mission was briefed on the importance of
strong recruitment, vetting and monitoring procedures
for the new Afghan National Auxiliary Police.
The mission paid tribute to the leading role that
the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) had assumed in contributing to security in
support of the Afghan Government. It also took note of
ISAF’s continuing need for adequate forces and
resources. The Afghan side also noted that, despite
unfortunate incidents such as those resulting in civilian
casualties, there was still overwhelming support for the
presence of international security forces. Better
coordination between the international forces and the
Afghan Government was called for by Afghan
interlocutors.
Next is the issue of impunity and corruption.
Throughout the mission, interlocutors cited corruption
and the perpetuation of a culture of impunity as the
root causes of popular Afghan disaffection and unease.
It was pointed out that widespread corruption in law
enforcement and in judicial institutions was central to
the population’s decreasing trust in the Government.
An anti-corruption commission had been established
two months earlier and was working to identify the
nature and the scope of the problem. Solutions,

3

S/PV.5581

however, remained elusive. Support and expertise
would be required from Afghanistan’s international
partners in this regard.
It was also pointed out that the continued
tolerance of positions of authority given to the former
commanders and warlords was contributing to
instability. Government efforts to diminish the
authority of those figures would also require
international support. The Government’s strategy to
disband illegally armed groups was considered a key
vehicle for dismantling the power base of those
commanders.
The next issue to which I would like to refer is
governance. Afghanistan was in desperate need of
training of professionals. The Afghan leadership
identified the restructuring of the civil service and the
strengthening of its capacity as the top priority for
Afghanistan and its international partners. A premium
was placed on enhancing human capital at all levels as
a precondition for an effective public sector and for
sustained progress towards development goals.
On human rights and the protection of civilians,
Afghan and international interlocutors expressed
concern about the increase in human rights violations
and the failure to ensure the protection of civilians —
including in the context of the attacking and burning of
schools — the Government’s failure to uphold equal
rights in law and the restrictions on public discourse.
The mission took note of their concern that the space
made for human rights and gender equality, which had
opened following the ousting of the Taliban in 2001,
had recently begun to close.
The mission participated in the third session of
the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board (JCMB).
The JCMB had demonstrated a growing capacity to
monitor progress and address bottlenecks hindering the
implementation of Compact benchmarks. While the
efforts of the JCMB should be commended, in order
for the Compact to deliver visible change to the Afghan
people, Government-led coordination efforts would
need to be strengthened and integrated under the
overall National Development Strategy.
Pervasive unemployment, particularly among the
young, is one of the central factors contributing to
instability in the country. Attracting private sector
investors is important, but the lack of security deterred
those investments that could generate jobs.

4

Insecurity, ongoing drought, flooding and combat
operations have all combined to displace larger
population groups inside Afghanistan this year,
generating fresh vulnerabilities and new humanitarian
needs. In this regard, increased efforts are needed to
ensure the delivery of assistance to people living in
more remote areas of Afghanistan.
I would like briefly to refer to the issue of
counter-narcotics efforts. Afghanistan’s burgeoning
narco-economy was identified by the vast majority of
the mission’s interlocutors as a primary threat to
stability. It was described as a cancer which would
spread and kill Afghan society over the long term. The
mission was informed that in 2006, opium poppy
cultivation represented 60 per cent of Afghanistan’s
gross domestic product. The importance of much more
energetic measures and of regional and international
cooperation in combating drug trafficking was
underscored.
With regard to regional cooperation to address
the many problems, it is clear that such cooperation is
of the utmost importance in resolving Afghanistan’s
challenges, since issues of security have regional as
well as internal dimensions. Many interlocutors
stressed that the existence of sanctuaries in Pakistan
for insurgent groups must be addressed by law
enforcement and other means. The mission was briefed
by the Afghan side about the negative impact on border
security that could result from the recent peace deal in
North Waziristan, Pakistan.
For its part, the Pakistani side, pointing out its
burden of accepting a large number of refugees,
stressed that a stable Afghanistan was essential for
Pakistan’s security. It said that Pakistan was doing its
best to improve the security in the border area, having
suffered casualties in the operations, while admitting
the difficulty of ensuring effective control over the
long border, which has many crossing points. It was
pointed out that cooperation among Pakistan,
Afghanistan and international forces was ongoing at
various levels, including through the Tripartite
Commission. The ISAF commander in Kabul, for his
part, told the mission that he appreciated the emerging
tripartite cooperation. As regards the peace deal in
North Waziristan, the Pakistani side pointed out that
the assertion that the peace deal has resulted in an
increase in incidents did not reflect the facts. The
mission encouraged Pakistan to monitor the North
Waziristan agreement with a view to ensuring that the

06-64703

S/PV.5581

cross-border impact of that or any future agreement is
positive for security and stability.

revitalize its support for the Afghan Government’s
efforts to disband illegally armed groups.

The mission was encouraged by the efforts of the
Afghan and Pakistani leaders to promote mutual
cooperation and trust, including through peopleto-people contact. The mission was briefed on plans to
hold cross-border jirgas on security.

On the rule of law and good governance, the
Government of Afghanistan, with the support of its
international partners, should, as a matter of the
highest priority, establish the rule of law and good
governance throughout the country. Immediate steps
must be taken to strengthen justice sector institutions
and provincial governments, including through the
replacement of corrupt officials and local power
brokers.

Finally, Afghan interlocutors strongly praised the
work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). Donors similarly welcomed
the expanded UNAMA presence, describing it as a
huge plus. The mission acknowledged the voices
calling for UNAMA to play greater coordination role
between them and the military.
Now, I should like to turn briefly to the key
findings of the mission.
First, the spread of insurgent and terrorist activity
by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist groups,
coupled with corruption and failures of governance,
collectively pose a grave threat to nation-building. To
overcome those challenges, the Afghan Government
and the international community have established a
sound strategy, including, in particular, the Afghanistan
Compact. The Council will need to ensure that this
shared strategy remains firm and enduring.
The Afghanistan Compact is the best framework
for cooperation between the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community and
should be moved forward to serious action under the
overall guidance of the JCMB. The Afghan
Government should transform its ownership into
further action, with a view to achieving the
benchmarks set out in the Compact. The international
community, for its part, should provide additional
support on an ongoing basis, both for quick gains and
for sustained progress.
Secondly, with regard to international military
forces, NATO and other countries are urged to maintain
and increase their commitment to ISAF to meet the
challenge of the current security environment in
Afghanistan. It is important to establish a strong and
sustainable Afghan national army and a trusted and
effective national police force. With regard to the
establishment of the police force, donors and the
Afghan Government should redouble their collective
efforts. The international community should also

06-64703

The Government and the international community
should sharpen their focus on human rights and the
protection of civilians. The Government is also
encouraged to reinforce its commitment to human
rights and reconciliation and increase support for the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission and
the implementation of the Peace, Justice and
Reconciliation Action Plan, as required by the
Compact. The Government and donors should
empower women as a true cross-cutting priority.
Next, with regard to the coordination and
delivery of humanitarian and development assistance,
such assistance should, wherever possible, be delivered
by skilled and experienced civilian actors, and the
capacity for civilian coordination of humanitarian
assistance should be strengthened in 2007. At the same
time, given the prevailing circumstances in
Afghanistan, assistance will need to be provided by
those best placed to deliver it. The focus should be to
extend development to the provinces, strengthen
accountability at the community level, and achieve
tangible and visible results. The JCMB coordination
mechanism should be further improved and focused on
delivery.
In the area of counter-narcotics, the Government
and the international community should do much more
to strengthen their efforts to fight this scourge by
helping diversify means of livelihood, so that rural
communities can move away from the illegal
cultivation of the opium poppy and pursue legitimate
economic opportunities. The Government, with support
from the international community, should step up
activities aimed at the arrest and prosecution of major
drug traffickers, regardless of their position or status.
With respect to regional cooperation, fostering
trust and cooperation between Afghanistan and its
neighbouring and regional partners is of crucial

5

S/PV.5581

importance for peace, security and development in the
region. The mission welcomes the efforts made by the
Governments of Afghanistan and of Pakistan to fight
terrorism and to reinforce border security, and it urges
both Governments to intensify dialogue and
collaboration. The mission looks forward to the
outcome of plans by the two countries to hold crossborder jirgas to improve security and stability, on the
basis of better understanding and mutual trust.
The list established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1267 (1999) should continue to be updated
as necessary and on the basis of the most current
information, as envisaged by the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
With regard to UNAMA, the United Nations
should continue to play a central and impartial role in
promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan. The
Secretary-General is encouraged to consider measures
to promote UNAMA’s coordination role, at both the
capital and country levels, and to make
recommendations in his next report.
Finally, the mission recognizes the extremely
difficult and stressful circumstances under which
UNAMA and the rest of the United Nations family are
operating in Afghanistan. Acknowledging their
dedication and commitment, the mission report
concludes by calling on Member States to provide all
necessary support to allow the United Nations to carry
out its mandate in such a challenging environment.
I will conclude my remarks on behalf of the
Council mission by expressing its deep appreciation to
the Governments of Afghanistan and of Pakistan, to the
Commander of ISAF and its contributing countries, to
UNAMA and the country team, to non-governmental
and civil society organizations active in the country,
and to all other interlocutors for their support and
cooperation and for the opportunities for discussion
that the mission was provided during the course of its
visit.
Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): I would like
first of all to thank Ambassador Oshima for his
excellent leadership of the Security Council’s mission
to Afghanistan last month and for his report to the
Council. Denmark fully supports the report and its
recommendations. I would, however, like to make a
few comments and observations in my national
capacity.

6

The serious challenges and obstacles facing
Afghanistan which are detailed in the report should not
be underestimated. We believe that the overall process
that began with the Bonn Agreement and now
continues under the Afghanistan Compact is largely on
track and that the right strategies are in place. But a
continued strong and long-term commitment to see
them through — on the part of both the Afghan
Government and the international community —
remains absolutely essential.
Considerable progress has been achieved,
including the establishment of representative political
institutions, the enhanced capacity of the security
sector and improvements in human rights, including
women’s rights and media freedom. But in spite of that
progress, Afghanistan is facing a number of intractable
problems.
The persistent threat to security posed by armed
groups such as the Taliban throughout large parts of the
country, the reign of drug lords and other criminal
elements, the weak central Government presence and
service delivery outside Kabul, and the continued high
levels of corruption and impunity among key public
officials have undermined the Afghan people’s trust in
their own Government and triggered a vicious circle in
which the lack of development and productive
employment opportunities feeds insecurity, and vice
versa.
The only way to break this cycle is to continue to
do what the Afghan Government, the international
community and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) are already doing, that is, to
endeavour to improve the Government’s institutional
capacity for service delivery throughout Afghanistan,
including agricultural and rural infrastructure support
for viable alternatives to poppy cultivation; strengthen
accountability and the rule of law by bringing corrupt
officials to justice and promote further respect for
human rights, including women’s rights, which are
currently under increasing attack; and build up the
capacity of the Afghan army and police force, ensuring
full coordination and cooperation between the Afghan
security structures and the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF).
I would in this regard particularly like to
emphasize the need for improved aid coordination so
as to get more out of the limited resources available.
We believe that UNAMA’s coordination role should be

06-64703

S/PV.5581

strengthened. It is particularly important to ensure that
the increasing amount of aid provided through the
Provincial Reconstruction Teams is made fully
accountable and aligned with the development
priorities in the Afghanistan Compact.
Another key area in which urgent action is
needed is the implementation of the Government’s
action plan for transitional justice. The fact that former
warlords and others who have committed massive
human rights violations continue to serve in public
office is clearly perpetuating the culture of impunity
and undermining the public’s trust in the rule of law.
Finally, we would like to stress the importance of
regional cooperation, including cooperation between
Afghanistan and Pakistan, on improving security in the
border region. The current insurgency in Afghanistan
cannot be brought to a halt as long as sanctuaries exist
for the insurgents across the country’s borders. We
therefore welcome Pakistan’s determination, stated
during the mission’s visit to Islamabad, to prevent
Talibanization and terrorism and to reinforce border
security. We welcome the fact that preparations for the
proposed cross-border jirgas, which are part of the
strategy to counter that threat, are currently being
discussed at the highest level.
Afghanistan has travelled a long way in the past
five years. With continued efforts to overcome the
current challenges, we hope that, in another five years,
the Afghan people will be able to enjoy increased
stability, prosperity and democracy.
In closing, I would like to pay tribute to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tom Koenigs
and to all the staff of UNAMA for the sterling job that
they are doing in Afghanistan, often at great personal
risk.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to begin by thanking Ambassador Oshima
for his excellent leadership of the mission to
Afghanistan and, indeed, for the work of the Japanese
Mission here in leading work on this subject in the
Council.
The report of the mission is a comprehensive
assessment of the situation in Afghanistan, and
Ambassador Oshima’s briefing today was similarly
thorough and thought-provoking. My thanks go also to
Special Representative Koenigs and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for the job they do

06-64703

day by day in Afghanistan. And I align myself with the
statement to be made in due course by the Ambassador
of Finland on behalf of the European Union (EU).
The United Kingdom is committed to assisting
Afghanistan in the long term. Tony Blair in Kabul as
recently as 20 November stressed the importance to the
international community of delivering a secure, stable
Afghanistan. The United Kingdom is a major
contributor to the international effort in Afghanistan,
through NATO, the European Union and in our
bilateral programme. And we have led the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) military operation
through this particularly challenging year. Like others
around the table, we are also heading up one of the
provincial reconstruction teams. There is one in
Helmand.
Security, particularly in the south, is proving
challenging. The Taliban’s direct offensive on ISAF
this summer was defeated, but we can expect
continuing disruption from anti-Government elements.
We believe neither the Taliban nor other illegal armed
groups currently pose a credible threat to the overall
stability of Afghanistan, but they can seriously disrupt
the work of improving the quality of life of the Afghan
people. Our role is to support President Karzai in his
Government’s effort to extend security and stability
throughout the country and to improve development
prospects. So, we welcome the continued commitment
to Afghan security shown at NATO’s Riga summit, but
there are still some capability gaps, as Ambassador
Oshima recalled today. But allies are working to ensure
that these are filled. Equally, it is important to continue
the development of Afghan security forces, the
indigenous capability, including the Afghan National
Police.
We need to accelerate work to establish the rule
of law. As Ambassador Oshima noted earlier, capacitybuilding here is a critical challenge. Failure to
consolidate gains made in this area will undermine
popular support for the wider reform programme. We
must use the Law and Order Trust Fund for
Afghanistan to support police salaries and other rule of
law-related capacity-building.
Drugs continue to remain, in our view, the
gravest threat to the long-term security, development
and effective governance of Afghanistan. The Afghan
Government’s national drug control strategy, with its
four priorities — targeting the trafficker, strengthening

7

S/PV.5581

livelihoods, reducing demand and developing effective
institutions — seem to us the right approach. That
means that we need increased and sustained assistance,
including to the Afghan Counter Narcotics Trust Fund,
and we should provide international mentors for the
counter-narcotics police of Afghanistan. This is vital if
we are to ensure that the progress to date is not
undermined.
It is important, generally, that we all look at what
more we can do to support international objectives in
Afghanistan. An EU fact-finding mission is in
Afghanistan now, looking at how the European Union
can further assist in developing policing and related
rule-of-law issues, including counter-narcotics. We
hope that this will lead to the deployment of new EU
assets in the new year.
The position of women in Afghanistan is an area
where we have seen important progress since 2001,
from an abysmal start, it has to be said, but some
progress, not least in the level of representation in the
National Assembly and in an increase in access to
education. There are still, of course, problems from
those years when girls were not allowed to have any
education. There is clearly, therefore, much more to be
done to consolidate education for those now coming
through and for those who missed it previously. So, we
would strongly urge the Government to reconsider any
suggestions to abolish the Ministry of Women’s
Affairs. In our view, the Ministry plays an integral role
in ensuring the full participation of women in all
aspects of peace consolidation and peacebuilding in
Afghanistan.
We cannot afford to lose momentum. It is vital
that the Afghanistan Compact Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board (JCMB) gives direction and impetus
to the programmes set out in the Compact, including on
institutional capacity-building and counter-narcotics.
So, we are pleased to see that the Council’s report
notes that the JCMB capability is developing. It was
welcome that the mission participated in one of their
sessions in Kabul.
Finally, I would like to underline British support
for the report’s call for enhanced regional cooperation.
This is vital, in particular, for Afghan and Pakistan
governmental contribution — that they should work
together to counter the common Taliban threat. So, the
plans for the cross-border jirgas are particularly
welcome.

8

Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru)(spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to express the gratitude of the
delegation of Peru for the work done by the Security
Council mission to Afghanistan, led by the Ambassador
of Japan, Mr. Kenzo Oshima, and I would like to thank
him for the report he has given us this morning.
We believe that the work that was done by the
mission, which is condensed in the report he presented
to us, is useful in order to understand the situation on
the ground. In this way, the Security Council has news
of the process in Afghanistan, which is necessary in
order to support the efforts of the Government and
people of Afghanistan to build a democratic and viable
State, one which is fully integrated in its region and in
the international system.
The report on the Security Council’s mission
acknowledges a few encouraging advances in
infrastructure, true economic and trade progress, as
well as in basic social services. However, it also
confirms that the situation is basically fragile in
Afghanistan as this year comes to an end. Despite the
optimism generated by the adoption of the Compact
last January, the reality presents a picture where the
political and social order faces serious threats that
endanger what has been achieved until now.
The Afghan authorities have made efforts in order
to find a way out of the crisis. However, as the report
says, these efforts until now have been insufficient in
consolidating the rule of law or establishing firm
governance with prospects of viable economic
sustainability. There are many problems that are facing
Afghanistan and endangering its viability as an
emerging nation, a nation integrated constructively
within the region.
The difficult transition in this country does not
only generate a situation of crisis within its territory
but also raises the risk of instability at the regional
level. The intensification of the extremist insurgency,
led by the Taliban, and the increasing insecurity in the
southern and eastern parts of Afghanistan endanger the
new institutions in this country. Narco-trafficking,
corruption and crime in general provide fertile ground
for the activities of illegal armed groups. I am not
going to repeat figures that we find in the mission’s
report, in the report of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, and in other international studies
with which we are all familiar.

06-64703

S/PV.5581

This is in contrast to four years of efforts at the
United Nations and in the international community to
bring stability to that country. It is enough to point out
that it is very disturbing to see that opium cultivation
represents 60 per cent of the gross domestic product
(GDP) of Afghanistan. No State can be in a position to
function in a stable manner when it must face such a
huge challenge.
As we have seen in other regions of the world,
crime, corruption and drug trafficking are activities
that go hand in hand. When we fail to halt them in time
with coherent policies, they seriously affect security,
the development of democratic institutions, economic
reconstruction, the rule of law and human rights.
Measures designed to improve civil security are
necessary but insufficient conditions. It is critical for
that country to find alternative modes of legal
economic activity if it is to be sustainable as a State.
Social indicators reveal high rates of illiteracy and low
rates of human development, which generate structural
underdevelopment that hampers reconstruction in that
country. In that context, I stress the importance of
improved training of human resources in Afghanistan.
Development assistance is absolutely crucial. In
item 41, the mission’s report refers to that aspect in
recommending that emphasis be placed on the
development of the provinces and the implementation
of employment-generating programmes, given that the
lack of job opportunities contributes significantly to
the recruitment of insurgents and exacerbates poverty
and the conditions that have fuelled drug trafficking
and corruption.
Lastly, we join the appeal to the international
community to step up its efforts to identify measures to
stabilize Afghanistan, improve security conditions
there, strengthen and define the institutional
framework, and lay the foundations of sustainable
economic growth based on productive and viable
activities.
Ms. Sanders (United States of America): The
United States expresses its appreciation to Ambassador
Oshima, the Japanese mission and the Secretariat for
this comprehensive report and for all the work that
went into planning and undertaking this valuable
mission.
We applaud the efforts of the Government of
Afghanistan, as well as the United Nations Assistance

06-64703

Mission in Afghanistan, for their hard and difficult
work. We are pleased that the international community
solidly supports Afghanistan and its democratic
transition. The United States commends the
extraordinary work of the members of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and NATO. Despite
many challenges, their contributions have improved
security, democracy and governance in Afghanistan,
added to its economic and social development, as well
as assisted in counter-narcotics and regional
stabilization efforts.
The recent trip of the Security Council clearly
demonstrated that the international community’s
support will not diminish. We look forward to working
with the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community to help bring about security
and stability in Afghanistan, including through
continuing implementation of the Afghanistan
Compact. We affirm our commitment to working with
the Government of Afghanistan, ISAF partners and the
United Nations towards security, democracy and
prosperity in Afghanistan.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the Security
Council’s successful mission to Afghanistan. The
report before us contains many important ideas and
recommendations. We believe that it will be very
helpful to the Council in addressing the issue of
Afghanistan in its next phase.
I thank Ambassador Oshima and the Japanese
delegation for their initiative and active efforts to make
the mission possible and successful.
I should like to take this opportunity to stress
three points.
First, security and stability remain the top priority
for Afghanistan and should be addressed with enhanced
effort. China supports the efforts of the Government of
Afghanistan to combat terrorist and extremist activities
and to maintain national security and stability. The
international community should provide more
resources to help Afghanistan to strengthen its military
and police forces so that it can, independently and as
soon as possible, assume the responsibility for
maintaining national security and social stability.
Secondly, it is necessary to accelerate economic
and social reconstruction in Afghanistan so that
development and dignity can be enjoyed by all

9

S/PV.5581

Afghans. The international community should make
further efforts to assist the Afghan Government
effectively to implement the Afghanistan Compact and
the interim Afghan National Development Strategy so
as to help it to achieve tangible progress on the
economy, infrastructure, education, human rights and
law and order.
The extensive growth in poppy cultivation and
illicit trafficking poses a life-and-death challenge to the
peacebuilding process in Afghanistan. We urge
Afghanistan to strive to counter the drug threat and
hope that it can cooperate closely with the United
Nations, regional organizations and its neighbours to
that end.
Thirdly, the international community should
continue to provide unwavering support to the people
and Government of Afghanistan in order to propel that
country towards success. That is the common
responsibility of the international community. We
support an enhanced and more extensive role for the
United Nations and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan in the peacebuilding effort in
that country. We call on the international community to
continue to provide multifaceted support and assistance
to Afghanistan and to make every effort to implement
tangible and beneficial projects for the Afghan people.
As a friendly neighbouring country of
Afghanistan, China will, as always, make a
constructive contribution to help Afghanistan to
achieve peace, stability and economic and social
development and to maintain regional peace and
stability.
Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation thanks the Permanent
Representative of Japan, Ambassador Oshima, for
organizing the visiting mission of the Security Council
to Afghanistan and for submitting his exhaustive report
on its results. The conclusions contained in that
document will serve as a good basis for the Council’s
further efforts to resolve the situation in Afghanistan.
I will briefly address the main points relating to
the priorities of our future work in that regard.
We are seriously concerned by the negative trends
emerging in the situation in that country. Afghanistan
faces a significant number of challenges and threats. In
dealing with the threats posed by the implacable
extremists, the ongoing and uncompromising struggle

10

against them and the strict implementation of the
Council’s sanctions regime against members of the
Taliban and Al-Qaida are of particular importance. The
generally complex situation is being exacerbated by the
ever-increasing drug threat and its negative impact on
the fight against terrorism and State administration
reform. The dangerous link between illicit drug
trafficking and the terrorist activities of the Taliban is
growing.
In such circumstances, we must implement a
range of measures to counter Afghan drug trafficking,
including the creation and strengthening of existing
security buffer zones in the context of international and
regional cooperation. We must also implement a full
spectrum of measures in the security sector,
strengthening the ranks and effectiveness of the
national army and the police, disarming illegal armed
groups, addressing corruption and drug trafficking, and
enhancing regional cooperation.
The Russian delegation is convinced that a stable
settlement in Afghanistan is possible only on the basis
of previously agreed arrangements, including the
decisions of the Berlin conference of April 2004. That
implies ensuring the participation of representatives of
all political, ethnic and religious groups of Afghan
society in the administrative institutions of the Afghan
Government and requires the assistance of those
neighbours of Afghanistan that can exercise a positive
effect on the situation and in the restoration of the
country. We feel that more active and collective
international involvement in resolving the situation in
Afghanistan will ensure the successful implementation
of the recovery programme for Afghanistan set forth in
the London Agreement. We believe that the United
Nations will continue to play a key role in resolving
the situation in Afghanistan and that under the aegis of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) there will be strict monitoring and
coordination in the implementation of the Compact.
Russia continues to assist Afghanistan on a
bilateral basis. We feel that our support, as part of the
international effort, will help to turn Afghanistan into
an independent and flourishing State that is free from
the Taliban, terrorism and narcotics. We are ready to
coordinate our efforts towards those goals with the
Afghanistan Government and the international
community.

06-64703

S/PV.5581

Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): First, I
wish to join those who have already thanked
Ambassador Oshima for the briefing to the Council this
morning on the results of the lessons learned by the
Security Council mission to Afghanistan. My
delegation fully supports that assessment of the
situation, as well as the recommendations, and would
like to congratulate Ambassador Oshima for the
manner in which he prepared and led the mission. My
delegation also supports the statement to be made later
by Finland on behalf of the European Union.
I wish to make a few additional comments on
what my delegation believes should guide the future
actions of the international community and in
particular, those of the United Nations. Given the fear
that the international community could disengage, it is
crucial to reaffirm the long-term commitment of the
international community to Afghanistan and the
Security Council mission has contributed to that
assurance.
Afghanistan is experiencing a difficult situation,
even if the security situation appears to be stabilizing
as winter approaches. The contribution of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to the
improvement must be recognized — Operation Medusa
has strengthened its credibility — and it must continue
to receive our full support. Beyond that, we must also
strengthen our efforts to provide training and
equipment for the Afghan security forces. France is
strongly committed to those efforts through its military
presence in Afghanistan.
The many difficult problems faced by
Afghanistan cannot be resolved exclusively through
military means. Our action must be part of a global
strategy to strengthen the responsibility of the Afghan
authorities and neighbouring countries and improve the
daily living conditions of the population. Thus, it is
important for the Afghan authorities and the
international community to maintain their efforts. That
is true first of all for the Afghan authorities. They must
strive to achieve, within the timeframe, the objectives
set forth in the Afghanistan Compact by placing
particular priority on the following issues: improved
governance and a firm fight against corruption, the
disbandment of illegally armed groups — a necessary
condition for long-term stability — and lastly,
strengthening the fight against drug trafficking within
the national strategy adopted by the Afghanistan

06-64703

Government. Efforts already under way concerning
protection of human rights must also be continued.
At the same time, the international community
must maintain its own efforts. The United Nations,
through the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), has a central and impartial
role — namely, for coordination of the implementation
of the Afghanistan Compact. It alone has the necessary
legitimacy and expertise to assume the role of
coordinator in reconstruction efforts and promoting
support to strengthen the State of Afghanistan.
Therefore, we must give UNAMA the means to fully
carry out its mission.
My delegation reiterates its wish that the
presence of UNAMA be extended to new provinces,
subject to security conditions. We also take the
opportunity to pay tribute to the work of UNAMA and
in particular, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Tom Koenigs.
Lastly, the neighbouring countries of Afghanistan
have a decisive role to play. Pakistan and Afghanistan
must work hand in hand in order to fully control the
borders between the two countries. The work of the
Tripartite Commission, as well as the Jirga project on
both sides of the border, are both positive
developments. Those efforts must be part of an overall
perspective to strengthen regional cooperation. We
must therefore maintain our efforts to deal with the
current difficulties and not endanger the significant
progress that has been made since the Bonn process.
France will play its full role in that effort.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have just
heard the last speaker among the Council members. I
now give the floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Farhâdi (Afghanistan): At the outset I wish
to congratulate you, Sir, upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. I also wish to pay tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Voto-Bernales of Peru for the
able manner in which he led the work of the Council
during the month of November. We pay tribute to all of
the members of the Security Council mission to
Afghanistan, for their recent visit under the leadership
of Ambassador Kenzo Oshima. The visit presented
another opportunity for the Council to review the
ongoing efforts of my Government to achieve sustained
progress in the areas of the security, social and
economic development, good governance, human

11

S/PV.5581

rights and the rule of law — with the support of our
international partners. Most importantly, it reaffirmed
to our people the sustained focus and commitment of
the international community to a peaceful and
prosperous Afghanistan. I am also thankful to other
members of the Council — some of whom were also
part of the mission to Afghanistan — Denmark, the
United Kingdom, Peru, the United States, China,
Russian Federation, France — for their proposals,
which contained interesting points to be addressed by
the Council.
We express our appreciation to the Council for
having published — in a short period of time — a
comprehensive report on the mission’s activities during
the course of its visit (S/2006/935). We also thank the
Japanese delegation for its assistance in that matter. We
fully support the recommendations presented in the
report, which was the work, in large part, of
Ambassador Oshima.
Much has changed in Afghanistan since the first
visit of the Security Council mission in 2002. Together,
we and the international community have succeeded in
implementing milestones and benchmarks that were set
out in the Bonn Agreement. The holding of presidential
and parliamentary elections, progress towards the
formation of a national army and police, the return of
more than 5 million children to schools, including
girls, and the adoption of a constitution that safeguards
and guarantees equal rights between men and
women — are but some of the many achievements that
have taken place. Nevertheless, despite these
achievements, we continue to face daunting challenges
that affect the daily lives of our people. The prevailing
security situation and the slow pace of development
remain in the forefront of our challenges.
Terrorism constitutes the most significant threat
to the security and prosperity of our people. Just two
weeks ago, on 25 November, a suicide bomber of
foreign origin walked into a restaurant in the southeastern province of Paktika and carried out a suicide
attack, brutally killing 15 civilians and injuring 12
others. Such attacks and other forms of terrorism,
which occur particularly along the south and south-east
border of the country, continue to be carried out in an
organized manner.
These attacks take place despite the rigorous
efforts of both the Afghan Government and the
international community to provide security for our

12

people. In this regard, we note with particular concern
that cross-border terrorists and extremists operating in
Afghanistan and in the region beyond receive incessant
support in terms of financial, ideological and logistical
assistance from sources located outside Afghanistan’s
borders.
In this context, allow me to refer briefly to
paragraph 8 of the Secretary-General’s report of
11 September 2006 (S/2006/727) in which he states,
“The leadership relies heavily on cross-border
fighters, many of whom are Afghans drawn from
nearby refugee camps and radical seminaries in
Pakistan … They are trained and paid to serve as
medium-level commanders, leading operations
inside Afghanistan, and they are able to retreat
back to safe havens outside the country.”
Relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council dealing with international
terrorism, in particular Assembly resolution 49/60 of
1994, by which the Assembly adopted the Declaration
on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism, and
Council resolution 1373 (2001), oblige States to refrain
from organizing, assisting and perpetrating terrorist
attacks. The 1994 Declaration on the elimination of
terrorism contains a specific provision that calls on
States to ensure that their respective territories are not
used for terrorist installations or training camps. In
addition, resolution 1373 (2001) requires States to
bring to justice any person who supports, facilitates,
participates or attempts to participate in the financing,
planning, preparation or perpetration of terrorist
attacks or provides safe havens.
We are of the view that the strict compliance by
States with the aforementioned resolutions and texts
would contribute significantly to peace and stability in
Afghanistan.
Afghanistan attaches great importance to the role
of regional cooperation in combating terrorism. A more
robust and comprehensive campaign against terrorism
not only serves the interest of peace and stability in
Afghanistan, but also benefits the security and stability
of the region and beyond.
Based on a proposal made by President Karzai,
we are preparing to convene a cross-border Jirga on
security, consisting of influential tribal and religious
figures from both sides of the Afghanistan-Pakistan
border, with a view to enhancing local and tribal

06-64703

S/PV.5581

structures to eliminate the scourge of terrorism from
Afghanistan and the region. We remain optimistic
about the outcome of this initiative. High-level
contacts aiming at developing cooperation in the
elimination of terrorist acts are now being made and
are very important for the relations between Pakistan
and Afghanistan.
Additional progress in the strengthening of our
security institutions is critical to improving the security
situation in Afghanistan. Despite inadequate resources,
the national army and police are engaged in
challenging combat operations against remnants of the
Taliban, Al-Qaeda and other extremist groups in the
southern and south-eastern provinces of the country.
Our security forces continue to face significant
challenges. Indeed, the lack of modern equipment and
logistical support has had a drastic impact on the
effectiveness of both the national army and the police.
As my delegation indicated in previous statements, a
significant improvement in the overall security
situation will require the provision of additional
resources to our security institutions.
We highlight the importance of the role of the
NATO-led International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) in securing stability and security in
Afghanistan. In that regard, the recent conclusion of
the third phase of the nationwide expansion of ISAF is
yet another important step forward. We also welcome
the recent inclusion of ISAF in the Tripartite
Commission.
Acceleration of social and economic development
is indispensable to overall success in Afghanistan.
While we have achieved much progress in many areas,
we regret that the pace of reconstruction and
development remains relatively slow. Here again, we
highlight the need to initiate and implement major
reconstruction projects and expedite the provision of
basic services so that tangible and visible
improvements in the daily lives of our people may be
achieved.
We also reiterate the need for sustained
international support for the implementation of the
Compact and for our interim national development
strategy. In this regard, we highlight the need to
channel donor assistance through the Afghan national
budget, while stressing the leadership role of the
Afghan Government in designating development
priorities.

06-64703

The Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
(JCMB) continues to make progress in carrying out its
important mandate. As noted in the report of the
Security Council mission, the Board recently convened
its third periodic meeting on 12 November. Moving
beyond procedural matters, it has begun the process of
reviewing progress made in key benchmarks scheduled
to be completed very shortly.
Enhanced regional economic cooperation is vital
for the timely and effective implementation of the
Compact. We express the utmost appreciation to the
Government of India for having co-hosted, with us, the
Second Regional Economic Cooperation Conference
on Afghanistan, which was held in New Delhi on
18 and 19 November. We were pleased at the broad
participation of representatives of neighbouring
countries and other international partners. At the
conclusion of the two-day meeting, participants
reaffirmed the central importance of Afghanistan’s
development to the growth, stability and prosperity of
the region.
The Government of Afghanistan attaches great
importance to the fight against corruption and narcotics
as key components of the Afghanistan Compact. The
dangerous link between the production of narcotics and
terrorism poses another threat to the stability and social
development of Afghanistan. For its part, Afghanistan
has embarked on a series of measures at the national,
regional and international levels to combat the scourge
of narcotics.
The updated Afghan National Drug Control
Strategy, presented at the London Conference on
Afghanistan, provides a comprehensive strategy for the
elimination of that threat. We continue to make efforts
to implement our Strategy. As noted in the report of the
Secretary-General, the specialized counter-narcotics
unit of the Afghan National Police seized
approximately 66 tons of narcotics during the first half
of 2006. Furthermore, the Ministry of CounterNarcotics has enhanced its coordination with the
Counter-Narcotics Tribunal, the Counter-Narcotics
Criminal Justice Task Force and other relevant
agencies.
Despite our efforts, we continue to face
significant challenges in our fight against narcotics. We
reiterate once again that a particular focus should be
accorded to providing alternative crops to farmers as
an essential element of a successful counter-narcotics

13

S/PV.5581

strategy. Equally important is the need for transit
countries to exercise strengthened control over their
borders to curb the flow of drugs, and for consuming
countries to reduce demand in their markets and to
fight against groups that are busy trafficking in those
countries.
The fight against corruption is among our top
priorities. Having already signed the United Nations
Convention against Corruption, we remain committed
to completing its ratification, perhaps very shortly.
National legislation will be enacted to facilitate the
implementation of the Convention by the end of 2007.
In that regard, a mechanism will be established with a
mandate to monitor and evaluate the process.
Furthermore, pursuant to the instructions of
President Karzai, the Government has embarked upon a
comprehensive initiative aimed at enhancing
transparency and good governance in various
Government institutions. As part of that initiative, the
Government has established an anti-corruption
commission — headed by the Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court and composed of numerous agencies —
to come up with additional recommendations for
further action by the President.
In conclusion, I would like to take this
opportunity to reaffirm my Government’s steadfast
commitment to overcome the remaining challenges in
implementing the provisions of the Afghanistan
Compact, with the support of our international
partners. We also express our sincere appreciation to
the international community for its ongoing support
and assistance with regard to our efforts to achieve a
peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now call on
the representative of Finland.
Mrs. Schroderus-Fox (Finland): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU).
The following countries — Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey,
Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia,
Liechtenstein, Ukraine and Moldova — align
themselves with this declaration.
The European Union highly commends the timely
mission to Afghanistan by the Security Council, under
the able leadership of Ambassador Oshima. The
mission is a clear sign of the continued commitment of
the international community to the stabilization and

14

reconstruction of Afghanistan. The European Union
supports the findings of the mission.
Afghanistan has achieved significant progress in
recent years. However, serious challenges, threatening
to undermine the achievements to date, remain and in
some cases have become more acute in the fields of
security, drug production, governance and human
rights, anti-corruption and economic development.
Afghanistan is at a critical juncture, and urgent,
coordinated steps must be taken by the Afghan
Government and the international community to face
up to those challenges. The military dimension of our
efforts should go hand in hand with a strong, highprofile political engagement.
I would like to affirm the European Union’s
unwavering and long-term support for the Government
and the people of Afghanistan. That engagement is
based on the Afghanistan Compact and the Joint
Political Declaration adopted by the European Union
and the Government of Afghanistan on 16 November
2005.
The EU’s assistance fosters the establishment of a
democratic, accountable, sustainable and self-sufficient
Afghan State capable of exercising its sovereignty and
protecting the rights of its citizens. The European
Union attaches special importance to the protection of
human rights, paying special attention to the rights of
women and children. The EU encourages the
Government of Afghanistan to reinforce its
commitment to human rights and reconciliation
through increased support for the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission and the implementation of
the Action Plan for Peace, Justice and Reconciliation in
Afghanistan.
The fight against corruption and impunity
remains a cross-cutting priority. We highlight the core
importance of Afghan leadership and responsibility in
that regard.
In the period 2002-2006, the European Union
collectively contributed €3.7 billion in aid to
Afghanistan, amounting to one third of the aid pledged
by the international community. EU Member States
have played leading coordinating roles in particular
sectors and have made large contributions to security,
including through the current provision of
approximately half of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) — amounting to more than

06-64703

S/PV.5581

16,000 troops — and through
provincial reconstruction teams.

participation

in

The European Union places particular importance
on the rule of law, and we are currently considering
ways to increase our engagement in this sector. As the
report points out, progress on the rule of law, including
police and justice, at both the central and provincial
levels is essential for the security and long-term
stability of Afghanistan. The European Commission
intends to increase its contributions for justice reform
and local governance, inter alia, through provincial
reconstruction teams led by, or with substantial assets
from, EU member States.
We have also been actively supporting counternarcotics efforts. Earlier this year, the EU adopted an
action-oriented plan to combat the production of drugs
in Afghanistan and their trafficking from that country
along heroin routes. The National Drug Control
Strategy represents an appropriate approach for
tackling the problem, under the primary responsibility
of the Afghan Government. Good governance and anticorruption policies are essential components of
counter-narcotics efforts.
The EU also encourages the development of
regional cooperation through political dialogue,
increased economic links and confidence-building
measures between Afghanistan and its neighbours. We
call on Afghanistan and Pakistan to deepen relations
and to cooperate closely to deal with insecurity in
border areas.
The European Union continues to support fully
the Afghanistan Compact and considers it the central
strategic framework for the future reconstruction and
stabilization of Afghanistan until 2010. We expect
strong Afghan leadership and responsibility in
implementation of the Compact, we and encourage
decisive steps from the Government of Afghanistan to
fulfil its commitments under the Afghanistan Compact.
The international community, including the
European Union, is fully committed to supporting this
Afghan-led process. The bottom-up development
strategies highlighted by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Tom
Koenigs, could provide a valuable contribution for
reconstruction and stabilization. The impact of
international assistance should be further enhanced
through efficient coordination and monitoring.

06-64703

The United Nations, mainly through UNAMA,
continues to have a key role in coordination and
monitoring the implementation of the Afghanistan
Compact, including chairing the Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board (JCMB). The EU will, together
with UNAMA, NATO and other key actors, including
the international financial institutions, work towards
effective cooperation and coordination within the
international community and with the Government of
Afghanistan.
The EU highly appreciates the work of UNAMA
and of Special Representative Koenigs in this respect
and welcomes the initiative of holding a JCMB
meeting of member States at the senior official level in
Berlin on the first anniversary of the Afghanistan
Compact.
The EU welcomes plans to expand UNAMA’s
presence throughout the field, security permitting. We
also emphasize close collaboration between the United
Nations Special Representative, the EU Special
Representative and the NATO Senior Civilian
Representative.
The European Union will continue to work, on
the basis of the Afghanistan Compact, in close
collaboration with the Afghan Government and our
international partners, to build an Afghanistan whose
prosperity and stability matches the hopes, the strength
and the fortitude of its people.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Sen (India): Let me begin by congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month.
This discussion is timely, coming as it does in the
midst of heightened international focus on Afghanistan
and the surrounding region. Any discussion on
Afghanistan must begin from the central premise that
the international community has an abiding
responsibility to assist Afghanistan in consolidating
democratic governance, peace, stability and long-term
employment-led development, while delivering
humanitarian assistance in the interim. Our views are
set forth in that context.
We have carefully read the report of the Security
Council mission and the earlier report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Afghanistan. We share the
mission’s positive assessment of the achievements of

15

S/PV.5581

the Government of President Karzai and the people of
Afghanistan over the past five years. The establishment
of genuinely democratically elected representative
institutions and sustained economic growth, as well as
growing trade and economic cooperation, investment in
core infrastructure projects and the implementation of
education, health and rural development programmes,
are praiseworthy, particularly as they were achieved in
the face of adversity. At the same time, the support of
the international community has been substantial and
fairly consistent. India is happy to continue playing a
role in the reconstruction of Afghanistan, given our
historic ties with the Afghan people.
There is no doubt that the most pressing task
before us is to overcome the challenge of insecurity.
We have heard several arguments suggesting that the
lack of effective governance in Afghanistan,
widespread corruption, the inefficiency of the police
service, the growing narcotics trade and continued
warlordism in the provinces all contribute to the
security problem. That may well be true, but to focus
on those as the cause of the security problems is, in our
judgement, to miss the point. Those are factors which
thrive on insecurity and serve to exacerbate it. They are
not causes of insecurity. Instead, it is the revival of the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist groups, and the
existence of cross-border safe havens for such groups,
that are the real cause of insecurity. In focusing on
rebuilding and strengthening Afghan State institutions,
the roots of insecurity should not be forgotten.
The report (S/2005/935) refers to Operation
Medusa. As we know, a greater number of people than
the number of those killed in Operation Medusa
became active again. Therefore, Operation Medusa has
not even contained, let alone eliminated, Medusa
herself; the snakes are still swirling because of the
cross-border dimension. That reinforces the importance
of this aspect, and historical experience shows that
unless it is addressed, attempts at stability or security
will be unavailing. It is therefore important to confront,
rather than to strike deals with, the Taliban, which is
really tantamount — if I may continue to use the
metaphor — to looking at the image of Medusa in the
shield without striking at Medusa herself.
While the report of the Council mission suggests
that insurgency is largely confined to one third of
Afghanistan, the situation remains precarious. The
statistics of the International Security Assistance Force
itself show that in recent months security incidents

16

have escalated by as much as 70 per cent and 50 per
cent in Paktika and Khost provinces. Therefore, it is
not clear that efforts to negotiate peace in the more
troubled Afghan provinces are succeeding; indeed,
terrorist violence spreading elsewhere may suggest the
opposite. Moreover, the growing incidence of suicide
bombings shows the increasing spread of an ideology
and tactics typical of Al-Qaida, which are not part of
the Afghan cultural and religious tradition.
Therefore, we believe that the cost of tolerating
the spiralling violence is infinitely higher than any
costs we might bear in quelling it through firm law
enforcement action. The consequences of collective
inaction may well be borne by the international
community in general, but will certainly be borne by
the States of the region in particular.
It is in this context that India emphasizes the need
to simultaneously implement firm and effective law
enforcement measures, security sector reform
programmes, capacity-building measures and regional
cooperation in all fields. Similarly, the growth of
representative political parties and the broad-basing of
the culture of democratic political activism, which is
already under way, are developments that should be
fostered, since they also greatly help in checking
terrorism. All of these contribute to the effort to create
credible and sustained opportunities to build upon the
growing constituency for peace in Afghanistan and
across the region. Nevertheless, they must be
accompanied by firm measures to enforce peace.
It was fortuitous that the Security Council
mission visited our region a few days prior to the
second Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan, which India had the honour to host,
jointly with our Afghan brothers, in New Delhi last
month. The regional dimension is explicitly recognized
in the report of the mission, in context of finding ways
to help Afghanistan overcome the challenges before it.
Indeed, the New Delhi Declaration of the Second
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan notes that a
“strategy for development for Afghanistan which
is based on cooperation with regional countries
creates significant possibilities for reducing
poverty and for achieving the Afghanistan
Compact
benchmarks
and
Millennium
Development Goals in the entire region”.

06-64703

S/PV.5581

Towards this end, it outlines a number of useful
suggestions for the countries of the region to
coordinate policies for exploiting shared resources like
water, agriculture and energy, to develop capacitybuilding programmes, and to expand trade and
transport linkages, in order to design and build
appropriate regional projects.
Similarly, we believe that more work needs to be
done to reverse the expansion of narcotics production.
Not only is it necessary to implement policies to stop
cultivation, but it is also important to focus on
simultaneously
implementing
crop
substitution
programmes and improving border management
mechanisms. It will take a coordinated effort by the
Government and people of Afghanistan, as well as by
regional players, to effectively address this particular
challenge.
India’s support for a sovereign, stable, democratic
and prosperous Afghanistan is consistent and well
known. We see a resurgent, stable, sovereign and
peaceful Afghanistan as an essential element in the
emerging mosaic of regional cooperation underpinning
our world. It is also part of a process that reclaims for
the people of Afghanistan their rightful place in our
collective future. Afghanistan’s entry into the South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, at its last
Summit in Dhaka, was a manifestation of this. We
believe that Afghanistan can and must be provided with
the means to re-establish itself as the crossroads of
Asia, and as one of the future transport hubs and
energy bridges of our region.
In conclusion, let me also reiterate our firm
commitment to our partnership with Afghanistan,
which today covers a multidimensional cooperation
programme that harmonizes with the priorities of the
Afghan Government. Not only have we extended
financial assistance, in excess of $650 million, to fund
infrastructure projects and to assist with the national
budget process, we are also expanding our involvement
in the capacity-building process, both through
traditional training programmes and through innovative
public-private partnerships that involve our apex
Chambers of Commerce and Industry. Thus, our
assistance spans the range of activity, from basic
infrastructure such as roads, power, dams and telecom
to rapidly implemented, community-based, small-scale
projects,
and
training
and
capacity-building
programmes. To summarize our approach, we seek to
help Afghanistan create the infrastructure of a modern

06-64703

State while, at the same time, going beyond monetary
assistance to provide the Afghan people the
wherewithal to help themselves.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now call on
the representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): The success of the United
Nations-supported mission in Afghanistan in providing
security, governance and development is vital to the
Afghan people, but is also vital to the health and future
of the United Nations, as the Prime Minister of Canada
declared in the General Assembly in September.
Canada welcomes the recent mission undertaken
by the Security Council to Afghanistan, which
demonstrated a collective commitment to review gains
made to date and to identify outstanding obstacles. I,
too, would like to thank Ambassador Oshima for
leading this mission so ably, and to thank Japan for
maintaining focus on Afghanistan in the Council.
Canada hopes and expects this level of consistent
engagement by the Council on Afghanistan to continue
in the months ahead.
The mission’s report (S/2006/935), combined
with the Secretary-General’s report of 11 September
and the biannual progress report of the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board (JCMB), provide
frank and comprehensive assessments of the current
situation. Taken together, they provide all of us with
concrete recommendations to guide our ongoing
efforts.
There has been important progress in Afghanistan
in 2006. Notably, the Bonn process drew to a close this
past January, and the Afghanistan Compact was
launched by the Afghan Government and the
international
community.
Across
Afghanistan,
governance institutions are emerging, including the
Parliament, the Supreme Court and the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission. Development
and reconstruction are occurring, although perhaps at a
slower pace than we would all hope. Significant
challenges, nevertheless, continue to confront
Afghanistan.
Indeed, Canada’s commitment to Afghanistan has
been steadfast, and we have deployed our soldiers
where they are needed most. It is clear that they are
now needed in the south, where insurgents are trying to
hold ordinary Afghans hostage by preventing them
from receiving the most basic of services from their

17

S/PV.5581

elected Government — health, education and the rule
of law. We encourage all Member States to consider
how they can contribute to meeting Afghan needs in
the south.
Canada is committed to improving the lives of
Afghans. As part of our approach, we have committed
nearly $1 billion in development assistance from 2001
to 2010. Alongside the Afghan Government, the United
Nations, NATO and our other international partners, we
are striving to help establish a stable, democratic and
self-sufficient Afghanistan. At its core, this is all about
restoring normalcy to the Afghan people: girls and
boys attending school, women starting small
businesses, refugees returning home and citizens
feeling free enough to express their views.
The Afghanistan Compact objectives are
Canada’s objectives. They will only be successfully
achieved, however, through concerted international
partnership, building the confidence of the Afghan
people and the Afghan Government’s leadership.
The United Nations Assistance Mission to
Afghanistan (UNAMA) is the primary international
institution responsible for stewardship of the Compact,
alongside the Afghan Government. UNAMA has a
crucial role to play in strengthening the emerging
governance institutions of the Afghan State, including
through
capacity-building.
Canada
encourages
UNAMA to enhance its role on the ground in
Afghanistan, particularly in the areas of governance,
human rights and the rule of law. This will involve
additional resources in Kabul as well as in the regional
offices across Afghanistan, including in Kandahar.
Canada will continue to support UNAMA through the
secondment of police and corrections advisors, and
hopes that others will make similar commitments.
Canada, therefore, supports the Mission’s
recommendation that the Secretary-General consider
measures to promote UNAMA’s coordinating role both
in Kabul and at the provincial and local levels, and
welcomes the ongoing expansion of UNAMA into the
provinces.
Afghanistan’s neighbours also have a central role
to play. Instability does not respect borders and poverty
is infectious. High-level regional engagement and
cooperation are critical to stemming the trafficking in
narcotics, finding sustainable solutions for Afghan
refugees and addressing transnational terrorism,
including the cross-border movement of insurgents. In

18

this regard, we welcome the commitment of both
Afghanistan and Pakistan to a meaningful and
constructive cross-border dialogue. We are also hopeful
that initial discussions, in the context of this recent
mission, with the Government of Pakistan can lead to
concrete improvements.
Canada strongly shares the concern expressed by
the mission regarding the humanitarian implications of
the use of landmines along the Afghanistan-Pakistan
border.
The people of Afghanistan must have faith in
their institutions of Government in order to have faith
in their future. Neither they nor we can tolerate
corruption within the ranks of Afghanistan’s national,
provincial or local institutions. We welcome the
Afghan Government’s commitment to fighting
corruption, as expressed by the Ambassador here today.
The Afghan people are entitled to an effective,
accountable and transparent Government.
(spoke in French)
Canada strongly supports the Council’s
recommendation that collective efforts be redoubled to
build an effective Afghan National Police that can
operate with the confidence of the people throughout
the country. Policing is a priority area for Canada in
Afghanistan. Through our civilian police contingent in
our Provincial Reconstruction Team in Kandahar, we
are providing training and mentorship to Afghan
police.
We also hope that any auxiliary police forces
deployed to southern Afghanistan will be properly
vetted, trained and equipped, and will be fully
accountable and operating under central authority.
Canada welcomes the emphasis in the Security
Council mission report on human rights, including
especially women’s rights and the protection of
civilians. Canada has strongly supported the
development of the Action Plan for Peace, Justice and
Reconciliation and looks forward to its formal launch
on 10 December on the occasion of International
Human Rights Day by the Government of Afghanistan.
Ultimately, the Afghan Government’s capacity to
provide basic services and ensure good governance is
critical to our collective success. We will continue to
support and expect strong Afghan leadership with
respect to the critical challenges confronting
Afghanistan. This includes visible and unequivocal

06-64703

S/PV.5581

action in the combat against corruption and for the
disbandment of illegal armed groups, among other
things. We would also welcome continued efforts to
extend Afghan national programmes to southern
Afghanistan and to other areas where the need is ever
more pressing.
It is in the interest of every country represented in
this Chamber to help the Afghan people in their time of
need. Afghans are counting on the United Nations and
its Member States to make good on our collective
commitments, as reflected in the Afghanistan Compact.
We commend the Security Council for its decision to
undertake this important mission in Afghanistan and
call on it to keep this issue high on its agenda in the
months to come.
The President (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the members of the Council, I extend a warm welcome
to the State Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Norway,
Mr. Raymond Johansen, and invite him to take the
floor.
Mr. Johansen (Norway): Norway welcomes the
Security Council’s second mission to Afghanistan. The
mission was indeed a timely one, as the situation in the
country is still cause for grave concern. The report
contains important recommendations. I would like to
commend Ambassador Oshima and other members of
the delegation for the initiative to map the terrain at
this crucial moment. Let me initially also commend
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Koenigs and his United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) team for their efforts and
dedication in spite of difficult circumstances.
Norway supports the views expressed by the
European Union (EU) and appreciates the constructive
role of, and the close cooperation with, EU Special
Representative Vendrell.
As it stated during the recent deliberations of the
General Assembly on Afghanistan, Norway believes
that the situation calls for a broad and comprehensive
strategy. Three challenges are facing us: first, a need
for improved coordination of international assistance;
secondly, a need for capacity-building within
Government institutions, the police, the judiciary and
the army; and, thirdly, more concerted efforts to
support the Afghan Government’s outreach beyond the
capital and to help it improve its own institutions.
These challenges are closely interlinked. Norway

06-64703

stands ready to contribute to developing and
implementing a strategy that addresses these issues.
In 2007, Norway intends to increase its financial
assistance to Afghanistan to at least 450 million
Norwegian krone, or approximately $72 million. That
is an increase of more than $16 million. We will
continue to contribute in accordance with national
priorities and the Afghanistan Compact and to channel
substantial resources to the Afghan budget through the
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF). A key
to success would be rapid progress on the development
of the Afghan National Development Strategy. The
plan should be focused and uncomplicated. It is crucial
that it be developed on the basis of consultations that
are truly national.
The International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) continues to play a key role in providing
security. Norway is committed to continuing its
participation in that respect.
Turning to the mission report, Norway would
particularly emphasize the importance of enhancing the
coordinating role of UNAMA. Norway is currently
looking at ways to assist UNAMA in strengthening its
capacity in the area of humanitarian coordination, both
in Kabul and in the field. It is imperative that UNAMA
be present in the provinces. Civil-military coordination
should be strengthened, while a clear division of roles
and tasks should be maintained. Humanitarian
assistance must be based on humanitarian principles.
Norway strongly supports the mission’s appeal to the
Secretary-General to make specific recommendations
on how to promote UNAMA’s coordinating role.
Norway agrees that it is important to strengthen
the Afghan National Police. Norway will increase its
efforts to achieve that goal and is looking forward to
continuing its close cooperation with Afghan
authorities, the EU and other stakeholders. UNAMA
has an important role to play in that arena as well, not
least in assisting the Afghan authorities in speeding up
reforms. Reform within the Ministry of Interior is vital.
In particular, I would like to point out the importance
of improving procedures for appointments and
respecting them.
The Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
(JCMB), of which Norway is now a member, has a
significant role to play. Norway welcomes its recent
report, which contained a balanced description of
challenges and achievements. We welcome the

19

S/PV.5581

proposal to hold a meeting of the JCMB with senior
officials. Further strengthening of headquarters
coordination is required. The Norwegian proposal to
appoint a special envoy is aimed at strengthening the
dialogue
between
capitals
and
international
organizations, in support of the Afghan Government
and UNAMA.
Norway also welcomes recent efforts to
strengthen regional cooperation. A political dialogue
and facilitation of economic cooperation within the
region would be helpful in endeavours to stabilize the
situation in Afghanistan.
The Governments of Afghanistan and of Pakistan
should be encouraged to continue their cooperation on
security matters in the border areas. The involvement
of local leaders in this dialogue will, hopefully, prove
to be useful in that respect.
Finally, Norway would like to stress the
importance of making the empowerment of women a
cross-cutting priority, in line with the recommendations
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and
security. Women’s rights and women’s needs should be
given particular attention in Afghanistan as well.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish to
begin, Sir, by congratulating you on your assumption
of the Council’s presidency for this month. I am
confident that you will lead the Council with your
well-known wisdom and ability. I also extend my
appreciation to your predecessor.
Allow me also to thank Ambassador Oshima for
his informative briefing on the recent mission to
Afghanistan. We are grateful to the Secretary-General
and to his Special Representative, Mr. Tom Koenigs, as
well as to their colleagues in UNAMA, for their
tireless efforts and dedication. We continue to
underline the central role of the United Nations.
The recent Security Council mission visited
Afghanistan at a crucial juncture, at a time when, on
the one hand, the Afghan people have many reasons to
be satisfied with their accomplishments, while, on the
other, a number of grave challenges have tempered
their legitimate hopes with signs of disillusionment.
It is indeed imperative to emphasize in words and
in deeds the continued commitment of the international

20

community to support the Government and people of
Afghanistan and the Afghanistan Compact, under
Afghan ownership and leadership, which remains the
central and strategic framework for cooperation
between the Afghan Government and the international
community.
As rightly mentioned in the reports of the mission
and of the Secretary-General, in the past several years,
Afghans have undertaken significant efforts, with the
support of the international community, towards the
development and stability of Afghanistan. These
achievements are grounds for hope and optimism. As
these reports indicate, the major achievements of the
Afghans in the past several years include the
establishment of democratic institutions, economic
growth, per capita income increase, trade and
investment expansion — principally with regional
partners, including Iran — significant infrastructure
projects, and successful national programmes in the
fields of education, health and rural development,
along with the development of new Afghan security
institutions.
However, it is unfortunate that, despite all these
positive and encouraging developments, the Afghan
people are still facing grave and daunting challenges in
their endeavours towards stability, security and
development. The security situation, as mentioned in
the reports, has, in general, remained precarious
throughout the country, with the increasing threat of
suicide attacks and other forms of terrorism, posed
mostly by the Taliban and Al-Qaida. We agree with the
finding of the mission that the spread of insurgent and
terrorist activity by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other
extremist groups, linked with the illegal drug trade and
coupled with other menaces such as corruption,
collectively disrupt rehabilitation and reconstruction
work in Afghanistan, thus posing a grave threat to
reconstruction and nation-building.
We strongly condemn the terrorist acts
perpetrated in Afghanistan and remain steadfast in our
unwavering support for the Afghan people and
Government in their efforts to achieve development
and security.
In the meantime, we believe that in combating
terrorism and insecurity in Afghanistan, any action,
including contacts and talks with terrorists who are
responsible for insecurity and mayhem, that could be

06-64703

S/PV.5581

wrongly interpreted as rewarding
criminals should be avoided.

terrorists

and

We support the report’s conclusion that
establishing a strong and sustainable Afghan National
Army is of vital importance in effectively addressing
the surge in terrorist activities and violence in certain
parts of Afghanistan. In this regard, it is imperative to
redouble the efforts to establish a trusted and effective
Afghan National Police throughout the country and to
address the inadequate and belated efforts to develop
the Afghan National Army.
As a neighbouring country, the Islamic Republic
of Iran is extremely concerned over the increase in
poppy cultivation and opium production in
Afghanistan, which according to various findings has
increased from 180 tons in 2001 to 6,100 tons this year,
representing more than 60 per cent of Afghanistan’s
gross domestic product. We concur with the mission’s
interlocutors, who have identified Afghanistan’s
flourishing narco-economy as a primary threat to the
stability of the country and as a cancer that is fast
becoming the number one problem in Afghanistan and
the wider region.
To effectively address this menace, greater efforts
and resolute actions on the part of both Afghanistan
and the wider international community are
unquestionably needed. We share the view that a more
robust campaign against drug traffickers, the
elimination of illicit poppy cultivation, demand
reduction, crop substitution, the strengthening of law
enforcement, promoting and diversifying lawful
livelihoods and stepping up Government activities to
arrest and prosecute major drug traffickers, regardless
of their position or status, and proceeding with the
energetic implementation of all elements of the
National Drug Control Strategy are vital and
indispensable if this menace is to be contained, let
alone eradicated.
For its part, the Islamic Republic of Iran has
fought a costly war against heavily armed drug
traffickers and is resolute in its continued fight against
that menace. Meanwhile, for Iran to sustain its ongoing
fight against drug trafficking, international support,
especially the cooperation of neighbouring countries, is
essential.
Given the importance of regional cooperation to
help the Afghans cope with growing insecurity, we
look with hope to a number of positive steps taken in

06-64703

the past several months with a view to enhancing
cooperation between Afghanistan and its neighbours in
more rigorously addressing the insecurity and terrorist
threats in the south, south-east and east of Afghanistan.
In this context, my Government has always been at the
forefront of efforts to support a regional dialogue to
combat terrorism, extremism and traffic in drugs. We
have also actively promoted regional cooperation for
the reconstruction of Afghanistan, as well as
cooperation on refugee issues.
We continue to have an enormous stake in the
success of the Afghan people and thus have extended
our unreserved cooperation to them and their
representatives
throughout
the
process.
Of
$560 million worth of reconstruction assistance
for Afghanistan pledged by Iran at the Tokyo
Conference — which is the highest pledge in terms of
per capita income of donor countries — we have thus
far spent $270 million on mutually agreed projects in
the areas of infrastructure, technical and educational
services and financial and in-kind assistance.
During his latest visit to Iran last May, President
Karzai, heading nine cabinet ministers and several
provincial governors, conferred with Iranian authorities
and discussed the expansion of relations in areas of
mutual interest. During the visit, seven agreements and
memorandums of understanding on exchange of
prisoners, extradition of criminals, promotion of
investment and construction of the Khwaf-Herat
railway, as well as cooperation in cultural, judicial and
economic fields, were signed.
The people and Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran have warmly hosted 3 million Afghan
refugees for about three decades, incurring huge costs
in the process. Now that Afghanistan has entered a new
phase of its history, we expect more cooperation on the
part of the international community and the Afghan
Government in the process of voluntary repatriation of
refugees. Despite the commendable actions taken in the
past several years, progress has yet to reach a
satisfactory level. We had expected the Security
Council mission to address the important issue of
refugees and their return in a more serious manner
during its visit and in its report.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Mr. President, on behalf
of the Pakistan delegation, I would like to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council this month. It is a special pleasure to see the

21

S/PV.5581

fraternal State of Qatar and you, my dear friend,
preside over the Council at this important juncture.
Let me also express our appreciation to
Ambassador Voto-Bernales of Peru for his successful
presidency in November.
The visit of the Security Council mission to
Afghanistan last month was timely. We congratulate
Ambassador Oshima for the presentation of a factual
and objective report on its findings. The overview
contained in the report of the mission is similar to the
assessment that was presented in the report of the
Secretary-General in September (S/2006/727).
It is a euphemism to say that the security
environment is precarious. Certainly, it is dangerous,
but we must understand the reasons for that
environment comprehensively and honestly. In the
view of Pakistan, the deterioration in the security
environment in Afghanistan is the result of three major
failures.
First is the failure of governance. We have
rampant corruption and misgovernance both at the
centre and in the provinces. We have a drug-based
economy — 60 per cent of the gross domestic product,
according to Afghanistan’s own figures. We have a
much-publicized failure of security sector reform in the
police as well as in the national army.
The second failure is the failure of reconstruction.
There has been some development in the northern parts
of Afghanistan, but there has been virtually no
development in the South and the South-East of
Afghanistan, which is largely terra incognita for the
Kabul Government. That is where there are large
sanctuaries for the militancy that today threatens
Afghanistan and Pakistan. Large tracts of land are out
of the control of both the Kabul Government and the
Coalition forces. There, the Islamic militants rule,
certainly by night and often by day. We must bring
reconstruction if the Afghan people and the people of
that region are to have a stake in peace and stability in
Afghanistan.
The third failure is the failure of reconciliation.
Large sections of the Afghan people, particularly the
Pashtuns, have been left out of the power structure,
both at the centre and in the provinces. Warlords rule
and fight against each other, and people have complete
insecurity. They therefore turn to anyone who can
provide that security for them.

22

Pakistan has a vital stake in peace and stability in
Afghanistan. The 25 years of war in Afghanistan have
destabilized and radicalized our frontier regions and
alienated some of the Pashtuns because of what is
happening in Afghanistan. Pakistan therefore desires
peace and stability in Afghanistan. If we are to serve
the larger objective of serving as a bridge between
Central Asia, South Asia and West Asia, we need peace
in Afghanistan. Above all, however, Pakistan’s support
for Afghanistan and our cooperation with Afghanistan
are dictated by the natural affiliation between our
peoples of history, of faith, of ethnicity and of common
suffering during difficult years.
We are therefore pained to hear insinuations and
allegations such as those which were expressed today
by my brother from Afghanistan. The Foreign Minister
of Pakistan is today in Kabul discussing ways and
means by which we can cooperate with and help
Afghanistan. But help is based on mutual trust, and
when we hear our Afghan brothers mouth allegations
which are either untrue or grossly exaggerated, we
question the motives. We ask ourselves why they seek
to explain their own failure by pointing fingers across
the border. We wonder whether they are acting on their
own behalf or whether they are acting as a puppet of
those who desire to erode relations between Pakistan
and Afghanistan and the brotherly peoples of the two
countries. People speak about medusas, but believe in
Kali, the goddess of war. We ask our Afghan brothers
to refrain from such exaggerations and allegations if
they desire our cooperation.
The Taliban are an Afghan phenomenon. My
brother has quoted from the report of the SecretaryGeneral; let me also refer to that report. The SecretaryGeneral’s report rightly notes that the insurgency in
Afghanistan is being conducted by “Afghans operating
inside Afghanistan’s borders” (S/2006/727, para. 5).
The report also identifies five distinct leadership
centres of the insurgency, all located within
Afghanistan. According to the report, “[t]he foot
soldiers of the insurgency are Afghans recruited within
Afghanistan” (ibid., para. 9). We therefore reject
insinuations of Pakistan’s providing sanctuaries or of
any training and recruitment in Pakistan. Certainly, we
would ask such friends as Denmark to come and check
before they repeat such allegations.
There are, of course, some elements of the
Taliban and their sympathizers who crossed over into
Pakistan following the post-9/11 military intervention

06-64703

S/PV.5581

by the United States and Coalition forces in
Afghanistan. Those Taliban and militants from
Al-Qaida melded into the 3 million Afghan refugees
who have been hosted for the past 25 years by
Pakistan.

We have proposed that the Afghan refugee camps
on the border be relocated to the Afghan side. We are
planning to return all refugees to Afghanistan within
three years. That should put an end to the allegations of
cross-border movement.

Pakistan is helping Afghanistan in the security
sector, including through the Tripartite Commission.
The United States, the International Security
Assistance Force, NATO and even Afghan officials are
aware of the nature and the extent of Pakistan’s
support. Pakistan believes that the Taliban are a
common threat to Afghanistan and Pakistan. Their
vision is contrary to the vision of modernism which we
are seeking to promote in our country. But the Taliban
are Afghans, operating in large areas of southern and
eastern Afghanistan. Those operations could not take
place unless the local population were sympathetic to
the Taliban and the militants who operate with
impunity in those large tracts of Afghanistan. Pakistan,
for its part, has made every effort to prevent illegal
border crossing. We have deployed 80,000 troops –
more than the total of Coalition and Afghan forces on
the other side. We have lost 600 of our personnel, who
have been killed in the 80 operations we have
conducted. Thus, there can be no doubt about the
sincerity and commitment of Pakistan to bring security
to the border regions of Afghanistan and Pakistan. But
that responsibility must be joint.

But it is surprising that the refugee issue does not
figure in the report of the Security Council mission. We
wonder, and would ask Ambassador Oshima, whether
the issue raised by the Kabul side. It is certain that it
was raised by the Foreign Secretary of Pakistan, when
he was consulted in Islamabad by Ambassador Oshima.
But that issue is totally ignored. We have said that in
order to prevent cross-border movement, we want to
fence the border — at least selectively. That was not
accepted by our partners. We proposed, more
drastically, to mine the border, but that is opposed on
humanitarian grounds, as we just heard from Canada.

We do not accept that the onus is only on
Pakistan. We have 700 posts along the border with
Afghanistan and 80,000 troops. There is only a fraction
of that number on the other side. In the North
Waziristan area, we have 97 posts, while NATO-ISAF
has three and the Afghan army 21. We therefore ask for
a matching effort to control the long and difficult
border. One should refrain from making allegations
against Pakistan and seeking to transfer blame to
Pakistan.
I would add that the international community has
avoided seriously addressing the problem of the
Afghan refugees. There are 3 million refugees still in
Pakistan. Without any appreciable international
assistance, we support them, on our own. They
constitute one tenth of the total population of
Afghanistan. Many of the complaints regarding illegal
border crossings would end, if we could return the
refugees to Afghanistan.

06-64703

People speak loosely about the agreement we
concluded in the North Waziristan area of our frontier.
We did so in order to calm the area and to prevent
cross-border action by militants. We made an
agreement with the tribal elders and not with the
Taliban. The result is that there is calm in North
Waziristan today and that can be independently
established. The incidents of violence in Afghanistan
have declined since September. That can be confirmed
by the statistics from NATO and ISAF.
The fighting currently taking place in
Afghanistan is mostly in Helmand Province, which is
quite a distance from the border. There too, United
Kingdom forces reached a similar agreement with
tribal leaders in the Musa Qala area, which has calmed
the situation there. Pakistan intends to convene tribal
jirgas in other parts of our frontier region to conclude
peace and development agreements that are similar to
that in North Waziristan. Jirgas in the tribal areas of
Pakistan and across the border in southern and eastern
Afghanistan are a time-honoured local tradition. It is a
process aimed at promoting consensus and
reconciliation by involving credible intermediaries and
tribal elders.
We believe that such agreements could be
replicated on the Afghan side to strengthen the tribal
and traditional leadership structures, end political
alienation, cease hostilities, bring about normalcy and
promote reconstruction and development. That
approach was endorsed at the summit meeting between
President Musharraf, President Karzai and President

23

S/PV.5581

Bush in September 2006, in Washington, D.C. Foreign
Minister Kasuri is visiting Kabul today for further
discussion on the modalities of the jirgas.
Pakistan will continue to provide its cooperation
and support to Afghanistan. But the problems of
Afghanistan need to be addressed through a holistic
approach based on political reconciliation, improved
security and governance and rapid and large-scale
economic and social development and reconstruction.
On its own, Afghanistan cannot achieve those
goals. It needs the support of the international
community. Despite its limited resources and its own
problems, Pakistan has committed $250 million for
reconstruction in Afghanistan. We have spent over half
of that amount and 60,000 Pakistanis are in
Afghanistan helping in the reconstruction.
As Ambassador Oshima appropriately warned in
his briefing, it is abundantly clear that Afghanistan
needs additional and sustained support and assistance
from the international community. Without such
support, there is no guarantee that Afghanistan will not
slide backwards into conflict and become a failed State
once again.

24

We believe it is necessary to win the hearts and
minds of the people through a political and economic
approach. Military means, often necessary, cannot
deliver in and of themselves. In that perspective,
President Musharraf has proposed the implementation
of a Marshall Plan-like programme of $4 to $5 billion
in south and south east Afghanistan. That amount is
only a fraction of what is spent on military operations
in Afghanistan. The international community should
seriously consider that proposal, which, under the
prevailing circumstances, could provide a realistic
chance of bringing durable peace and development to
Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
Before adjourning the meeting, I would like to
note that there will be consultations of the whole after
this meeting on the situation in the Middle East and
Lebanon, immediately after the adjournment of this
meeting.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

06-64703
