136

43/181.

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Vancouver Declaration on Human
Settlements, 1976 13 and the recommendations for national
action 14 adopted at Habitat: United Nations Conference
on Human Settlements,
Recalling its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980, the
annex to which contains the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade, in which, inter alia, the importance of the provision of basic shelter and infrastructure was stressed,
Recal/ing a/so its resolution 37 /221 of 20 December
1982, by which it proclaimed the year 1987 International
Year of Shelter for the Homeless,
Recalling further its resolution 42/ 191 of 11 December
1987, in which it decided that there should be a Global
Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000,
Recalling the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for
the Advancement of Women, 15
Recalling Commission on Human Settlements resolutions 9/9 of 16 May 1986 16 and 10/17 of 16 April 198717
on the participation of women in the solution of human
settlements problems,
Recalling a/so Commission on Human Settlements resolution 10/16 of 16 April 1987 17 on the effect ofthe externa] debt of the developing countries and their ability to
raise the funds needed to sol ve the housing problems of the
homeless up to the year 2000,
Taking note of Commission on Human Settlements
resolution 11/7 of 11 April 1988 18 entitled "Co-ordination
and co-operation with agencies and organizations within
the United Nations system",
Convinced that the continuous, co-ordinated and widely
based efforts ofGovernments, organizations ofthe United
Nations system, other intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations and individuals, when guided
by an appropriate strategy, will reverse the alarming
trends in the field ofhuman settlements and produce clear
and visible improvements in the shelter and neighbourhoods of the poor and disadvantaged by the year 2000, and
that this should be a global responsibility,
Encouraged by action already taken or being taken in
many countries to prepare national shelter strategies and
to adopt other measures that will promote achievement of
the goal of shelter for all,
Recognizing that, despite such efforts, more than one billion people have shelter unfit for human habitation, that
this number will increase dramatically, partly as a result of
population and urbanization trends, and that determined
measures must be taken aimed at profiting from these
trends, rather than being penalized by them,
A/so recognizing that the lnternational Year of Shelter
for the Homeless has confirmed the need to intensify na13 Report of Habitat: United !Vations Conference on Human
Settlements, Vancouver. 31 May-1 I June 1976 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.7 and corrigcndum), chap. l.
14 /bid., chap. II.
15
Report of the World Conference to Review und Appraise the
Achievements of the United Natiom Decade far Women: Equality,
Development and Peace. Nairobi, 15-26 Julv 1985 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.85.IV. IO), chap. l. séct. A.
16
,
See Official Record, (J/" the General A sscmbly. Forty-first Session,
Sufflement f'!o. 8 (A/41/8), annex 1, sect. A.
.
Ib,d., Forty-second Se.mon. Supplement No. 8 and corngendum
(A/42/8 and Corr.l), annex 1, sect. A.
18 /bid., Forty-third Sessio11. Supplcment Nu. 8 (A/43/8), annex [,
sect. A.

tional and international efforts to produce, deliver and improve shelter for ali. with specific emphasis on the poor
and disadvantaged,
Convinced that shelter problems are universal, that no
country has yet completely met its shelter needs and that
every country can profit from the experience of others,
Also convinced that shelter problems are a global concern requiring solutions that relate to other global problems and also requiring the efforts of ali countries to reach
such solutions, that the demand for shelter in each country can be met by applying a set of common principies, but
that goals can only be met by the individual efforts of each
Government acting in its own political, economic, social
and cultural context,
Recognizing that the core of the Global Strategy for
Shelter to the Year 2000 12 consists of integrated national
shelter strategies that need to be based on a full understanding ofthe scale and nature ofthe problem and the national resource base available to address the problem,
Recognizing a/so that national shelter strategies need to
contain four complementary parts: clear and measurable
objectives; national mobilization and distribution offinancial resources; promotion of shelter production and improvement with special reference to the management of
land, the provision of infrastructure and encouragement
of the use of appropriate building materials and technology; and the gradual reorganization of the shelter sector,
l. Adopts the Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year
2000;
2. Decides that the main objective of the Strategy is to
facilitate adequate shelter for ali by the year 2000, that the
main focus should therefore be on improving the situation
of the disadvantaged and the poor and that the following
fundamental objectives and principies should form the basis of the Strategy:
(a) Enabling policies, whereby the full potential and
resources of ali governmental and non-governmental actors in the field ofhuman settlements are utilized, must be
at the heart of national and international efforts;
(b) Women, as income-earners, home-makers and
heads of households, and women's organizations fulfil a
crucial role as contributors to the solution of human settlements problems, which should be fully recognized and
reflected in equal participation of women in the elaboration ofhousing policies, programmes and projects, and the
specific interests and capabilities of women should be adequately represented in human settlements policy formulation and in government mechanisms employed at all levels
for the implementation of housing policies, programmes
and projects;
(e) Shelter and development are mutually supportive
and interdependent, and policies must be developed in full
recognition of the important links between shelter and
economic development;
(d) The concept of sustainable development implies
that the provision of shelter and urban development must
be reconcilable with a sustainable management of the environment;
3. Designates the Commission on Human Settlements
as the United Nations intergovernmental body responsible
for co-ordinating, evaluating and monitoring the Strategy
and the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements
(Habitat) as the secretariat for the Strategy and the lead
agency for co-ordinating and monitoring the relevant programmes and activities of other United Nations organizations and agencies concerned:

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

4. Urges Governments to develop appropriate national
and sub-national strategies for shelter in the light of the
guidelines provided in the report ofthe Executive Director
of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements
(Habitat) entitled "Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year
2000" 19 and to report regularly to the Commission on Human Settlements, beginning at its twelfth session, on their
relevant experience and on progress achieved in implementing those strategies;
5. Requests the Executive Director to monitor the relevant global experience and progress of ali countries in implementing the Strategy and to report thereon to the Commission, beginning at its thirteenth session;
6. Decides to review and clarify the Strategy on a biennial basis, within regular budgetary resources, with the assistance of experts selected on the basis of equitable geographic representation, and to revise the Strategy in the
light of global and national experience from ali regions
and subregions;
7. Requests the Commission on Human Settlements,
as the body designated to co-ordinate implementation of
the Strategy, to report biennially to the General Assembly
on progress made in its implementation;
8. Also requests the Commission to strengthen, within
existing resources, its role in regard to the promotion of innovative measures by which bilateral and multilateral financia! institutions may support the shelter strategies of
developing countries, for example, by way of suitably devised loan agreements that would lead to the building up
of national revolving funds for shelter;
9. Requests financia! institutions and creditor countries to consider, as one ofthe conditions for the success of
the Strategy, immediate measures to reduce the externa!
debts by their conversion into long-term loans;
10. Adopts the guidelines for steps to be taken at the
national and international levels, as set out in the annex to
the present resolution, in support of the guidelines fornational and international action contained in the Global
Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000, l9 prepared pursuant
to its resolution 42/ 191;
11. Ca/ls upan ali States and others in a position to do
so to make generous contributions to the United Nations
Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation to facilitate
implementation of the Strategy.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988
ANNEX

l.
A.

Guidelines for steps to be taken at the
national leve!

CONSIDERATIONS FOR ÜOYERNMENTS WHEN FORMULATING
A NATIONAL SHELTER STRATEGY

l. A national shelter strategy must spell out clear operational objectives for the development of shelter conditions both in terms of the construction of new housing and the upgrading and maintenance of existing
housing stock and infrastructure and services.
2. In the definition of those objectives, development of shelter should
be seen as a process whereby conditions are gradually improved for both
men and women. The objectives need to address the scale ofthe problem,
while the "adequate" standard aimed at should be identified on the basis
of an analysis of the standa:rds and options affordable to the target population and society at large. The objectives should be based on a comprehensive view ofthe magnitude and nature of the problem and of thc available resource base, including the potcntial contribution of men and
19

HS/C/11/3. See also Official Records of the General Assembly,
Forty-third Session, Supp/ement No. 8, addendum (A/43/8/Add.l).

137

women. In addition to finance. land, manpower and institutions, building
materials and technology also have to be considered irrespective of
whether they are hcld by the public or prívate, formal or informal sector.
3. The objectives ofthe shelter sector need to be linked to the goals of
overall economic policy, social policy, settlement policy and environmental policy.
4. The strategy needs to outline the action through which !he objectives can be met. In an enabling strategy, actions such as the provision of
infrastructure may mean the direct involvement of the public sector in
shelter construction. The objective of "facilitating adequate shelter for
ali" also implies that direct govemment support should mainly be allocated to the most needy population groups.

5. The public sector is responsible for developing and implementing
measures for national shelter policies and for the adoption of measures to
stimulate the desired action by other sectors. This can be done through
measures in areas such as the locally based small-scale building-materials
industry, appropriate financial schemes or training programmes.
ó. Another important componen! is the development of administrative, institutional and legislative tasks that are the direct responsibility of
the Government, for example, land registration and regulation of construction.
7. An analysis of affordability will provide the criteria for defining
the right priorities and appropriate approaches and standards for public
sector involvement. Likewise, such an analysis gives the criteria for planning the indirect involvement of the public sector, that is, the type of activities to be promoted and the appropriate way of going about it.
8. The appropriate institutional framework for the implementation
of a strategy must be identified, which may require much institutional reorganization. Each agency involved must have a clear understanding of
its role within the overall organizational framework and of the tasks expected ofit. Mechanisms for the co-ordination ofinter- and intra-agency
activities need to be developed. Mechanisms such as shelter coalitions are
recommended and may be developed in partnership with the prívate and
non-governmental sectors. Finally, arrangements for the continuous
monitoring, review and revision of the strategy must be developed.

B

STEPS TO BE TAKEN BY GovERNMENTS WHEN IMPLEMENTING
A NATIONAL STRATEGY

9. Work for the preparation of the strategy must be organized. For
instance, a task force may be appointed for the actual work anda steering
committee ensuring high-level political commitment set up to guide its
work. Alternatively it may be possible to use existing mechanisms. Equal
participation of women should be ensured at ali levels.
10. Needs and resources must be assessed. Estimates are required of
the needs in housing construction and in upgrading and maintenance, including housing-related infrastructure, as well as of the resources that
can be mobilized during the period to the year 2000 to cover those needs.
1 L Shelter options and standards that are affordable by the target
groups and society at large nmst be analysed, taking into account both
the scale of need and ali the resources available -finance, land, manpower and institutions, building materials and technology.
12. Objectives must be set for the construction of new housing and
for the upgrading and maintenance ofthe existing housing stock in terms
both of the scale of the activities and of the housing standards to be met.
13. Action must be identified through which thosc objectives can be
realistically met. The estimated required resources for this action must
not exceed those that can be made available by society. The action ineludes both direct government involvement and measures needed to encourage, facilitate and integrate active participation of other sectors in
shelter delivery.
14. A plan of action must be prepared in consultation and partnership with non-governmental organizations, people and their representatives. which:
(a) Lisis the activities that are the direct responsibility of the public
sector;
(b) Lisis the activities lo he taken to facilitate and encourage the
other actor, to carry out their part of the task;
(e)

Outlines resource allocation to the aforementioned activities;

(d) Outlines the institutional arrangements for the implementation,
co-ordination, monitoring and review of the strategy;
(e)

Outlines a schedule for lhe activities of the various agencies.

General Assembly-Forty-third Session
11.

Guidelines for steps to be taken at the
international level

15. lnternational action will be necessary to support the activities of
countries in their endeavour to improve the housing situation of their
poor and disadvantaged inhabitants. Such assistance should support national programmes and use know-how available locally and within the
international community.
16. The goal of externa! assistance should be to enhance and support
national capabilities to develop and implement national action components of the Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000.
17. Mutual co-operation and exchange of information and expertise
bctween developing countries in human settlement work stimulate and
enrich national human settlement work.
18. The United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat)
will act as the co-ordinating agency in the implementation of the Global
Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000, on the basis of biennial plans to be
drawn up with the involvement of experts working with Governments
and the Centre al the regional and subregional levels.
19. As the co-ordinating agency for the Strategy, the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements (Habita!) will stimulate international and
national action by incorporating the Strategy in its future medium-term
plans and biennial work programmes.
20. An inter-agency-level working arrangement will be made within
the existing budget to provide continuous co-ordination of the Strategy.
21. The United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat)
will prepare a reporting format to facilitate monitoring by the Commission on Human Settlement~ of progress achieved in the implementation
of the Global Strategy.

43/182.

Preparation of an international development
strategy for the fourth United Nations development decade

secretariats of the United Nations system to the formulation of the strategy.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988

43/183.

Twenty-fifth anniversary of the establishment
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December
1964,
Noting that the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development intends to celebrate its twenty-fifth anniversary in 1989,
Noting a/so that the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development will use the occasion of its
twenty-fifth anniversary as an important opportunity to
inform and mobilize ali concerned, with a view to achieving its goals and objectives as contained in its mandate,
Expressing its appreciation of the important achievements of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development in fulfilling its mandate,
1. Decides to observe, at its forty-fourth session, the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in a manner befitting the
role and achievements of that organ;
2. Invites the Trade and Development Board to contribute, as appropriate, to the celebration of that anniversary.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 42/193 of 11 December 1987
and Economic and Social Council resolution 1988/76 of
29 July 1988 on an international development strategy for
the fourth United Nations development decade,
1. Decides to establish an Ad Hoc Committee of the
Whole for the Preparation of the International Development Strategy for the Fourth United Nations Development Decade, and requests the Ad Hoc Committee to submit a progress report to the General Assembly for
consideration at its forty-fourth session, with a view to finalizing the strategy in time for its adoption in 1990;
2. Invites the Committee for Development Planning to
continue its activities related to the preparation of the
strategy in support of the work and consideration of the
Ad Hoc Committee;
3. Invitesthe United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, the regional commissions and other organizations and specialized agencies ofthe United Nations system to include in their agendas, during 1989, items regarding their contributions to the preparation of the strategy;
4. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the executive heads of the other organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to contribute effectively
to the preparatory process for the strategy by providing ali
appropriate input, including relevant documentation, using comprehensive analytical studies;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in this context, to
entrust the Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation with the responsibility
for overall co-ordination of the contributions of relevant

43/184.

Reverse transfer of technology

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, 3362 (SVII) of 16 September 1975, 35/56 of5 December 1980 and
40/191 of 17 December 1985,
Conscious that the development process of the developing countries is crucially dependent on the availability of
highly trained personnel and that the acquisition of skills
and their efficient utilization are a crucial component of
the social, economic and technological transformation of
those countries,
Convinced that the continuing outflow of skilled personnel from developing countries seriously hampers their development and has implications of global concern,
Recognizing the urgent need to formulate appropriate
policies to avoid the "brain drain" and to obviate its adverse effects,
1. Takes note of the outcome of the Fourth Meeting of
Governmental Experts on the Reverse Transfer of Technology, held at Geneva from 14 to 18 March 1988; 20
2. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to make the
necessary arrangements so that future work on the reverse
transfer of technology can be considered by the Committee on Transfer of Technology in the context of the elabo-

20 Official Records of the General Assembly. Forty-third Session,
Supplement No. 15 (A/43/15), vol. 1, annex 111.
