Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

other bodies, may be reproduced in extenso in summary records or as official documents only if they
serve as bases for discussion, provided that the relevant decision is taken by the body concerned after a
statement of the financial implications has been submitted in accordance with regulation 13.1 of the Financial Regulations of the United Nations;
(f) Each report on the administrative and financial
implications of a proposal for a non-recurrent report
to be submitted in accordance with financial regulation 13.1 shall be prepared in accordance with the
following rules:
(i) It shall set forth the nature of the document,
the possible number of pages, and the type
and number of copies to be printed;
(ii) It shall state how much time will be required
to reproduce the requested document in all
the working languages;
(iii) It shall indicate whether there is any previous
publication on the same subject in the organizations in the United Nations system which
would duplicate or substantially overlap the
proposed publication;
(iv) Where, in the light of discussion, delegations
consider a particular report so useful that it
should be printed and bound, the report on
administrative and financial implications shall
state the cost incurred in preparing the mimeographed version, including drafting costs, and
the estimated cost of the proposed new edition;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to widen the existing practice of soliciting bids
for external printing of publications of the United
Nations from all Member States;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
short document setting forth in clear terms the policies
laid down by the General Assembly regarding the
control and limitation of documentation and to make
this document available to members prior to each
session of a council, board, commission, committee
or other body;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session on
the implementation of the present resolution and to
include in his report:
(a) Any reasons he might have for not implementing the recommendations and suggestions referred
to in paragraph 2 above;
(b) The information requested in paragraph 5
above;
( c) Any complementary recommendations that he
might deem appropriate.
1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.

2539 (XXIV),

Composition of the Secretariat

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2480 (XXIII) of 21 December 1968,
Taking note of the Secretary-General's report on
the composition of the Secretariat, 20
2 9 Ibid., Twenty-fourth Session, AnMxes, agenda item 83,
document A/1145.

83

Reaffirming the need for an equitable geographical
distribution of the staff of the Secretariat as between
regions, and within each region, in particular at the
level of senior posts, and the need for a better linguistic balance in the Secretariat,
Desirous that the principles and factors enunciated
in its resolution 1852 (XVII) of 19 December 1962
be adequately reflected in the existing system of
desirable ranges,
Recognizing that long-term service is conducive to
greater efficiency in certain posts entailing complex duties and responsibilities,
I
l. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to achieve a better geographical distribution of
the staff of the Secretariat at all levels, bearing in mind
the requirements of the Charter of the United Nations
of efficiency, competence and integrity;
2. Renews its invitation to the Secretary-General to
give preference to nationals from countries not yet
represented or inadequately represented, either in the
Secretariat as a whole or specifically at the senior level,
in particular with respect to appointments to higher
posts;
3. Requests that the information included in the
reports of the Secretary-General relating to geographical
distribution of the staff of the United Nations Development Programme and the staff of the United Nations
Children's Fund should reflect the position at the
regional as well as the country level;
4. Welcomes the Secretary-General's intention to
prepare a long-term plan of recruitment as a means
of accelerating the achievement of an equitable geographical distribution of the staff; 30

II
Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts
to achieve a better linguistic balance within the Secretariat.
1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.
2540 (XXIV). Amendments to the Staff Rules
of the United Nations

The General Assembly
Takes note of the changes made by the SecretaryGeneral in the Staff Rules in the year ending on 31
August 1969, as set forth in his note to the Fifth
Committee.31
1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.
2541 (XXIV). International salary system

The General Assembly
l. Takes note with appreciation of that part of the
report of the International Civil Service Advisory Board
on its seventeenth session which is concerned with the
principles underlying the international salary system ;32
2. Requests the Secretary-General to keep it informed of the progress made by the Board in the
examination of the matters mentioned therein.
1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.
3o Ibid., para. 28 (d).
a1 Ibid., document A/C.S/1239.
32 Ibid., document A/C.S/1240, annex.
