S/2019/625

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 August 2019
Original: English

Letter dated 1 August 2019 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the statement by the President of the Security
Council of 10 August 2018 on the Central African region ( S/PRST/2018/17), as well
as my letter dated 24 August 2018 to the President of the Council on the mandate of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) ( S/2018/789) and
her response dated 28 August 2018 (S/2018/790).
In the aforementioned statement, the Security Council requested me to conduct
a strategic review regarding the scope of the mandate and activities of UNOCA and
to present recommendations to it, by 1 August 2019, on areas of improvement,
including the coherence of United Nations activities in countries in the subregion
under the UNOCA mandate, or new or refocused priorities. The Council expressed its
intention to consider those recommendations, including any proposed changes to the
mandate, by 31 August 2019.
In response to the request of the Security Council, I appointed Ahmedou
Ould-Abdallah (Mauritania) (former Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for West Africa; for Somalia; and for Burundi) to lead the strategic review team,
which included representatives from the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, the Department of Peace Operations/the United Nati ons Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.
The strategic review was conducted in three phases: (a) from 28 May to 4 June
2019, consultations were held in New York with United Nations officials, members
of the UNOCA Integrated Task Force, representatives of Unite d Nations field
presences, members of the Security Council and representatives of the States
members of the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and think
tanks; (b) from 5 to 14 June, consultations were held in Libreville, Brazzaville and
Yaoundé with representatives of UNOCA, Government officials, and representatives
of political parties and regional and subregional organizations and mechanisms,
including the African Union, the diplomatic community and civil society; and
(c) from 17 to 20 June, debriefing meetings were held in New York with Secretariat
officials, members of the Integrated Task Force, members of the Council, and
representatives of States members of ECCAS and States members of the International
Organization of la Francophonie.

19-13213 (E)

060819

*1913213*

S/2019/625

The review team conducted a thorough analysis of the context in the Central
African subregion, including the challenges and regional trends in the political,
security, humanitarian, human rights and socioeconomic fields. The team submitted
its report on 27 June 2019.
Main findings of the strategic review
In its report, the review team noted that, since the last strategic review of
UNOCA in March 2015, the Central African subregion has continued to face serious
peace and security challenges, which were likely to increase in the coming years in
the context of multiple elections and ongoing security, humanitarian, human rights
and socioeconomic issues.
UNOCA enjoyed strong support and buy-in across the subregion through its
work in conflict prevention and preventive diplomacy, its support for regional and
subregional initiatives, its coordination of United Nations presences in Central Africa
and its reporting and analysis provided to Headquarters and other United Nations
entities. In particular, UNOCA was highly appreciated for its good offices and early warning services.
UNOCA partners expressed their wish for more frequent visits by my Special
Representative for Central Africa to the countries of the subregion. In a vast subregion
such as Central Africa, they felt that UNOCA needed to be more visible, a nd called
for its stronger engagement, in particular in enhancing efforts to raise the awareness
of electoral processes and human rights issues.
In general, little concern was raised about the possible duplication of mandates
between UNOCA and other United Nations presences in Central Africa. A strong need
was identified for UNOCA to continue rallying actors in the subregion in support of
the peace process in the Central African Republic, in close consultation with
MINUSCA. However, UNOCA partners saw limited space for the Office to engage
in the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, given the presence of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and the Office of my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region.
Partners requested further sharing of information and consultations between UNOCA,
MINUSCA, MONUSCO, the Office of my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region
and the Office of my Special Envoy for Burundi at both the leadership and working
levels.
The review team noted that the coordination role of UNOCA was valued, as
were the good relations and regular contacts maintained by my Special Representative
with the United Nations resident coordinators in the subregion. The ongoing contact
between UNOCA and the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) was welcomed, and UNOCA partners requested enhanced cooperation
on interregional issues such as the Lake Chad Basin crisis, transhumance, maritime
security in the Gulf of Guinea and other issues included in the Lomé Declaration on
Peace, Security, Stability and the Fight against Terrorism and Violent Extremism,
jointly adopted by the Heads of State and Government of ECCAS and the Economic
Community of West African States in July 2018.
The team highlighted that the relationship between UNOCA and ECCAS was
key to the success of preventive diplomacy efforts, while noting that capacity
remained a limiting issue. In this regard, the team identified preventive diplomacy as
one area in which there could be an expansion of activities. Partners requested
UNOCA to be more involved in the ongoing ECCAS reform process and also
requested that the mandate of UNOCA be aligned with the outcome of that process,
once concluded. Regional and subregional organizations appreciated their working
relations with UNOCA and requested more frequent interaction with the Office.
2/5

19-13213

S/2019/625

UNOCA partners called for more support from the Office for regional initiatives
and work on cross-border, cross-cutting and thematic issues, including: maritime
security in the Gulf of Guinea; the implementation of the Central African Convention
for the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts
and Components That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly
(Kinshasa Convention); transhumance and related illicit trafficking and insecurity;
forced displacement, including in relation to refugees, security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; the systematic c onsideration of
climate change and socioeconomic concerns in UNOCA interventions; women, peace
and security; and youth engagement in conflict prevention. Further engagement with
civil society and national human rights institutions was also identified as a need, in
cooperation with the United Nations Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in
Central Africa.
The limited operational capacities of UNOCA were frequently cited as a limiting
factor, in particular in terms of travel and communications.
Observations and recommendations
I welcome the report on the strategic review, which validates the conviction of
the United Nations Secretariat that the regional offices are a forward platform for
conflict prevention.
In the eight years since its inauguration, UNOCA has made noticeable
contributions to conflict prevention and management in a complex subregion,
including through the good offices of my Special Representative for Central Africa.
The Office has been instrumental in preventing and mitigating election -related crises
and promoting inclusive political dialogue and reform processes in Cameroon, Chad,
the Congo, Gabon, and Sao Tome and Principe. UNOCA has remained engaged in the
crisis in the Central African Republic and has promoted bilateral cooperation with the
country’s neighbours, while encouraging coherence among regional and international
actors. UNOCA has bolstered cooperation on peace and security with regional and
subregional organizations, in particular the African Union, ECCAS, the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community and the Gulf of Guinea Commission.
UNOCA has also increased its cooperation with UNOWAS on regional and
subregional initiatives. UNOCA has further ensured coherence and coordination in
the peace- and security-related activities of United Nations entities in Central Africa.
The Office has continued to serve as the secretariat of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa.
Having reviewed the report, I have the honour to put forward the following
recommendations regarding the mandate of UNOCA, for consideration by the
Security Council:
(a) Mandate of UNOCA remains valid. In this regard, with reference to the
aforementioned exchange of letters I had with the President of the Counc il in August
2018 (S/2018/789 and S/2018/790), the work of UNOCA should be enhanced in the
areas identified below:
(i) Early warning and analysis, with a gender perspective. UNOCA, in
cooperation with regional partners, should focus on conducting regional
research and analysis, in particular on transnational issues that have an impact
on the stability of Central Africa; such work will continue to benefit
Headquarters, Member States and United Nations country teams and presences
in Central Africa;
(ii) Good offices in non-mission settings. UNOCA has a particular advantage
in working in such settings: my Special Representative for Central Africa has
19-13213

3/5

S/2019/625

used his good offices in Cameroon, Chad, the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon
and Sao Tome and Principe, and the good offices of UNOCA will be particularly
needed during the upcoming electoral cycle in the subregion;
(iii) Support for and strengthening the capacity of ECCAS. ECCAS has a
key role to play in addressing the regional and subregional peace and security
issues identified in the review, and the strengthening of ECCAS must remain
one of the top priorities of UNOCA, including through: support for ECCAS in
the areas of conflict prevention, mediation and early warning; support for the
ongoing ECCAS reform process, which should culminate in the emergence of
ECCAS as a stronger subregional organization; enhancement of UNOCA
efforts, in close collaboration with ECCAS, in the area of women, peace and
security, including by assisting States members of ECCAS in the development
of their national action plans for the implementation of Council resolution 1325
(2000); and enhanced engagement of UNOCA with young people in the area of
conflict prevention and in the implementation of Council resolution 2250
(2015);
(iv) Strengthening partnerships with civil society and supporting
subregional civil society networks. UNOCA is currently working with ECCAS
on establishing a subregional network of civil society organizations;
(b) Ensuring a clear division of labour between UNOCA and other United
Nations entities. The following efforts should be made in this regard:
(i) Rallying of regional support for the peace process in the Central
African Republic, in close consultation with MINUSCA. UNOCA should
continue to facilitate the revitalization of the joint bil ateral commissions
between the Central African Republic and its neighbours, although there is little
value in the Office engaging in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, or in
Burundi; UNOCA should continue to organize the annual meeting of my special
representatives and envoys, regional directors of United Nations entities and
United Nations resident coordinators in Central Africa; my Special
Representative for Central Africa should continue to participate in the separate
annual meeting with my Special Envoys for the Great Lakes Region and for
Burundi; and enhanced cooperation, information exchange and sharing of
lessons learned should be promoted among UNOCA, MINUSCA, MONUSCO,
the Offices of my Special Envoys for the Great Lakes Region and for Burundi
and other United Nations regional presences, including the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, the United Nations
Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa and the Regional
Office for West and Central Africa of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs;
(ii) Maintaining good cooperation with United Nations resident coordinators
and relevant regional offices. UNOCA should build on its good relations with
the United Nations resident coordinators and with relevant regional directors of
the Development Coordination Office to further support cross-border initiatives;
UNOCA and UNOWAS should enhance their cooperation, including on various
interregional issues such as the Lake Chad Basin crisis, transhumanc e, forced
displacement and maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea;
(c) Resource requirements. I have instructed the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, in coordination with UNOCA and other relevant United
Nations entities, to assess the reasonable resource requirements for UNOCA to
implement its mandate as presented in the review to ensure the establishment of
achievable goals.

4/5

19-13213

S/2019/625

I thank Mr. Ould-Abdallah and the members of the UNOCA strategic review
team for the important work that they have undertaken and for the submission of their
findings and recommendations. I also take this opportunity to thank UNOCA and all
entities of the United Nations system in Central Africa for their continuing efforts to
advance the cause of peace and security in the subregion.
I should be grateful if you would have the present letter circulated as a document
of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

19-13213

5/5
