A/66/PV.111

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

111th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 29 May 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 138 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/66/668/Add.12)
The President: I should like, in keeping with
established practice, to draw the attention of the General
Assembly to document A/66/668/Add.12, in which
the Secretary-General informs the President of the
Assembly that, since the issuance of his communication
contained in document A/66/668/Add.11, Swaziland has
made the payment necessary to reduce its arrears below
the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes due
note of the information contained in this document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 130
Interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union
Report of the Secretary-General (A/66/770)
Draft resolution (A/66/L.45)
The President: I welcome participants to today’s
meeting. I am pleased that the General Assembly is
holding a stand-alone debate on the interaction between
the United Nations, national parliaments and the
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU). Today’s meeting is
more than a discussion of the institutional relationship
between two organizations. It seeks to examine in greater

(Qatar)

detail how the United Nations, as a system, relates to
the global parliamentary community. I would like to
acknowledge the presence here today of the President
of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, The Honourable
Mr. Abdelwahad Radi, and of the Secretary-General of
the IPU, Mr. Anders Johnsson.
In the Millennium Declaration (resolution
55/2) more than a decade ago, heads of State and
Government called on the United Nations to engage
more systematically with national parliaments
through their world organization, the IPU. The report
submitted by the Secretary-General for today’s debate
(A/66/770) highlights the various ways in which that
engagement has taken place. More and more, legislators
are joining their national delegations at major United
Nations events. Parliaments are increasingly involved
in the review and implementation of international
commitments. I witnessed this during my visits to
Member States, including to Strasbourg, France,
Belgium and elsewhere.
The IPU has taken the lead in convening
parliamentary meetings in the context of global
conferences, as we saw last year during the Fourth
United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries in Istanbul. Within the scope of its own bodies
and mechanism, the IPU is providing an environment in
which members of parliament can discuss and articulate
parliamentary input into major United Nations
processes. We saw this during the consultations on the
outcome of the forthcoming United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development in Rio. On 21 September
last year, I myself had the pleasure of engaging with a

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-35239 (E)

*1235239*

A/66/PV.111

group of legislators who had come to New York as part
of their high-level delegations to the General Assembly’s
general debate. I presented to them my initiative aimed
at establishing mediation as one of the pillars of my
presidency. I was very pleased to see that, not long after
that meeting, a parliamentary perspective was submitted
as a contribution to the United Nations report on the role
of effective mediation.
On 28 November 2011, my Office worked closely
with the IPU to convene the annual parliamentary
hearing at the United Nations, which focused on the very
topical issue of strengthening political accountability
for a more peaceful and prosperous world. We had a rich
debate in which several Government representatives
also participated. I am pleased to note that the draft
resolution before the Assembly (A/66/L.45) calls for the
annual hearing to be more closely linked to major United
Nations processes, so as to help inform those processes
from a parliamentary perspective. To that end, I will be
consulting with Member States in the coming weeks to
determine which forthcoming United Nations process
would best stand to gain from robust parliamentary
input.
Finally, I strongly believe that in our work at the
United Nations we should pay more attention to how
we are engaging with parliaments at the national level.
We should help strengthen parliamentary capacities,
and we should involve parliaments in national dialogue
and reconciliation efforts, as well as in formulating and
vetting national strategies.
Every parliamentarian here has experience and
innovations to share, and each of us has a responsibility
and a critical role to play in bridging the divide between
the United Nations and parliaments and between
parliaments and civilians. It is for this reason that I
am a firm believer in cooperation between the IPU
and the United Nations and in the essential role of
parliamentarians in realizing and implementing the
policy work of the United Nations.
I now give the floor to the representative of Morocco
to introduce draft resolution A/66/L.45.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset I would like to express, Sir, on behalf of the
delegation of the Kingdom of Morocco, our appreciation
and gratitude for your efforts and initiatives in the
presidency of the General Assembly at its current
session in pushing forward issues of international
interest, the most recent of which is enhancing the

2

interaction and cooperation between the United Nations,
national parliaments and international associations and
organizations.
Under agenda item 130, entitled “Interaction
between the United Nations, national parliaments
and the Inter-Parliamentary Union”, I should like to
introduce draft resolution A/66/L.45, keeping in mind
that the General Assembly has adopted such a resolution
on a biannual basis, the most recent of which was
resolution 65/123.
The delegation of Morocco, as the head of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) and represented by
Mr. Abdelwahad Radi, who is present with us here today,
has the honour of presenting draft resolution A/66/L.45
on behalf of its original 34 sponsoring Member States,
now joined by 50 more, bringing the total number of
sponsors to 84. As the Assembly knows, in conformity
with past practice the list of sponsors will remain open
to any member seeking to join.
The delegation of Morocco, together with the
IPU delegation, has conducted extensive discussions
on the draft resolution, in which all the necessary
information was provided on all amendments. The
draft resolution is based primarily on previous General
Assembly resolutions, with additions inspired by the
outcomes of the 126th IPU Assembly and the report
of the Secretary-General contained in A/66/770. These
amendments seek to entrench cooperation between
the United Nations, national parliaments and the IPU,
especially by drawing up a new agreement between the
United Nations and the IPU; providing parliamentary
input to the process of designing the next generation of
international development goals; giving a more regular
and systemic role to legislators and allowing them to
participate in national delegations to the major United
Nations conferences and events; strengthening the links
between the parliamentary hearing process and the main
United Nations processes, including in preparation for
international conferences; calling on United Nations
country teams to draw up more systemic and holistic
ways to deal with national parliaments; and encouraging
the United Nations bodies and agencies to use the help
and expertise of the IPU and member parliaments
in a more systemic way and in order to strengthen
parliamentary institutions, especially in post-conflict
States and States in transition to democracy.
These ideas are of special importance in the light
of the fact that democracy is expanding and taking

12-35239

A/66/PV.111

root and the growing role of legislative institutions in
drawing up policies and development plans. Moreover,
they give added momentum to the role of the IPU at the
international level. For all these reasons, we hope that
the General Assembly will adopt the draft resolution by
consensus.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
to congratulate you, Sir, on convening this very important
debate on the interaction between the United Nations,
national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union
(IPU). I welcome the presence of Mr. Abdelwahad Radi,
President of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, and the
officials here with him. I congratulate him on the tireless
work he has been performing since he took office, and
wish him every success in carrying out his functions in
the future.
Greater cooperation and interaction between
the United Nations, national parliaments and the
Inter-Parliamentary Union are not only welcome, but
necessary. In addition to playing an essential role in
incorporating international commitments into national
judicial systems and verifying their observance,
parliaments are also crucial actors in efforts to achieve a
more democratic United Nations that is more connected
to the realities of its Member States. In order to achieve
this, a more fluid dialogue on the most important global
issues is needed among the Organization, those who
directly represent the citizens of each country, and the
world organization of national parliaments.
From a comprehensive perspective, respect for
and the promotion of international law, including the
Charter’s provisions, on the one hand, and the rule of
law at the national level, on the other, are two sides of
the same coin. The parliamentary institution is a crucial
participant in enabling countries’ societies to benefit
from both.
In the case of the Eastern Republic of Uruguay,
we proudly affirm that our Parliament is continuing to
undertake extremely significant work on the country’s
legal system and development, thereby branding its
ongoing constitutionality and making an outstanding
contribution to strengthening the rule of law and building
a democratic society, which is a distinctive feature of the
Uruguayan nation.
More specifically, Uruguay is convinced that
strengthening the relationship between national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union is
essential at a time when the United Nations is seeking

to preserve and increase its credibility, legitimacy
and relevance. To begin with, we should take further
advantage of the existing cooperation bodies, for
example, by making better use of the annual joint
parliamentary hearings between the General Assembly
and the IPU. Those should focus on achieving genuine
interaction among parliamentarians, diplomats, United
Nations staff and academics.
In addition, Uruguay welcomes the interest shown
by the IPU and national parliaments in the various
issues on the United Nations agenda. We encourage
their participation in such matters, for example, in
particular, in the Delivering as One process. In that
regard, in Uruguay’s case, which is one of the eight
pilot countries of the programme, the executive branch
sees it as very pertinent that the role of parliament in
that process be enhanced. Our national Parliament has
already taken part in at least two joint projects, one on
helping to develop bills on drafting and implementing
a communications strategy between parliament and
civil society in the context of the decentralization and
promotion of citizen participation policy. The other
has to do with supporting the strengthening of gender
institutionalization in the structures, procedures and
practices of the Uruguayan Parliament in the context
of a bill to support public policies on reducing gender
inequality. The latter is a priority issue on the agenda
of both the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary
Union, as stated in the report of the Secretary-General
contained in document A/66/770 and in draft resolution
A/66/L.45.
We also share the vision on the critical role
that national parliaments can play in effectively
implementing the notion of national ownership in
post-conflict peacebuilding. At a time when political
stability is fragile, the participation of parliamentarians
in national reconstruction and development programmes
is crucial for sustainable peace processes.
Those and other issues are addressed in the various
recommendations proposed by the Secretary-General
in his report. The draft resolution introduced by the
delegation of Morocco, which Uruguay sponsored from
the start and which, we hope, will shortly be adopted by
consensus, includes a number of those recommendations.
Uruguay encourages the wider membership to persevere
in its efforts to achieve the effective implementation of
those recommendations and to take advantage of this
opportunity to capitalize on the renewed profile of
that relationship, which underscores the importance

12-352393

A/66/PV.111

of interaction, as well as cooperation, and the role of
national parliamentarians.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): My delegation would
also like to acknowledge the excellent work done to
date by the President of the Inter-Parliamentary Union
(IPU), Mr. Abdelwahad Radi, his team and its Secretary
General.
The role of parliament, as the voice of the people,
is crucial in a democratic society and deserves the
enthusiastic and unfettered support of Governments. As
a democracy, Indonesia depends on its Parliament for
just, fair and representative legislation and to safeguard
the accountability of the Government in its work.
Preceding the United Nations, the IPU has been
a home for parliaments of different regions and
various legal and political systems. As an institution,
the Union has also contributed to deliberations on
global challenges, such as sustainable development,
democratization and the rule of law, as well as the role
of women in parliament. Those all-important issues are
also being discussed here at the United Nations and
within its organs.
Since 1996, Indonesia has strongly supported
the strengthening of the institutional relationship
between the United Nations and the IPU. We have
witnessed the productive cooperation between the two
organizations in various areas, including democracy,
human rights, gender equality, sustainable development
and international peace and security. On the strength of
that cooperation, Indonesia has also thrown its support
behind the more structured parliamentary component
of the work of the United Nations initiated through
resolution 65/123, of December 2010, on cooperation
between the United Nations, national parliaments and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union. As reported by the
Secretary-General, numerous activities have been
conducted among all three since 2010 (see A/66/770).
On democracy and human rights, we welcome
and commend the work of the IPU and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in preparing
the Global Parliamentary Report. The report will
be a starting point for further studies in identifying
challenges in the evolving relationship between citizens
and parliaments. We also welcome the joint meetings
and activities conducted by the United Nations and the
IPU aimed at promoting democracy at the regional and
national levels.

4

Indonesia also attaches great importance to United
Nations-IPU cooperation in promoting the role of
women in parliament. We are proud that 30 per cent
of the current members of our Parliament are women.
Moreover, Indonesia was led by a woman President just
a few years ago. Therefore, we are delighted and very
supportive of the close cooperation between UNDP and
the IPU, along with several national Governments, to
promote gender equality and women’s rights.
The cooperation between the United Nations and the
IPU has also touched upon issues that are of importance
on the current international agenda.
Since 2010, discussions and activities on
sustainable development and international peace and
security have been undertaken. We see it as progress
when a parliament, as the voice of the people, gets
involved in the discussion of substantive matters in
multilateral forums. Such involvement will infuse the
national legislative process with knowledge of issues
being considered at the multilateral level and enhance
the multilateral process thanks to access to national
stakeholders.
As mentioned in the report, we are encouraged by
the increased interaction between United Nations senior
officials with the IPU, for we are convinced that that
will raise awareness, strengthen understanding and
build political support for the important initiatives
that are currently under way in the United Nations
system. Indonesian membership together with its active
role in the IPU is a testimony to our determination
to promote parliaments’ increased contribution to
helping Governments address global challenges. The
Indonesian Parliament has also been active in advancing
cooperation with various parliamentarian organizations,
including the Parliamentary Union of Islamic Countries
(PUIG), the presidency of which is currently held by
the Indonesian Speaker of Parliament. We consider
PUIG to be an important parliamentarian organization,
the objectives of which include advancing a common
agenda on economic, social, cultural and political issues
of interest to Islamic countries.
Indonesia acknowledges and welcomes the draft
resolution before us (A/66/L.45) as introduced by
the representative of Morocco on the interaction
between the United Nations, national parliaments and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union. We take note of the
fact that the draft resoluiton was generated from the
2010 resolution (resolution 65/123), which enjoyed

12-35239

A/66/PV.111

wide support from the General Assembly. We are also
very pleased that the progress of United Nations-IPU
cooperation in the past two years has also been reflected
in the draft resolution.
Finally, in line with the position that we have taken
concerning issues relating to the cooperation between
the IPU and the United Nations during the past decade
and our active role in the IPU, Indonesia is delighted to
sponsor the draft resolution.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): I would like to start
by expressing Egypt’s sincere appreciation to His
Excellency Mr. Abdelwahed Radi, President of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) and Speaker of the
Assembly of Representatives of the Kingdom of
Morocco; to Mr. Anders B. Johnsson, Secretary General
of the IPU; and to Ambassador Anda Filip, Director of
the Office of the Permanent Observer Mission of the
IPU to the United Nations, for all the efforts they have
undertaken to strengthen the relationship between the
IPU and the United Nations. I would also like to thank
His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for all
his efforts to strengthen and develop that cooperation.
Egypt has always believed in the importance of
enhancing the cooperation between the United Nations
and the IPU, as the latter is an important organization
seeking to ensure complementarity of the roles of
Governments and parliaments in support of the United
Nations system so that it may achieve its objectives
and fulfil its mandate. As a strong advocate of the role
of national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary
Union, Egypt has played a central role in furthering the
cooperation between the United Nations and the IPU. To
that end, we introduced the current agenda item in the
General Assembly, as well as the first draft resolution
in that context in 1996. The international community’s
confidence in the accumulated experience of the IPU was
further highlighted by the proposals submitted by Egypt
that were included in the 2005 World Summit Outcome
(resolution 60/1), which stressed the importance of
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and national and regional parliaments, in particular
through the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
The IPU, through its conferences and specialized
meetings, makes valuable contributions to many
important fields, such as disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation, while addressing various challenges
of world economic and social development, including
financing for development, globalization, the

liberalization of trade, climate change, and food and
nutrition security, as well as combating the spread of
pandemics and their devastating human, economic and
social impacts. The IPU also plays an important role in
supporting the efforts of Member States to promote and
protect human rights through its close and systematic
relationship with relevant United Nations bodies. Within
that context, we encourage the IPU to work closely with
the new United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women in areas that include the
empowerment of women and gender mainstreaming,
as well as to enhance its interaction with the United
Nations on all issues of common interest.
The role of the IPU is of equal importance in the
promotion of peace, understanding and tolerance where
it actively participates in international efforts, including
those of the United Nations, to promote dialogue among
cultures, civilizations and religions.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic
Vice-President, took the Chair.

Republic

of

Iran),

Finally, as Egypt truly believes in the important role
of the IPU in supporting the international community’s
endeavours to achieve internationally agreed goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals, we
emphasize the need to continue developing and
improving the cooperative relationship of the United
Nations with the IPU, including through the active
engagement of the IPU in the major United Nations
deliberative processes and the review of international
commitments and goals.
Mr. Carnahan (United States of America): I wish to
offer special thanks to the representative of Morocco for
introducing the draft resolution before us (A/66/L.45),
on the interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU).
I also thank the 84 sponsors of the draft resolution. I
am honoured to be here today as the United States
Congressional representative to the sixty-sixth session
of the General Assembly to recognize the close ties
that are shared among the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
I also wish to acknowledge one of my early
predecessors, from over 100 years ago, the late
United States Congressman, Richard Bartholdt, who
represented my constituency in St. Louis, Missouri, in
the early 1900s. He was a German immigrant to America
and a strong advocate for legislators being engaged
in international issues and organizations, especially

12-352395

A/66/PV.111

the IPU. In fact, he was a leader in hosting the IPU’s
international conference in St. Louis during his tenure.
Today, with 162 national parliaments as members,
the IPU plays a vital role in bringing parliamentarians
from around the globe together to discuss best practices
and promote democracy worldwide. The IPU assists new
parliaments and advances the role of women, indigenous
populations and minorities in governance through its
programmes and capacity-building. By encouraging
dialogue between members, it promotes human rights,
the rule of law and gender equality. The IPU also works
daily to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
legislators and serves as a credible and practical resource
in helping to improve parliamentarians’ understanding
of the legislative process. That work is particularly
valuable to democracies such as those in the nations of
the Middle East and North Africa.
The United States firmly believes that strong
legislators are critical elements of strong democracies,
and that engaged elected legislators are critical to
maintaining engaged citizens in international initiatives.
But the work of the IPU is important not only to
emerging democracies; the IPU helps to strengthen
parliaments and increase parliamentary capacity around
the world. In democracies both new and old, dialogue
between individual parliamentarians and between the
IPU and the United Nations, such as with the draft
resolution (A/66/L.45) we have before us today, is
fundamental to this work.
The United States is pleased to join the consensus
on this draft resolution today. We are appreciative of
the opportunity and the honour to address the General
Assembly. We look forward to supporting enhanced
United Nations-IPU cooperation from Washington, D.C.
Ms. Ochir (Mongolia): Let me begin by expressing my
delegation’s deep appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (A/66/770) submitted
under agenda item 130. The report identifies major areas
of interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU)
since the adoption of resolution 65/123. In that respect,
my delegation wishes to make a few comments on the
following areas of interaction.
First, engaging parliaments in major United
Nations conferences through the IPU-led parliamentary
dimension has proved to be critical not only in terms
of incorporating their views and concerns in the

6

proceedings and outcomes; more importantly, it has
facilitated the building of political support for the
subsequent implementation of those outcomes. The
parliamentary track in the lead-up to, as well as during,
the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries is a good example. Here, my
delegation remains hopeful that the necessary funding
will be obtained so as to ensure an effective follow-up
of the Istanbul Programme of Action by parliaments
through, inter alia, a five-year joint United Nations/IPU
project.
The Istanbul Conference was not the first major
conference which benefited from an important
contribution by parliaments. In 2003, when Mongolia
hosted the Fifth International Conference of New or
Restored Democracies, a parliamentary forum was an
integral part of the tripartite structure of the Conference,
along with the intergovernmental process and a civil
society forum. The parliamentary forum led by the IPU
significantly contributed to the Ulaanbaatar Declaration
and Plan of Action on Democracy, Good Governance
and Civil Society and its effective follow-up process.
My delegation therefore wishes to express its strong
support for the Secretary-General’s recommendation
to more systematically facilitate the inclusion of
a substantive parliamentary component in major
international processes, especially in the light of the
upcoming global review of the implementation of the
Millennium Development Goals, the elaboration of
the post-2015 development agenda and the charting
of a road map for its implementation. To that end, we
believe that annual parliamentary hearings at the United
Nations could also be utilized.
Secondly, closer involvement by Parliaments
in and their oversight of international commitments
represent, in our view, another important area that
has great potential for interaction. As the report of
the Secretary-General rightly states, parliaments have
a wide range of tools at their disposal to ensure that
national laws, policies, actions, programmes and budgets
reflect the principles and obligations undertaken by
Governments at international conferences. We welcome
the important work done in that respect by the relevant
United Nations agencies, in close cooperation with
the IPU, in developing handbooks, guides and other
tools for parliamentarians. In furthering such work, a
comparative study could be useful on best practices
among parliaments relative to how their oversight has
led to the better implementation of the commitments

12-35239

A/66/PV.111

undertaken by respective Governments on aid
allocation, aid effectiveness, the MDGs, the elimination
of discrimination against women, gender budgeting, the
rights of the child, the rights of persons with disabilities
and other relevant commitments.
My delegation also commends the important work
carried out by the IPU in support of United Nations
human rights treaty bodies, including the Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
as well as the Human Rights Council, particularly as
concerns the universal periodic review of the fulfilment
by Member States of human rights obligations and
commitments. We trust that the experience gained by the
IPU in relation to the Committee will be effectively used
in the future with other United Nations treaty bodies, in
particular with the Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and the Committee on the Rights of the
Child.
Thirdly, greater involvement on the part of
parliaments in the elaboration of national development
strategies is critical for their effective implementation,
in terms of both creating an enabling legal environment
and ensuring the allocation of the necessary resources.
In Mongolia, both the MDGs and the MDG-based
comprehensive development strategy were developed
with the participation of the Parliament and subsequently
adopted by parliamentary resolution, thus becoming
law. In its resolution of April 2005, the Parliament of
Mongolia endorsed the national MDGs and entrusted
the relevant State entities with their implementation
and monitoring, and provided for the allocation of the
necessary resources in the annual State budgets. It also
mandated the Government to report to the Parliament
on the progress achieved in the implementation of the
MDGs every two years. Here I wish also to highlight
that in addition to the eight global MDGs, Mongolia has
initiated and integrated a ninth goal, on “strengthening
human rights and fostering democratic governance”,
into its MDGs as an innovative step reflecting the
inseparable link between development, human rights
and democracy.
In concluding, may I convey my delegation’s firm
belief that interaction between the United Nations and
the IPU has evolved over the past decade and a half
to encompass virtually all major areas of policy. In
view of those developments, we strongly support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that a new
cooperation agreement be concluded between the United

Nations and the IPU, as reflected in draft resolution
A/66/L.45, which Mongolia is privileged to co-sponsor.
Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
appreciates the opportunity to address the General
Assembly at this meeting devoted to the question
of interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU).
This allows us to acknowledge parliamentary diplomacy
and its contribution to our Organization in attaining the
objective of a world of development, full respect for
human rights, peace and security.
Since its creation in the late nineteenth century and
beginning with the recognition of its consultative status
and subsequently its status as a permanent observer,
acquired in 2002, the IPU has increased the quantity
and quality of its participation in and contribution to the
various global processes.
Clearly, its work has also strengthened the
efforts of national parliaments in becoming involved
in global governance and promoted transparency
and accountability in areas such as, inter alia, the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), human rights,
international law, democracy and gender equality.
Member States have recognized the importance of
fostering intergovernmental debate through the inputs
of various sectors of our societies, such as civil society
organizations, the private sector, local authorities and
Parliaments.
As a result, the outcome documents are more
comprehensive because they involve many visions and
participants. In particular, there is a greater possibility
that they will be complied with because the participants
themselves share responsibility for their implementation.
Mexico is convinced that the cooperation of
parliamentarians and the Inter-Parliamentary Union
with the United Nations should be promoted and
strengthened. To that end, Mexico’s delegations to
major international conferences have included national
parliamentarians for several years. We have also begun
to ensure that conferences receive and analyse proposals
from parliamentarians and the IPU. In that connection,
Mexico is a sponsor of draft resolution A/66/L.45 with
a view to strengthening such efforts. We believe that
the cooperation agreement between the Organization
and the IPU should be renewed in order to recognize
the new reality of the IPU and fully benefit from its
capabilities. Moreover, we fully support parliamentary

12-352397

A/66/PV.111

contributions to debates of the Human Rights Council
and treaty bodies, and the acceptance and analysis of
their input into important topical processes, such as the
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues and the rule of
law debate.
Parliaments are important participants in the
international arena, complementing countries’ external
efforts. Their active role fosters and strengthens our
international efforts. We support their cooperation with
our Organization.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I am happy to
participate in today’s plenary meeting on agenda item
130, “Interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union”. We
welcome the Secretary-General’s report on the subject
(A/66/770), which is a comprehensive catalogue of
some of the modalities and examples of interaction
between the United Nations, national parliaments and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) over the past two
years.
We are also happy to be a sponsor of draft resolution
A/66/L.45 on the subject, which, among other things,
calls for the inclusion in the provisional agenda of the
General Assembly’s sixty-eighth session of the item
“Interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union”. Let me
also place on record our appreciation for the work done
by the Permanent Mission of Morocco in that regard.
India is the largest democracy in the world. The
success of the democratic principle and all the institutions
that it entails has defined my country and its approach to
relations with the rest of the world. It is no wonder, then,
that we have placed great emphasis on the work of the
General Assembly ever since we first joined the United
Nations. In fact, even as early as the Assembly’s eighth
session in 1953, an Indian, Mrs. Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit,
had the singular honour of presiding over this Hall.
This year, 2012, also happens to mark the sixtieth
anniversary of the first sitting of the Indian Parliament.
Speaking on that occasion, our Prime Minister,
Mr. Manmohan Singh, said,
“The story of the Indian Parliament is a story
of human striving for freedom and dignity, for
tolerance and equality, for peace and progress. Our
Parliament has not just voiced the concerns and
aspirations of the Indian people alone, but those of
all humankind, of every freedom-loving person who

8

seeks a life of dignity and peace. Our Parliament
stands as a unique representation of the values
that created our republic: of unity in diversity, of
secularism, of pluralism and the rule of law. How
we conduct ourselves, how the Parliament conducts
itself, is therefore a way of showing respect to those
values and to the memory of those who created
and built this symbol of freedom and dignity. Each
one of us owes it to those who sent us here to not
only represent their views and their interests but to
do so with dignity, compassion and decorum. Our
democracy has passed through many testing times.
At every turn the people of India have with great
enthusiasm and hope reiterated their faith in the
democratic character of our State and reaffirmed
the pluralistic character of our polity and society.
Among democracies around the world India has one
of the highest voter turn-outs in elections.”
The Inter-Parliamentary Union, which is the world
organization of 162 national parliaments, has done
yeoman service over the last decade or so in promoting
closer coherence and interaction with the United
Nations and its activities. The areas to which the IPU
has contributed include peacebuilding, human rights,
gender equality, economic and social development,
international law, the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals, protecting the interests of least
developed countries and the like. Of particular relevance
is the role that the IPU and its members are playing,
and should continue to play, in the years to come,
and which have led to the cementing of a culture of
multilateralism and internationalism in today’s world.
As the Secretary-General rightly points out in his report,
“parliaments and their members have a vital role
to play in ensuring respect for, and implementation
of, international commitments. Parliaments have
a wide range of tools at their disposal to ensure
that national laws, policies, actions, programmes
and budgets reflect the principles and obligations
contained in various international instruments”
(A/66/770, para. 20).
This has been most evident in the context of gender
issues, in particular the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. We are
of the view that such trends must be strengthened and
encouraged.
An important pillar of the ongoing interaction
between national parliaments and the United Nations

12-35239

A/66/PV.111

is the practice by various Member States of including
legislators as members of national delegations to United
Nations meetings and events. Many of those here will
have witnessed active participation by some of India’s
finest parliamentarians in the Assembly, the Security
Council and the various committees during the period
from October through November every year. We have
found that tradition to be very useful, both for the
visiting legislators as well as for us here in New York.
We intend to continue that practice, and I am happy to
note that it finds special mention in the draft resolution.
In conclusion, permit me to reiterate that India
attaches importance to the role of the IPU and the
interaction between the IPU, national parliaments and
the United Nations. We will play our role in pushing that
interaction forward.
Mr. Mihuţ (Romania): I am honoured to express
Romania’s support for an important element of the
international cooperation connecting the democratic
processes at the national and international levels and
nurturing more direct involvement in global affairs by
constituencies all over the world.
The Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), the world
organization of national parliaments, plays a crucial role
in bringing together legislative bodies and legislators
from all continents into the work of the United Nations.
As a sponsor of draft resolution A/66/L.45 on interaction
between national parliaments, the United Nations and the
IPU, Romania supports more systematic engagement on
the part of the United Nations with the IPU in organizing
and integrating a parliamentary component of and
contribution to the major United Nations deliberative
processes and reviews of international commitments, in
accordance with the provisions of resolution 65/123.
Cooperation among national parliaments, the
United Nations and the IPU is of the utmost importance
to all parties — a win-win process — due to the fact that
solid parliamentary support for the United Nations and
the implementation of multilateral agreements boosts
the global role of the United Nations and keeps national
parliaments connected to international topical issues.
Democratic governance, national dialogue and
reconciliation, respect and promotion for human rights
and enhanced development effectiveness must continue
to represent shared values of all entities. The architecture
of the next generation of global development goals must
benefit from a substantial parliamentary contribution. In
an international system aiming to strengthen the rule of

law and democratic governance, stronger parliamentary
involvement is to be recommended in order to identify
viable solutions to major global issues and to work
towards their implementation.
The Parliament of Romania, represented by the
Romanian group at the IPU, is an active contributor
to the thematic debates and to the drafting of IPU
resolutions that address many issues, such as fighting
organized crime, the transparency of the financing of
political parties and electoral campaigns, ensuring
sustainable development through the management of
natural resources, agricultural products and demographic
changes, and the enhancement of health for women and
children.
For the sake of all the reasons I have set out, Romania
fully supports a new cooperation agreement between
the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union
in order to better reflect the deepening and widening
interaction between those two international bodies.
Mrs. Pacunega Manano (Uganda): I thank
the President for organizing today’s debate on the
important issue before us. Uganda welcomes the
increasing interaction between the United Nations,
national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union
as highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General
(A/66/770).
Our deliberations on the draft resolution that
we are considering for adoption today (A/66/L.45)
provide an opportunity for advancing and concretizing
the cooperation between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union. In the
2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1), world
leaders called for strengthened cooperation between the
United Nations and national and regional parliaments,
in particular through the Inter-Parliamentary Union,
with a view to furthering all aspects of the United
Nations Millennium Declaration (resolution 55/2) in all
fields of the work of the United Nations and to ensuring
the effective implementation of United Nations reform.
We are convinced that enhancing that cooperation will
result in mobilizing greater parliamentary support for
the United Nations, contributing to the implementation
of multilateral agreements and reform of global
governance. There is no doubt that global action is
required to respond more effectively to challenges that
transcend national borders, such as the financial and
economic crisis, food crisis, volatility, energy deficits,
climate change, terrorism and transnational crime,
which threaten the future of humankind.

12-352399

A/66/PV.111

The Inter-Parliamentary Union assemblies continue
to provide a unique and valuable forum for the
engagement of national parliaments and legislatures,
not only in seeking solutions to key global issues but
also in working towards the implementation of agreed
outcomes and commitments. Uganda was therefore
honoured to host the 126th Inter-Parliamentary Union
Assembly in Kampala from 31 March to 5 April, under
the theme “Parliaments and people: bridging the gap”.
That Assembly adopted a number of resolutions on key
issues, including ownership of the international agenda,
good governance and access to health as a basic right.
We commend the increasing engagement with the
Inter-Parliamentary Union in integrating a parliamentary
component and contribution to major United Nations
deliberative processes and their review of international
commitments in accordance with resolution 65/123.
My delegation recalls, in that regard, the valuable
contributions made by parliaments during the sixteenth
and seventeenth Conferences of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, held
in Cancún and Durban, respectively, as well as the fourth
United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries, held in Istanbul. Given the representative
political oversight and resource-allocation roles of
parliaments and legislatures at the national level, their
involvement can significantly contribute to providing
impetus to the implementation of agreed outcomes
and to fulfilment of commitments. In our quest for the
reform of global governance institutions, including the
United Nations, particularly the Security Council, as
well as international financial institutions, parliaments
and legislatures can also make a valuable contribution.
Finally, as the target date for the achievement
of the Millennium Development Goals nears, with
many developing countries, particularly in Africa,
unlikely to meet the targets by 2015, we call upon the
Inter-Parliamentary Union to intensify its efforts in
mobilizing parliamentary support for the fulfilment of
those commitments.
Mr. Repkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation attaches great
importance to international parliamentary cooperation.
The Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation is an
active participant in universal and regional structures
and is in constant cooperation with the United Nations.
The extensive programme of international working
relationships and communications of the Russian
Federation’s Federal Assembly is an integral part of

10

our country’s foreign policy, which aims at achieving
unswerving compliance with international norms. Such
cooperation is of great practical importance. Due to it,
the legal framework is being improved, issues related
to the harmonization of legislation are being resolved
and legislative support is being provided for decisions
of the State.
The Russian Federation takes note with satisfaction
of the role of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU)
as a facilitator in improving relations between the
parliaments of various countries and the United Nations
for the purposes of strengthening and broadening
international cooperation. The result of such work is
evident in the fact that a growing number of parliaments
of various States are attending international meetings
and more parliaments are in the process of creating
special committees to deal directly with issues related
to United Nations activities.
Today, the steady convergence of the programmes
and actions of the United Nations and the IPU is
palpable. Joint parliamentary hearings have become
an important arena for the interaction of members of
national parliaments, the leadership of the United
Nations and representatives of Governments on the
entire spectrum of current global issues, such as peace
and security, the economy, social policy and human
rights. Moreover, the potential for interaction among
national parliaments, the Inter-Parliamentary Union and
the United Nations has not yet been fully tapped. In that
context, it is necessary to continue the dialogue that has
already begun, which, first and foremost, is aimed at
achieving the most important goals in the area of strict
observance of human rights throughout the world.
The draft resolution that will be adopted by
consensus today, on the interaction between the
United Nations, national parliaments and the
Inter-Parliamentary Union (A/66/L.45), which the
Russian Federation has sponsored along with others,
provides great opportunities to achieve those goals.
Of particular importance is the role of the IPU in
establishing and strengthening parliamentary institutes
in countries emerging from conflict situations, as well
as in those that are making the transition to democacy. It
is necessary to make every effort to achieve other goals
as well, such as ensuring peace and security, economic
and social development, the primacy of international
law, human rights and democracy, gender equality and
the expansion of opportunities for women.

12-35239

A/66/PV.111

Furthermore, it is important to focus the efforts of
the Inter-Parliamentary Union on providing assistance
to national parliaments, particularly in post-conflict
countries, strengthening the rule of law and bringing
national legislations into line with international
obligations.
Mr. Mottaghi Nejad (Islamic Republic of Iran):
On behalf of my delegation, I would like to thank the
sponsors for presenting draft resolution A/66/L.45,
entitled “Interaction between the United Nations,
national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary
Union”. In that regard, I would like to make a few brief
remarks.
It is evident that the resolutions and decisions that we
adopt at the United Nations may frequently appeal to the
national parliaments of Member States to play their role
in implementing the provisions of those resolutions and
decisions. For that reason, cooperation among national
parliaments of Member States, the Inter-Parliamentary
Union (IPU) and the United Nations is considered
to be of great importance to the goals and purposes
whose implementation the United Nations pursues at
the national level. In fact, the kind of work that is done
by the United Nations could be of great guidance to the
planning of national goals and plans, as well.
Considering the current developments in
international relations, the Inter-Parliamentary Union
faces greater duties and responsibilities. The past
cooperation between the Inter-Parliamentary Union and
the United Nations has seen significant achievements
to date. There is a need to evaluate and assess
measures already taken by the United Nations and their
implications and application for national parliaments
of Member States and to explore ways and means of
enhancing their role in the work of the United Nations
in areas applicable to national parliaments.

join consensus on the draft resolution before us. We
believe that it would greatly help us to regulate such
contacts and mutual cooperation.
The Acting President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 57/32, of 19 November 2002, I
now call on the President of the Inter-Parliamentary
Union.
Mr. Radi (Inter-Parliamentary Union) (spoke
in French): It is a great honour for me to address the
General Assembly for the first time in my capacity as
President of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU). I
take this opportunity to pay tribute to my predecessor,
Theo-Ben Gurirab, Speaker of the Namibian Parliament,
who also served as President of the General Assembly
at its fifty-fourth session, for his vision and his hard
work. I, in turn, pledge to spare no effort in continuing
to enhance the interaction between the United Nations
Organization, parliaments and the IPU.
Ten years ago, in the autumn of 2002, the IPU was
granted Permanent Observer status to the United Nations.
Our relationship has significantly developed since
then. The most recent report of the Secretary-General
(A/66/770), which has been prepared for our discussion
today, bears testimony to what we have managed to
achieve together. Allow me to mention a few aspects of
our engagement.

There is also a need to identify and explore new areas
of cooperation between our Organization and the Union.
We would recommend more frequent consultations
between the President of the Inter-Parliamentary Union
and the Secretary-General of the United Nations. The
IPU should not limit its role as an Observer to the
United Nations. Rather, it should directly participate in
the relevant activities of the United Nations.

Parliaments and parliamentarians increasingly
take an active part in implementing international
commitments. The area where that cooperation is most
systematic is in the context of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women. The IPU works with parliaments of the
countries under review so that they can participate in
the review process, provide input to the national report,
attend the sessions of the Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women, and receive its
findings for consideration and action by parliament.
At each of its sessions, the Committee then verifies
the level of parliamentary involvement in drafting the
reports. On the basis on that experience, we hope to
establish similar forms of cooperation with other United
Nations treaty bodies, as well as with the Human Rights
Council, in particular in the context of the universal
periodic review.

The Islamic Republic of Iran has made great efforts
to promote the role of parliament and to advance the
goals and purposes as defined and set forth by the IPU
and the United Nations. In that spirit, we support and

Over the years, we have also been working to
develop a meaningful parliamentary component to the
major United Nations processes. The parliamentary
track of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the

12-3523911

A/66/PV.111

Least Developed Countries last year was one of our most
successful initiatives in that regard. The parliaments of
many least developed countries have already directly
participated in the national progress reviews of the
Brussels Programme of Action. The IPU has held
consultations with parliamentarians in order to garner
their views on the new agreement for the period 20112020 and to then reflect that input in the United Nations
process. The Parliamentary Forum held in Istanbul on
the sidelines of the Fourth United Nations Conference
on the Least Developed Countries helped to provide
stronger political support for the Istanbul Programme
of Action. Lastly, there was a proposal for a five-year
joint United Nations-IPU project to help mainstream
the Istanbul Programme of Action in the work of
parliaments, whose implementation, we understand,
will start shortly.
Every year, in close cooperation with the Office
of the President of the General Assembly, we have
been convening a joint parliamentary hearing at the
United Nations. That gathering has provided a unique
opportunity for legislators to engage with senior United
Nations officials, representatives of permanent missions
and experts on issues that are high on the global agenda.
We are pleased to see that the draft resolution before
the Assembly today calls for this annual parliamentary
hearing at the United Nations to be more closely linked
to major United Nations processes, so as to help inform
those processes from a parliamentary perspective. We
welcome the prospect of further pursuing that work.
Finally, the report of the Secretary-General refers
to the nature of the relationship between the United
Nations system and national parliaments. All too
often, we have observed that development partners
primarily consider parliaments as recipients of technical
assistance and less as political players with a voice
on matters relating to national development strategies
or budget oversight. That needs to change. If we truly
wish to promote democratic governance, parliaments
need to be acknowledged, respected and included in
national consultations on matters of crucial interest for
the citizens they were elected to represent.
I myself come from a region that is undergoing
fundamental changes towards greater political
transparency and accountability. The core mission of
the IPU is to promote democracy and help build strong
parliaments. Over the past year alone, from Egypt to
Tunisia, Bahrain to Libya and to Oman, the IPU has
anticipated the needs of parliaments and has responded

12

to their requests to help strengthen their capacities. In
so doing, the IPU does not act alone, but brings with it
the talent and expertise of its member parliaments. We
welcome the fact that the General Assembly calls for
greater coherence and closer cooperation between the
United Nations and the IPU in support of parliamentary
institutions, particularly in countries emerging from
conflict and in transition to democracy.
I think we can all agree that there is a real need
for greater transparency at both the national and
international levels. The United Nations has been
gradually opening up to other major stakeholders,
in particular civil society and the private sector. That
has helped to partially address the challenge of the
democracy gap in international relations. We believe
that the enhanced partnership with the IPU has also
brought its own contribution, helping to make the work
of the United Nations better known and more accessible
to legislators, while at the same time allowing for a
certain measure of parliamentary oversight.
As far as we are concerned, we see the cooperation
between the United Nations and the IPU as a two-way
relationship. We see it as a partnership that is mutually
beneficial. Of course, much remains to be done, but we
feel that we are on the right track towards our goal, which
is to promote a parliamentary dimension in the work of
the United Nations. We look forward to our future work
with the United Nations System Chief Executives Board
for Coordination to build greater coherence in our joint
initiatives, and we plan on revising the cooperation
agreement between our two organizations, which is
outdated.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Morocco, Ambassador Loulichki,
for leading the consultations with Member States and
presenting a substantive and promising draft resolution.
I would also like to thank all the Missions that have
sponsored this draft resolution, in particular those that
have taken the time to participate in this discussion
today. The IPU and our member parliaments greatly
value this relationship. We are determined to work hard
in strengthening the United Nations as the cornerstone
of international cooperation, while helping to promote
the contribution of parliaments to the major issues
facing the international community.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/66/L.45 entitled “Interaction

12-35239

A/66/PV.111

between the United Nations, national parliaments and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union”.

Netherlands, and his team for having coordinated this
draft resolution until the previous session.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

The draft resolution before us has some new
elements with respect to the previous session’s
resolution. First, in the sixth paragraph of the preamble,
the General Assembly acknowledges the fact that
the International Criminal Court (ICC) has achieved
considerable progress in its analyses, investigations and
judicial proceedings in situations and cases referred to
it by States parties and by the Security Council, as well
as those which the Prosecutor of the Court has initiated
proprio motu in accordance with the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court.

Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
A/66/L.45: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Azerbaijan, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Canada, China, Cyprus, Denmark, Equatorial
Guinea, Gabon, Georgia, Guatemala, Honduras,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Japan, Jordan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lichtenstein, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Pakistan, Panama, the
Republic of Moldova, the Russian Federation, Rwanda,
San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Sri
Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Ukraine and the United Republic
of Tanzania.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/66/L.45?
Draft resolution A/66/L.45 was adopted (resolution
66/261).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 130?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 75 (continued)
Report of the International Criminal Court
Draft resolution (A/66/L.47)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly considered agenda item 75 at its 44th and
47th plenary meetings, on 26 October and 1 November
2011, respectively.
I now give the floor to the representative of Japan to
introduce draft resolution A/66/L.47.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): It is my great honour to
introduce, under agenda item 75, draft resolution
A/66/L.47, entitled “Report of the International Criminal
Court”. At the outset, I would like to thank Ambassador
Herman Schaper, Permanent Representative of the

Also in the preamble, a paragraph that reads “Noting
the need for funding of expenses related to investigations
or prosecutions of the International Criminal Court,
including in connection with situations referred to the
Court by the Security Council” has been inserted.
In the operative part, paragraph 6 recalls article 3 of
the Relationship Agreement between the United Nations
and the Court, as well as the need to respect each other’s
status and mandate, and requests the Secretary-General
to include information relevant to the implementation
of article 3 in his report to be submitted pursuant to
operative paragraph 11.
In paragraph 11, the words “all aspects of” have been
added. The paragraph now reads, in part, “emphasizes
the importance of the full implementation of all aspects
of the Relationship Agreement”.
In paragraph 12, the General Assembly, recalling
the referrals to the ICC already made by the Security
Council, also invites all States to consider voluntary
contributions to bear the expenses related to
investigations or prosecutions of the ICC, including
in connection with situations referred by the Council.
I recognize that starting an operative paragraph with
the progressive form is not the usual practice from the
editorial viewpoint. It is my understanding, however,
that, even with that knowledge, the Member States
wish to take action on the text before us as it is the only
acceptable formulation to be arrived at after extensive
negotiations. I would like to thank the President and his
team for their support and understanding.
Let me speak in my national capacity of the
ICC in general and its relationship with the United
Nations. First of all, we welcome the seven new States
Parties — Grenada, Tunisia, the Philippines, Maldives,

12-3523913

A/66/PV.111

Cape Verde, Vanuatu and Guatemala — that have joined
our effort to fight against impunity since the adoption of
resolution 65/12. As President Sang-Hyun Song of the
Court mentioned during his introduction of the report
to the Assembly in November (see A/66/PV.44), a new
chapter will open for the ICC as this year marks its tenth
anniversary. In this connection, I would like to express
my appreciation to the President of the Assembly of
States Parties, Ambassador Tiina Intelmann of Estonia,
for her tremendous work coordinating all the efforts to
commemorate the anniversary both inside and outside of
the Assembly of States Parties.
In opening the next chapter of the Court’s history,
however, we have already found challenges to overcome,
such as universality, complementarity, cooperation,
non-cooperation, victims assistance, reparation,
ratification of the crimes of aggression clauses, referrals
by the Security Council and the budget of the Court,
to list but a few. To tackle those challenges, not only
should the States parties cooperate with the Court, but
also cooperation by States not parties is necessary; and
close cooperation and consultation between the United
Nations and the ICC are indispensable as well. To this
end, it is of high importance to have discussions on the
ICC at the General Assembly.
In order for us, the international community as a
whole — States parties and non-parties alike — to fight
impunity and have the rule of law prevail, we should
redouble our efforts and move in unison as we proceed
into the future of the Court.
The draft resolution before us is, as in previous years,
the result of very extensive consultations that comprised
the whole membership of the United Nations, that is
to say, the States parties and non-parties to the Rome
Statute. Therefore, I would like to thank all Member
States, and I sincerely hope that the draft resolution will
be adopted by consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft resolution A/66/L.47, entitled “Report of
the International Criminal Court”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I should like to announce that,

14

since the submission of the draft resolution, in addition
to those delegations listed in document A/66/L.47, the
following countries have become sponsors of the draft
resolution: Albania, Andorra, Costa Rica, Georgia,
Ghana, Honduras, Paraguay and San Marino.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/66/L.47?
Draft resolution A/66/L.47 was adopted (resolution
66/262).
The Acting President: I shall now call on the
representative of the Sudan, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
May I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
representatives from their seats.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of the Sudan would like to reiterate that it
will cooperate with all members of the international
community in the process of entrenching the concept
of international justice. However, we are opposed to the
politicization of that concept by any party. I would also
like to state that we are opposed to impunity.
The delegation of the Sudan is not a party to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
and has reservations relating to the past conduct of the
ICC Prosecutor, which was neither neutral nor impartial
and was aimed at politicizing international justice.
The Sudan therefore wishes to register its position
on draft resolution A/66/L.47, entitled “Report of the
International Criminal Court”. We do not believe that
the resolution is binding on the Sudan, and we declare
our reservations thereon for the reasons we have just
outlined.
We ask that our position be recorded in the records
of this meeting.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 75?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

12-35239
