S/PV.7873

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7873rd meeting

Friday, 27 January 2017, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Skoog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Barro
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Klein
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2017/21)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-02242 (E)
*1702242*

S/PV.7873

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.

grounds should be resisted. It is also essential that the
last stage of this process be conducted transparently,
according to the rules that have been agreed and that
have been designed to ensure a free and fair election.
All candidates must honour the provisions of the code of
conduct they signed when registering their candidacy.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2017/21)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Abdusalam Hadliyeh Omer, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Investment Promotion of the Federal
Republic of Somalia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Michael
Keating, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia; Mr. Francisco Caetano
Jose Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head
of the African Union Mission in Somalia; and Ms. Asha
Gelle Dirie, founder and Executive Director of the Asha
Gelle Foundation.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/21, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Keating.
Mr. Keating: We meet at an auspicious moment,
at the conclusion of an extended and exhaustive
parliamentary electoral process and just 12 days before
the election of a new President. We also meet at a time
when Al-Shabaab is doing everything it can to discredit
and disrupt the process, as we are seeing in Mogadishu
and in the attack in Kulbiyo today. Allow me to extend
my deepest condolences to the families of the soldiers
and civilians whose lives have been lost.
An immediate priority is to ensure that the date
set by the Joint Federal Election Committee for the
presidential vote is adhered to. The date has been set on
technical grounds, and pressures to change it on political
2/12

27/01/2017

This is particularly important because the
parliamentary stage of the process was marred by
several instances of malpractice, including bribery
and vote-buying, harassment and intimidation, and
manipulation as well as repeated and protracted delays.
Some were high-profile and egregious, though the
majority of contests were correctly conducted. They
were widely watched, including through social media.
The electoral process has held up a mirror to
Somalis in which they have seen the good and the bad
regarding how power is exercised, the relationship
between elders, clan power brokers, politicians,
business, ordinary citizens, women and men. They do
not like everything they have seen, least of all the levels
of corruption and the absence of institutions that can
ensure legal and financial accountability.
Many important lessons have been learned. The ad
hoc electoral bodies have done a remarkable job, but
had difficulties withstanding political pressure, threats
and inducements. The electoral timetable was subject
to repeated delays, often because the process was used
to try to resolve very long-standing disputes between
clans, states and other actors.
The point is that the process was essentially a
political one, used for inter- and intra-clan negotiations
and reconciliation, and should be in part evaluated as
such. The electoral features were essential, as they set
the stage for the move to universal suffrage.
These lessons must be addressed in planning the
one-person, one-vote elections scheduled for 2020. The
National Independent Electoral Commission needs to
be empowered, a voter registry established and a robust
legal mechanism put in place to adjudicate disputes and
sanction abusive behavior. Efforts in this regard must
begin as soon as the electoral process concludes.
Despite the problems it has faced, the process
has had very encouraging outcomes and marks an
important milestone in Somalia’s evolution and postconflict transformation. An Upper House has come
into existence, its 54 members chosen on a federal
State rather than a clan basis. This embodiment of the
17-02242

27/01/2017

The situation in Somalia

S/PV.7873

emerging federal character of Somalia could play a
central role in advancing a genuinely national agenda.

the centre and locally, both to generate revenues and
provide services.

The number of voters has significantly increased.
The electorate was expanded from 135 men in 2012 to
more than 13,000 individuals, 30 per cent of whom are
women. Almost a quarter of the members of Parliament
are now women, a truly remarkable achievement and the
result of an effective political mobilization supported
by the United Nations and the international community
and some Somali leaders.

Unfortunately, there is also a fifth, urgent priority:
responding to the current drought. Five million people
are estimated to be in need around the country, from
Somaliland and Puntland in the north to coastal areas
in the centre and Jubaland in the south. An estimated
320,000 children under 5 are acutely malnourished.
Coping capacities have been eroded to the point
of collapse.

There has been genuine electoral competition.
Voting took place in six locations around the country,
again reflecting emerging federal State structures. The
new Parliament is younger, more diverse and likely to
be more responsive to the electorate than the previous
one. In short, this Parliament is more legitimate and
representative than any since the last elections were
held, in 1969.

The drought response plan seeks $864 million,
$300 million of which is required in the first quarter
of this year. The Famine Early Warning System
Network reports that famine is now looming and that
urgent action to ramp up assistance and ensure access
is needed to mitigate the potential for a large-scale
loss of life. The drought also has serious political and
security implications. It is exacerbating competition for
resources such as water and intensifying local conflicts.
The number of displaced persons is visibly growing.
Reports and images of malnutrition are circulating on
social media.

And despite the horrendous attack by Al-Shabaab
on a hotel used by parliamentarians in Mogadishu only
two days ago, terrorists have been unable to derail the
electoral process. This in and of itself is an important
message. Mogadishu will remain an unusually targetrich environment until the presidential election is
concluded, another reason why the schedule should not
be allowed to slip.
Let me pay tribute here also to the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and to the
Somali security and intelligence forces for protecting
electoral sites around the country. They deserve
great credit for fulfilling a dangerous job in very
difficult circumstances.
The election of a President accepted as legitimate by
the population and by the international community will
set the stage for Somalia to tackle the serious challenges
ahead. However, if voting for the next President is not
secret or seen as compromised by corruption, coercion
or external interference, then the country could face a
protracted period of uncertainty.
This is the last thing Somalia needs. Somalis expect
and deserve an administration that will address a number
of urgent priorities. Many of these are on the agenda of
the presidential candidates, including the incumbent.
Let me name four: reform of the security sector;
acceleration of the constitutional review; reconciliation
and the resolution of many festering conflicts around
the country; and strengthening governance, at both

The perceived inability of the federal and local
governments to respond will damage their legitimacy
and will be exploited by Al-Shabaab. The drought is
being cited by Somaliland as a key factor in postponing
its elections from March until October. Revenues from
the livestock trade are dropping, and financial resources
committed to drought response will impact public and
security-sector payroll commitments. In a nutshell,
failure to support the drought response could halt and
even undermine the pursuit of key State-building and
peacebuilding objectives.
Security-sector reform must not be delayed or
derailed. The prospects for peace and stability depend
upon Somalis assuming greater political and financial
responsibility for their own security. A plan for
achieving this is urgently required.
AMISOM and the troop-contributing countries,
as they have made clear, will not stay forever. Their
presence has been and remains indispensable to
securing Somalia, to creating the space for the federal
State-building project and to protecting the elections.
They will not stay unless the immediate funding issues
are addressed and unless they believe that there is a
credible plan whereby the Somali security forces and
police are able to hold those areas that have been
liberated from Al-Shabaab.

17-022423/12

S/PV.7873

The situation in Somalia

The 20 per cent cut in the European Union’s
(EU) generous support for the African Union (AU) in
Somalia is a source of great concern. AMISOM funding
needs to be put on a sustainable and predictable basis.
I urge the Council to review the options for doing this,
including the use of assessed contributions. The Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia will no doubt address
the Council on these matters, including the need for
immediate support for the planned offensive against
Al-Shabaab.
But even as the financial problem is addressed, the
larger issue of sustainable security in Somalia remains,
given additional urgency by the stated intention of
several troop-contributing countries to leave. Key to
this will be building Somali national security forces,
whether army, police, maritime or intelligence, that
reflect the emerging federal State; that are trusted by
all Somalis and not seen as monopolized by certain
clans; that are accountable to the political leadership;
and that are affordable.
Years of investment by the international community
have yielded limited results. Al-Shabaab is degraded but
remains a potent threat. One reason is that the approach
to security has in the past been largely military and
operational. That is of course essential, but not enough.
The imperative for the incoming President and
Government is to reach a political agreement among
Somalis regarding the architecture, ownership, funding
and purpose of the security forces as the basis for
more coherent and coordinated international support
by the international community, notably the African
Union, the United Nations and its partners. I hope the
necessary elements can be put in place by the time of
the next high-level conference on Somalia, scheduled to
take place in London in May.
The African Union and the United Nations are
committed to working closely together with major
investors, the broader international community and
the new Somali Administration on a comprehensive
approach to security. That effort must draw upon
the respective capacities and strengths of the key
stakeholders, whether in funding and supporting
AMISOM, building Somali national security forces,
establishing and extending the rule of law and State
authority at the local level or preventing and countering
violent extremism.
4/12

27/01/2017

Sustainable security and Somalia’s sovereignty
require a reduction in its heavy financial dependence
upon the outside world, as well as success in raising
domestic revenues for the provision of public
goods, including the rule of law and security. The
international financial institutions have a critical role
to strengthen financial management capacities and
accountability mechanisms.
Another priority is the resumption of the
constitutional review process to address critical
outstanding political issues. Those include the
delineation of responsibilities between the President
and the Prime Minister and between the Upper House
and the House of the People, as well as between the
respective roles and responsibilities of the Federal
Government and the Federal member states in a range
of areas, including resource- and revenue-sharing, the
judicial system and the road map towards one-person,
one-vote elections. The agreement reached between the
Federal Government and member states on policing
sets a good precedent; it now needs to be implemented.
The constitutional review process is all the more
meaningful now that the Federal map of Somalia
is complete, with the creation of Hir-Shabelle in
November. The electoral process has put into sharp
relief the many unresolved disputes and conflicts
around the country. The most high profile are between
Somaliland and Somalia, and the dispute in Galkayo,
but there are at least half a dozen others, any one of
which has the potential to turn violent at great human
and political cost. My Somali interlocutors have made
it clear that they want the United Nations, working
with its AU, EU and Intergovernmental Authority on
Development partners, to focus on building Somali
capacities to prevent and resolve conflicts and to
support reconciliation processes. Grounding that
political process in the rule of law, with a strong and
constructive role by the new Parliament, could be one
of the strongest guarantors of long-term stability and
durable governance reform in Somalia.
Ordinary Somalis must benefit from our collective
efforts. Significant work remains to be done to improve
the country’s dismal human rights situation. I am
particularly concerned by the plight of children affected
by armed conflict and the unacceptable incidence of
abduction and forced recruitment by Al-Shabaab. The
majority of its militants consist of children deliberately
targeted in communities and areas under Al-Shabaab’s
control. I would like to add my voice to that of Secretary17-02242

27/01/2017

The situation in Somalia

General Guterres, as he highlighted in his recent report
(S/2016/1098) on children and armed conflict, to speak
out against that alarming situation.
As requested by the Security Council, the United
Nations family has started a review of its presence in
Somalia, with a view to supporting the next political
cycle and, in particular, to addressing the priorities I
have just outlined. I would like to mention that, given
the postponements of the electoral process, the review
will obviously not be completed by the end of this
month. However, we intend to engage with the new
Government as soon as possible and to revert to the
Council in the coming months.
Allow me to conclude by thanking members of the
Council for their unified position on Somalia and the
support that I and my Office are receiving from them.
As I have said before, progress in Somalia is fragile and
reversible, and fraught with complexity. But the stage is
gradually being set for Somalia to move to a new phase
in sustaining peace, preventing and resolving violent
conflict and building a functional, Federal State.
Ultimately, it is the Somalis who will determine their
own fate — but the Council’s support is central to their
chances of success.
The President: I thank Mr. Keating for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira.
Mr. Madeira: On behalf of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, Ms. Nkosazana
Dlamini-Zuma, and of Ambassador Ismail Chergui,
Commissioner for Peace and Security, who were unable
to come here today because of the ongoing African
Union (AU) Summit, I warmly greet you, Mr. President,
and all members of the Security Council.
Since my previous briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.7778) there have been important and encouraging
political and security developments in Somalia. Despite
enormous and multiple challenges, Somalis have
defied the odds and completed their parliamentary
election. A new, bicameral Federal Parliament is now
in place in Somalia as a result of a highly disputed and
engaging electoral process. The presidential election is
scheduled to take place on 8 February, as announced.
The African Union and the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), in close partnership with the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
United Nations and other international partners, stood by
Somalia and provided the Parliament, the Government,

S/PV.7873

the Federal Indirect Electoral Implementation Team, the
State-Level Indirect Electoral Implementation Team,
as well as the independent electoral dispute resolution
mechanism, all the support, assistance and advice it
could to ensure that the electoral process was conducted
in accordance with the approved terms of reference
and that its credibility was enhanced by ensuring that
allegations of malpractice and other irregularities were
objectively, properly and timely addressed, as well
as to ensure that attempts by Al-Shabaab to taint and
discredit its final outcome did not succeed.
The political environment is one of hope and
confidence, as the newly inaugurated Speaker of the
House of the People announced the priorities of the
national political agenda as being the continuation
and completion of the constitutional review, the
formation of political parties, the establishment of
local Governments, the resumption of dialogue with
Somaliland, the strengthening of revenue-collection
capacity and the building of State institutions and
the enhancement of their capacity to deliver basic
essential services to the people. As partners united
in a common struggle against violent extremism and
destabilization, we, the members of the international
community, are called to support the Parliament not
only in achieving those goals, but also in enhancing
its role as the privileged forum for dialogue, political
debate and negotiation, national reconciliation and
cohesion, as the rightful representative, the mouthpiece
and the legitimate interpreter of the will, aspirations
and apprehensions of the people of Somalia for the next
four years.
Despite being the result of an electoral process taht
fell far short of the cherished one-person, one-vote ideal,
the establishment of this Parliament represents progress
and displays unique characteristics. After having been
highly scrutinized by their own communities, the
members of Parliament won the trust of their people
when they emerged victorious from an electoral contest
in which the majority of 51 delegates voted for each one
of them. That feature did not exist in 2012, when only a
few elders had the right and power to determine alone
who should represent their community and the people
of Somalia. Fifteen per cent of the new parliamentarians
are youth between 25 and 35 years of age, and 24 per
cent of the Parliament is made up of women. Those two
social categories represent the majority of the Somali
population today. They are the face of the most vibrant
and are the most enduring feature of the Somali society.

17-022425/12

S/PV.7873

The situation in Somalia

Many have been exposed to different political, social
and cultural environments, which is an asset in itself.
If properly harnessed, this new reality has the potential
to help Somalia move more swiftly away from its
current predicament.
Another important development in the period under
consideration is the fact that, despite Al-Shabaab’s
vow to thwart the process, the parliamentary election
took place in all six of the designated electoral centres
without any security incidents that could be attributed
to Al-Shabaab. That was possible because of the
professionalism and close coordination and cooperation
that exists between the Somali national security forces
and AMISOM, the effectiveness of the plan they put in
place, as well as the enhanced and sustained exchange
of real time actionable intelligence. That effort is
continuing and producing commendable results in
other areas of joint endeavour.
The gains accumulated with the successful launch
of regional states could be compromised if the current
political unease that is witnessed in a good number
of those states is not properly tackled and addressed
in a timely manner. The continued existence of such
tensions has the potential to arouse the appetites of
negative armed groups, who normally prey on such
convoluted environments, and escalate violence to
unexpected and challenging levels.
AMISOM is working hand in hand with the Somali
national security forces. It continues to provide a secure
environment in which the Somali political process can
thrive. Although weakened, Al-Shabaab continues to
engage in targeted assassinations, direct and indirect
fire, ambushes, reinforced with improvised explosive
devices on AMISOM convoys along supply routes,
the hurling of grenades, vehicle-borne improvised
explosive devices and infiltration across all sectors,
including in Mogadishu. Despite logistical, financial
and operational challenges, AMISOM continues to
support the Somali national security forces’ operations,
administration and training in its areas of responsibility.
Moreover, AMISOM police units are continuing to
carry out their mandated tasks in Mogadishu, Baidoa,
Kismayo, Beledweyne, Jowhar and Adado. Such
activities are taking place with immense sacrifice by
the troop- and police-contributing countries and in the
context of inadequate and very limited resources.
The reality in the theatre of operations has changed.
The enemy is resorting to new tactics that pose new
6/12

27/01/2017

challenges. The need to adjust to those new challenges
and overcome the enemy is pressing. The terrorist group
continues to maintain control of pockets of territories
around the Jubba Valley corridor and along the northeastern coastline. Their stronghold in those areas has
been reinforced by the growing influence and influx
of foreign fighters, in large part through neighbouring
Yemen. Those territories must be recovered from
the enemy, as an integral part of the process for its
degradation and eventual defeat.
To that end, the African Union reiterates its call for
the deployment of additional forces and key combat and
stabilization capabilities in order to enable AMISOM
and the Somali national security forces to conduct
expanded offensive operations. There is urgency for the
United Nations and other members of the international
community to provide one-time support to additional
forces of up to 4,000 troops in the form of the provision
of rations, fuel, transport and medicine for a limited
duration, to allow for the conduct of specific military
operations as a catalyst for an imminent AMISOM
drawdown from Somalia.
It has become abundantly clear to us that, no matter
how effective AMISOM may be, there can be no lasting
and sustainable peace and security in Somalia unless
capable and properly empowered Somali national
security forces are in place. We therefore ask that
support continue to be provided to the Somali national
security forces not only for the upcoming offensive
operations, but also in the context of the overall effort
of building a comprehensive and capable Somali
security apparatus. To that effect, we insist on the need
for a better coordinated, complementary and mutually
reinforcing partner intervention in the area of security
in Somalia. Our individual and dispersed interventions,
as much as they are accepted and appreciated, are
having limited effect on our joint security effort in
the country.
We will continue to join hands with the United
Nations in our effort to work closely with our partners
in this endeavour. Even so, a comprehensive approach
to security is indispensable. That should be anchored on
the concurrence of mutually reinforcing factors, such as
the presence and the adequate territorial expansion of
functioning State institutions, democratic governance,
the provision of humanitarian assistance and other
essential services to the people, dispute resolution
mechanisms, building capable national security forces
and preventing and addressing the conditions conducive
17-02242

27/01/2017

The situation in Somalia

to violent extremism and radicalization, which lead
to terrorism. That is the best way of guaranteeing
sustainable peace and security to Somalia. We
recognize that partners, such as the United Kingdom
and others, are doing a very commendable job in that
regard. We look forward to continue working with them
in this area.
We are happy that a suitable solution was found for
the payment of stipends to the Burundian contingent
serving in AMISOM. Nonetheless, this problem is a
reflection of the limited resources and funding that
AMISOM is facing. A sustainable, lasting and acceptable
solution must be found to ensure that AMISOM is
properly funded. We are fighting with our bare hands
against an enemy that has acquired expertise to produce
explosive devices that are powerful enough to bring
down this building. Taking into account the possibility
of considering an assessed contribution for the funding
of AMISOM has now become very important.
The President: I thank Mr. Madeira for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Dirie.
Ms. Dirie: It is an honour for me to address the
Security Council on the state of women’s political
representation in Somalia. Because of time constraints,
I cannot cover all of the key milestones, achievements,
challenges and lessons learned in the 2016 electoral
process. However, a document has been distributed.
The Committee of Goodwill Ambassadors, which
I have the privilege of chairing, was appointed by the
Federal President of Somalia to help women secure
30 per cent of the seats in both houses of Parliament. That
was the goal agreed by the country’s political leaders in
the National Leadership Forum. As in other countries,
advancing women’s political empowerment in Somalia
is a challenging task. Despite the huge contributions
that they make to society, women are often excluded
from decision-making and leadership roles. In 2012,
women were selected for only 14 per cent of the seats
in the Federal Parliament. The National Leadership
Forum’s decision for the 2016 electoral process to
reserve a minimum of 30 per cent of the parliamentary
seats for women was therefore very encouraging.
To achieve that goal, the Goodwill Ambassadors
first carried out a clan-mapping exercise showing the
distribution of reserved seats per clan. The detailed
mapping schematic has also been attached to my notes,
which were just circulated in the Chamber. We then

S/PV.7873

launched an advocacy campaign involving civil society
actors and political lobbyists, as well as Federal and
state Women’s Affairs Ministries, to secure the buyin of political leaders and clan elders. We received
enormous support and encouragement from the United
Nations, and from the international community in
general, in our quest to realize the 30 per cent goal, and I
would like to express my thanks for the partnership and
collective efforts of the Somali Federal Government,
the National Leadership Forum, the Women’s Affairs
Ministries, civil society, women activists, the United
Nations-African Union Integrated Gender Office, the
United Nations Development Programme, UN-Women,
the European Union, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and members of the diplomatic
community. Women were elected to 25 per cent of the
seats in both houses of the new Parliament, among them
my fellow Goodwill Ambassadors. That is a substantial
and unprecedented achievement for Somali women
and for the society as a whole. We faced numerous
challenges and learned important lessons in the course
of our work. I would like to mention several of those
lessons that should be considered in preparation for the
2020 universal elections.
In the absence of a legally binding provision, the
political decision to reserve 30 per cent of the seats for
women was extremely difficult to enforce. No one was,
or could be, held responsible and accountable for their
action or inaction. A secured legal provision is therefore
critical to advancing women’s political equality.
Securing the reserved seats for women relied in large
measure on the will of clan elders, who are traditionally
opposed to women’s political participation. That
affected women’s ability to secure clan endorsement
and to operate freely without threats and intimidation.
A massive structural transformation is required to
advance women’s representation in politics and the
democratization process in Somalia.
Throughout the electoral process, women
presented a unified position that served as a source of
strength. Together with the Goodwill Ambassadors,
civil society and the Women’s Affairs Ministries, we
all worked in a united fashion that had a very positive
impact on our campaign. The lack of adequate financial
and logistical support posed a significant challenge
to women candidates during the campaign period.
Furthermore, women were disproportionately affected
by election-related corruption and abuses that weakened

17-022427/12

S/PV.7873

The situation in Somalia

their position vis-à-vis the clan elders, the state-level
Electoral Implementation Teams and state authorities.
Provisions for adequate support and the establishment
of a level playing field will be critical to the success of
women candidates in the future.
On behalf of Goodwill Ambassadors, I would like
to thank the Government of Sweden, current President
of the Security Council, and UN-Women, which
facilitated my trip to New York.
The President: I thank Ms. Dirie for her briefing.
The representative of Uruguay has asked for the
floor to make a statement.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to begin by thanking Mr. Keating, Mr. Madeira and,
in particular, Ms. Dirie for their detailed briefings. I
also welcome the presence in the Chamber of Mr. Omer,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Investment Promotion
of the Federal Republic of Somalia.
Allow me first to vigorously condemn the suicide
attack perpetrated by the Al-Shabaab terrorist group
that took place at the Dayah Hotel in Mogadishu this
past Wednesday and resulted in dozens of deaths.
At the dawn of a new beginning for Somalia,
Uruguay welcomes the establishment of the new
Federal Parliament in December 2016 and the election
of the Presidents of their respective house. We hope
that the process will come to a successful conclusion
on 8 February with the election of the new President
of Somalia. Uruguay urges that all the necessary
measures be taken to ensure a review of the provisional
Federal Constitution, which we consider vital for
Somalia to become a true constitutional democracy.
The support of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia (UNSOM) and the financial assistance of
the international community are vital for the timely
adoption of the permanent Constitution.
Uruguay recognizes the efforts made to reach
the target of 30 per cent of the seats in Parliament
for women. Although this time the goal was not
achieved, the result has shown a transformation in the
representation and political participation of women in
Somalia. With such an important precedent, efforts
must be redoubled to achieve that goal in 2020, as well
as effectively implement the democratic principle of
one-person, one-vote.
8/12

27/01/2017

Security sector reform, in particular the rapid
and effective development of the Somali National
Army, is vital so that Government security forces,
including the police, can assume greater responsibility
for peacekeeping and the security and protection of
Somali citizens.
Uruguay is very concerned about the reported
increase in human rights violations in Somalia. Despite
the Somali authorities’ important commitment to protect
children over the past several years, the detention of
children for alleged links to Al-Shabaab continues to
be a reason for concern, as does their murder and other
violations of their rights, such as their recruitment by
various parties, sexual violence, kidnapping, as well as
attacks against schools and hospitals. Uruguay urges
the Government of Somalia to ensure that children are
treated first as victims and that its guiding principles
are in the best interests of children and in accordance
with international protection norms. The death
sentences that were imposed on children in Puntland
are unacceptable.
As a sponsor of resolution 2286 (2016), we note
with concern that the most recent report (S/2016/1098)
of the Secretary-General on children in armed conflict
in Somalia indicates that from 2012 to 2016 there
were 40 attacks against hospitals in that country. Such
attacks, no matter whence they come, are war crimes.
In conclusion, once again, Uruguay recognizes
the important work of United Nations Support Office
in Somalia, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia and the African Union Mission in Somalia and
considers them fundamental in building the Somali
State and making progress in the consolidation of peace
and lasting stability in the Horn of Africa.
The President: I shall now make a very brief
statement in my capacity as the representative
of Sweden.
I should like to thank the briefers and to honour the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia
and the representative of civil society, Ms. Dirie.
I would like first to convey our condolences to the
Government of Somalia and the Government of Kenya,
as well as to the victims’ families, for the deplorable
terrorist attacks over the past several days.
Sweden welcomes the successful electoral process,
and we commend the Somali security forces and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for
17-02242

27/01/2017

The situation in Somalia

S/PV.7873

having provided a secure environment in which the
process could take place. The new Parliament is
inclusive: 25 per cent of parliamentarians are women
and 16 per cent are under 35-years-old, with half of its
members elected for the first time. It is now important
that there be no further delays and that the presidential
election be held on 8 February, as scheduled, so
that a Government can be formed to take peace and
State-building efforts forward.

Mr. Omer (Somalia): I want to also join you,
Mr. President, and Mr. Michael Keating and Ambassador
Madeira in sending our sincere condolences to the
Kenyan and Somali families and the military staff and
civilians who perished last night in the Juba Valley in a
senseless, barbaric and un-Islamic attack. Moreover, it
is wrong to use of our children as human bombs. This
has happened too often, so let us all condemn it and
make sure that it does not happen again.

Building a better future for Somalia should benefit
from the input of all Somalis. The presence in the
Chamber today of Ms. Asha Gelle Dirie is testimony
to a vibrant civil society. We hope that the increased
representation of women and youth now seen in
Parliament will be replicated at every level in the
peace and State-building effort. I want to congratulate
Ms. Gelle on her leadership in Somalia. I think she is
breaking new ground in a way that could also serve as a
model for other countries beyond Somalia.

At the outset, on behalf of the Somali Government,
I wish to congratulate the new members of this organ
on their election. I commend in particular the Swedish
Government on its stewardship and leadership of the
Security Council this month.

The report (S/2016/1032) before us today also
highlights a severe humanitarian situation, which
is likely to worsen. Five million people are already
suffering from acute food shortages. I call in this open
Chamber on all donors to seek in their pockets funds
and assistance for the humanitarian response plan and
call on Somali authorities to facilitate humanitarian
access in order to prevent humanitarian disaster.
Finally, we believe that AMISOM remains
crucially important for the stabilization of Somalia.
We commend the troop-contributing countries and
their soldiers and pay tribute to their efforts and
sacrifice. Sweden and the European Union are and
remain committed to supporting AMISOM, both
financially and politically, but funding gaps must be
dealt with. We join the African Union in calling on
the international community at large to assist, while
recognizing the need to find more sustainable means.
However, achieving sustainable peace and stabilization
goes beyond AMISOM; the development of a credible
and capable Somali national security sector must be a
priority within a well-coordinated and comprehensive
approach to security.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I have the pleasure to give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Somalia.

It is a great honour for me to address the Security
Council on the important matter of Somalia’s progress
and the remaining challenges today. The members of
the Security Council, with many other partner nations
within the United Nations, continue to play a vital role
in our national progress alongside our people and the
Government, both multilaterally and bilaterally.
It is important to remember that, since I last
addressed the Security Council, in September 2016 (see
S/PV.7778), all members have taken the opportunity to
visit Somalia and witness our national progress. The
members of Security Council met with the President
in Mogadishu. That was followed by further highlevel visits from many Security Council membes and
Members of the United Nations, which serve as the best
evidence of constructive engagement, strengthening
partnerships and Somalia and Somalis determinedly
overcoming the difficult nightmare of the past.
I must stress and reiterate that, in many ways,
Somalia has some key remaining challenges to overcome
going forward, as Mr. Keating, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia, made clear in
his briefing. But, as he also acknowledged, the overall
progress our country is making is tangible, sustainable
and historic. The progress I am referring to, and which
I will discuss in greater detail, is political, social,
economic and security related. In Somalia’s case, as in
most post-conflict States, those components must go
hand in hand for there to be sustainable development.
Furthermore, while the term “progress” can be easily
open to interpretation according to individual and
group expectations, we can safely say that, by all
measurements, progress in Somalia is clear and selfevident. Somalis cannot hide from or wish away their

17-022429/12

S/PV.7873

The situation in Somalia

difficult past, as it clearly has impacted on all of us
heavily. But there is also no denying our collective
ambition to never return to it.
The Federal Government of Somalia and the
Somali people, through sacrifice, self-assessment
and tough negotiations, have finally set sail in the
direction of peace and progress. Somalia is among
Africa’s first democracies and we are once again in
the process of completing our first successful national
elections in decades. So far, all parliamentarians from
both the Upper and Lower House have been elected by
constituents they represent. In turn, they have elected
speakers for both institutions, paving the way for the
presidential election scheduled for 8 February.
For the first time in history, a transformation has
taken place in female political representation, as was
underlined by my siste Asha Gelle Dirie. When it comes
to participation, an important precedent has been set
for women’s political mobilization. We are proud to
say that we have achieved almost 26 per cent women
representation in our Parliament, which is an increase
of more than 70 per cent and a substantial improvement
from what it was in 2012.
In addition to the increase in female lawmakers,
a larger number of young and talented Members of
Parliament have been elected, including from the
diaspora. While the election was not yet one person,
one vote, it is a remarkable improvement over 2012,
when 135 elders selected the entire Parliament. The
current process of indirect elections allowed a total
of 14,025 delegates, selected by traditional elders and
representing all groups within society, to vote for
competing candidates. More impressive, the voting was
not Mogadishu-centered, like in 2012, but took place
all over the newly formed regional member states,
including Hir-Shabelle, which was finally established.
Following on from the voting, what is most
symbolic is how peacefully and quickly titles were
transferred and how the Somali people and politicians
embraced the spirit and rules of democracy. Where in
2012, the entire process of elections was in the hands
of 135 tribal elders guided by an electoral commission,
today it is overseenoverseen by a Federal Indirect
Electoral Implementation Team at the national level
and six state-level indirect electoral implementation
teams in the regions, which have been vocal throughout
the elections.
10/12

27/01/2017

Despite the mentioned successes in the electoral
process, there were challenges too, which provided
us with many valuable lessons for the future. Those
challenges, flowing from the very ambition of holding
elections in a recovering post-conflict State that has
only had an internationally recognized Government
since 2012, led to a delay in the electoral process,
which will be concluded by 8 February. Among the key
reasons for the delay was the process of understanding
and implementing an electoral system that was adopted
by the Somali Government on the part of the Federal
member states and candidates.
Going forward, the process of planning and
executing one person, one vote in 2020 must begin
immediately. Furthermore, to guide the entire process,
we will partner with all stakeholders and complete
the constitutional review process, strengthen enabling
democratic institutions and ratify and implement the
laws that underpin it all, such as the political party laws.
It is a fact of history and process that democratization
is not easy. It is a marathon in tough terrain rather
than a race in a perfectly designed stadium with
guiding tracks, perfect lighting and enthusiastic fans.
However, we in Somalia are committed to our national
development — and hence to governing ourselves fairly
and democratically.
Since our previous meeting at the Security Council
(see S/PV.7778), security has continued to improve.
As I informed members then, I can confidently repeat
that, due to the courage and sacrifices of the Somali
National Army and the troops of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), Al-Shabaab has
been defeated militarily. Despite the headlines and
the — at times — irresponsible discussions in some
quarters of the international media of its resurgence,
Al-Shabaab has been reduced to carrying out primarily
opportunistic attacks against soft targets and innocent
civilians. The most recent example of this was the attack
on Wednesday on the Dayah Hotel in Mogadishu, in
which innocent people lost their lives and many more
were injured because of pointless and cruel violence.
While our thoughts and prayers are with all the victims
of this and other evil attacks, both in Somalia and across
the world, we are winning the war against Al-Shabaab.
Many of their leaders either have been killed or have
defected to the Government, and their desperate tactics
are the best evidence of their diminishing capabilities
and moral bankruptcy.
17-02242

27/01/2017

The situation in Somalia

Permanently defeating Al-Shabaab is pertinent to
the progress of Somalia and the overall fight against
international terrorism. No one is insulated from
terrorism, and the violent ending of last year as well
as the beginning of this year, in as diverse places as
Berlin, Istanbul and Mogadishu, are clear illustrations
of this. We are therefore proud and privileged to be
working with valued partners, including members of
the Security Council, in diverse and effective ways to
destroy the last remaining pockets of terror on our soil.
The Somali Government is proud of the collective
efforts of the Somali security forces and their partners
in AMISOM, which allow the Somali people to live
peacefully. I pay my respects and convey the gratitude of
my country for their sterling efforts and success, which
has come at a deadly price on many occasions. Their
sacrifices will never be forgotten, and their memory
will spur on our national and regional progress.
Despite the courage of AMISOM soldiers in
Somalia, our national ambition is to nurture and develop
a well-trained, -equipped and -funded Somali National
Army and police force that protects its citizens and
safeguards the progress of the nation for the betterment
of our people, our neighbours and the world. We are
thankful to all partners that are actively assisting us to
work towards and realize this fundamental goal.
The fight against international terrorism is difficult
and long. This is simply because we are dealing
with new phenomena, which include greater use of
technology to radicalize people and new techniques
of terror, such as misleading young children to blow
themselves up. For those present who wish to know
about the latest such incident, two young people aged
16 years old blew themselves up in Mogadishu. There is
no textbook that teaches us how to deal with this, and
therefore we must share knowledge, adapt and devise
sustainable and diverse solutions to overcome this evil.
In the case of Somalia, we have completed our national
countering violent extremism strategy, and we look
forward to continuing our partnership with all Member
States on this critical issue.
Despite our solid political and socioeconomic
ambitions and gains, I would like to reiterate, as I did
in my September 2016 presentation to this organ, the
importance of the remaining challenges to development
in Somalia, such as investment, education, jobs and
skills. These critical components of development must
accompany the physical security we seek, otherwise

S/PV.7873

it will prove difficult to overcome the challenges of
radicalization, illegal migration and the tragedy of
wasted talent and lives on the high seas. The Somali
Government has adopted a national development plan,
which was completed last year, in line with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. We kindly ask
all partners to support the clearly specified Somali
priorities set out within it.
I would like to turn your attention, Mr. President, to
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in my Somalia,
which is poised to worsen as drought conditions extend
beyond Puntland and Somaliland to areas in the south.
The drought is expected to deepen, as the current rainy
season sharply underperformed and it will be another
four months before the next rainy season. According
to the United Nations, as previously stated, there are
now 5 million people facing acute food shortages,
including more than 50,000 children who are severely
malnourished. We appeal to the Council, the donor
community and the public and private sectors to
urgently heed the multiple urgent warnings by United
Nations specialized agencies and to help us address the
pressing lifesaving and livelihood-support needs facing
many Somali people, in particular women, children,
the internally displaced persons and other vulnerable
people. This appeal goes for the entire Horn of Africa,
in particular parts of Ethiopia and of Kenya.
In conclusion, this is my third opportunity to
address this important organ in my current role. Our
Government has achieved many of the goals we set for
ourselves in the past two years, but many challenges
remain. It has been an honour to work with Council
members’ Governments on the key issues concerning
both Somalia and the wider world, and I would like to
thank everyone for their valuable support.
I would also like to stress the fact that the progress of
Somalia is more than rhetorical; it is a reality evidenced
by every member of the diaspora — and I include myself
in this — and their desire to return, in the undefeatable
spirit of the Somali people, to achieve progress and
prosperity for themselves, their families and their
nation. In looking at Somalia, therefore, please continue
to see our courageous progress against great odds,
our country’s wonderful opportunities and untapped
potential resources, as well as our determination to
never return to the past, but to accelerate — peaceably
and purposefully — to a better future.

17-0224211/12

S/PV.7873

The situation in Somalia

The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on

12/12

27/01/2017

the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

17-02242
