UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

th

MEETING:

NEW

29 MARCH

1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2426)

1

,,..*,..,....,,.....,,..I,*,...*,....

Adoption of the agenda . . . . .*....,,.,.I.,....,,,,.....*.....**...**....

1

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister for External Relations of
Nicaragua addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15651) ..I..

1

UPV.2426

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/...) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Securify Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2426th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 29 March 1983, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Sir John THOMSON (United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

(Democratic Yemen), Mr. Knipping Victoria (Dominican
Republic), Mr. Afbornoz (Ecuador), Mr. Chdvez-Mena (El
Salvador), Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic), Mr. van
Well (Federal Republic of Germany), Mr. Taylor (Grenada), Mr. Rdcz (Hungary), Mr, Purushottam (India), Mr.
Serajzadeh (Islamic Republic ofIran), Mr. La Rocca (Italy),
Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Maudave (Mauritius), Mr MuAbz Ledo (Mexico), Mr. Narkhuu (Mongolia),
Mr. Ozores Typaldos (Panama), Mr. Pustor de la Torre
(Peru), Mr. Arcilla (Philippines), Mr. de Pinit+ (Spain), Mr.
El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic). Mr. Rupia (UnitedRepublit of Tanzania), Mrs. Coronel de Rodriguez (Venezuela),
Mr. Hoang Bich Son (Viet Nam) and Mr. SiloviE (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional agenda (WAgendaI2426)
1.

Adoption

of the agenda.

2.

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/15651).

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have just received a letter from the
representative of Ghana in which he requests to beinvited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

The meeting was called to order at 11.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted,
Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister
for External Relations of Nicaragua, addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15651)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gbeho (Ghana)
took the place reservedfor him at the side of the Council
chamber.

I. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at previous meetings on this item [242Oth to 2425th
meetings], I invite the representative of Honduras to take a
place at the Security Council table. I invite the representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Barbados, Belgium, Bolivia,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czechoslovakia,
Democratic Yemen, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, the German Democratic
Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, Grenada,
Hungary, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Panama, Peru, the Philippines, Spain, the Syrian Arab
Republic, the United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela,
Viet Nam and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

3, The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
resume consideration of the item on its agenda.
4. Mr. NGUAYILA
MBELA
KALANDA
(Zaire)
(interpretation from French): This is the first time I have
spoken at an open meeting during this month of March
1983. You will allow me to follow tradition and to join my
voice with all those who have preceded me here in congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month which is now drawing to an end.
Your personal and professional qualities, combined with
your English sense of humour, have allowed us to seeyour
name inscribed as a diplomat of the first rank. You belong
to a country with which my country maintains links of
sincere friendship and co-operation. My delegation is
therefore always prepared fully to support you in carrying
out your duties. I should also like to take this opportunity
to express our appreciation to your predecessor Mr.
Troyanovsky, representative of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, for the well-balanced and courteous
manner in which he conducted our work last month.,

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ortez Colindres
(Honduras) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Abada
(Algeria), Mr. Mur7iz (Argentina), Mr. Moseley (Barbados), Miss Dever (Belgium), Mr. Salazar Paredes
fBoZivia), Mr. Bueno (Brazil, Mr, Tsvetkov (Bulgaria),
Mr. Sanz de Santamarfa (Colombia), Mr. Zumbado
Jimt+ux (Costa Rica), Mr. Roa Kourf (Cuba), Mr. Moushoutas (Cyprus), Mr. Suja (Czechoslovakia), Mr. Al-Al@
1

5. The delegation of Zaire learned of the exacerbation of the situation in Central America with bitterness.
The discussion now taking place here pits two fraternal
countries, Nicaragua
and Honduras,
against each
other, and to them is added the United States, accused
of attempting
to destabilize Nicaragua through the
material and military support that it is providing, according to Nicaragua, to those opposed to the Sandinist
regime in power in that country, through the intermediary of Honduras,

ment to strengthen democracy, to alleviate the plight of
people and to assist in creating stable regional structures
which contribute to the preservation of peace.
10. I want to emphasize at the same time that Nicaragua’s difficult path to freedom and democracy has not
been without disappointment
for friends and without
tensions with its neighbours. There was much disquieting
information about events inside the country that caused
deep concern among its friends as to the preservation of
human rights, political freedom and pluralistic democracy. As the foreign relations of countries are often
affected by internal problems, it is not surprising that in
this case as well such interaction has led to a controversial situation.

6. As we have had occasion to recall in the past, the
Republic of Zaire remains deeply committed to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, without
which the world would not be what it is today. That is
why, because of the clear will of the parties concerned to
enter into a direct dialogue leading to peaceful settlement
of their dispute, my delegation would on that basis like to
suggest that in its wisdom the Council, rather than taking
a decision on the substance of the question, which would
run the risk of heightening the tension in the region even
further, merely take note of the initiative of the parties
and encourage them to co-operate in seeking a solution
that will take due account not only of the principles of
the Charter and all the principles of international law,
but one that would also take account of the sociopolitical realities of the region, It is certainly not by an
exchange of recrimination by both sides that the peoples
in those countries will come to enjoy their right to peace
or, still less, their happiness.

11. To make it perfectly clear, my Government is
always on the side of those who are committed, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, to
the principles of non-intervention in the internal affairs
of States, territorial integrity, the inviolability of frontiers
and the independence and sovereignty of States. These
principles have to be respected strictly, especially in a
period of change such as that through which Central
America is passing.
12. In the present period of conflict in the area, we wish
that the high aspirations of the revolution against the
Somoza dictatorship to establish a truly democratic
society in Nicaragua will prevail and that Nicaragua will
contribute to harmonious relations with all countries of
the region. As soon as Nicaragua establishes credibility
in a policy of good-neighbourliness, non-interference and
respect for human rights and democratic institutions, tensions in the area will diminish. This is not a question that
concerns only one neighbour, but is really a problem for
the whole region. We therefore wish that Nicaragua
would be ready to embark on a policy of reconciliation
and of confidence-building and take up the offer to settle
the controversial issues at a conference of alI countries of
the region. A relevant proposal has been made and
should provide a first step towards defusing tensions. We
would hope that the countries of Central America which
have undergone so many difficult experiences in the past
might find a way to a peaceful common future.

7. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Federal Republic of Germany, I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement,
8. Mr. van WELL (Federal Republic of Germany):
Allow me, Sir, to express my pleasure and appreciation at
speaking in the Security Council while you are presiding
over it.
9. My Government has asked to participate in this
debate because we take a strong interest in developments in Central America, owing to our long-standing
and intensive co-operation with the countries and peoples of the region. May I recall that the Federal Republic of Germany, together with all countries which
cherish democracy, was deeply satisfied when in July
1979 the Somoza dictatorship
over Nicaragua came
finally to an end. Our commitment
to a new start in
Nicaragua was expressed by sending a Governmental
delegation to Nicaragua in that same month in order to
bring aid to overcome the most urgent needs. At the
same time we offered our help in the reconstruction of
the country. Exchanges on all official levels and by political and private organizations followed and were a testimony to the widespread support in my country for
assistance to Nicaragua in establishing democratic institutions based on social and economic structures which
would satisfy the aspirations of all people in the country. This policy of friendship and help for Nicaragua
was an expression of the general policy of my Govern-

13. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Peru. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
14. Mr. PASTOR de la TORRE (Peru) (interpreration
from Spanish): I should first of all like to extend to you,
Sir, my delegation’s congratulations on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of March. We are confident that thanks to your skill and
experience we will achieve fruitful results in the problem
at present before the Council.
15. This is the second time within one year that this
body has been convened at the request of the Government of Nicaragua to deal with a question which certainly
exceeds its national scope and concerns the entire Central
American region. We have heard statements by many
.2

delegations expressing the views of their Governments.
AIso the parties directly concerned have set forth their
respective positions and have levelled charges of mutual
recrimination,
with which we are all now familiar. Meanwhile the problem of political confrontation in Central
America goes back many years and is now a perpetual
crisis which is worsening day by day,

impotent and whether the whole security system will be
questioned to the point of converting it into a structure
that instead of preserving peace will decisively damage the
meagre confidence that the small and medium-sized countries still have in the Organization.
22. My delegation deems it appropriate to draw the
Council’s attention to the yet unexplored possibilities
offered by the Organization of American States for a
joint examination of and an agreed solution to the differences among the Latin American countries.

16. At this stage one must ask: is there a genuine desire
to try to come up with a practical and viable solution of
the situation? Has the problem gotten out of hand for the
Governments which are confronting each other because
there are forces and interests outside the region which are
making it difficult to find a solution that will respond to
the yearnings of the Central American peoples? Is it not
possible that the approach to the Central American crisis
that has been taken does not correspond to nor reveal the
true dimensions or true nature of the problem?

23. It is time that we all, beginning with Honduras,
Nicaragua and the other Central American countries
that find themselves enmeshed in this crisis-which in
essence is one of identity-as well as the great Powers, on
which rests the tremendous responsibility for world
peace, and the Latin American countries, which see with
dismay how our intraregional problems are still being
manipulated by outside forces, committed ourselves to
peace in an act of faith, which would allow us to set aside
seemingly priority political interests and devote ourselves
to achieving a negotiated political solution to be reached
between the parties directly interested, without foreign
interference or pressure and with the sole purpose of
maintaining or, as the case may be, restoring peace in the
region, as well as respect for fundamental human, civil
and political rights, which today have been curbed by the
forces in conflict.

17. The truth is that none of the replies taken in isolation would be a comprehensive approach to the whole
problem, and perhaps a combination of the three would
give the best picture of what is.actually happening now in
Central America,
18. There are interests of all kinds which have undermined the political will expressed here to reach a political
settlement, and this applies to all the parties directly concerned. As was stated by the Contadora declaration,’ an
attempt has been made to put the crisis in Central America
within the context of East-West confrontation, overlook.ing the profound economic and social problems which
have been experienced by the peoples of the region over
the centuries.

24. My delegation would now like to make a concrete
proposal which, we believe, could be useful in achieving
our stated purpose and which might well be considered a
basis for the establishment of a dialogue. First, there
must be a commitment to avoid, in talks to be agreed
upon, any ideological and political polarization in the
general consideratjon of all the problems confronting
Central America. Secondly, consequently, all interests foreign to the subregion and alien to its overall problems
should be excluded, as the focus should be on improving
the well-being of its peoples through a genuine process of
development in a climate of peace and democracy.
Thirdly, there must be strict respect for and submission to
the principles and norms of international law enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations and other international
instruments, and specifically bearing in mind the principles
of non-intervention in the internal and external affairs of
States, the right to self-determination of peoples, respect
for treaties, the sovereign equality of States, the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the inadmissibility of the threat
or use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State. Fourthly, all acts of hostility
which have been taking place in the confrontation zone
between Honduras and Nicaragua must cease immediately, by decision of the Security Council, which decision
could be implemented through the machinery established
in Chapters VII and VIII of the Charter, Chapter VII
referring to the competence of regional arrangements.
Fifthly, at the same time the Council may wish to adopt
provisional measures contributing concomitantly to such a
cessation of hostilities and making possible an effective
dialogue between all the parties concerned, which are, in
the first place, the Republics of Honduras and Nicaragua,

19. In the same way, in the consideration of the facts
which have given rise to this crisis and in our understanding of the background and treatment of this question,
approaches have been taken which distort reality and
which continue to obstruct our search for a broad and
lasting political settlement,
20. My delegation wishes to say that these comments
point to one conclusion: neither the countries directly
concerned, nor the Powers which say that they stand by
one side or the other, nor those countries which in good
faith have contributed towards the settlement of the dispute have set aside positions, interests and prejudices in
order to enhance the goal to which the Organization is
devoted, namely, the preservation of peace. We have heard
so many recriminations, accusations, denunciations and
assessments of blame regarding the internal and external
problems of each country concerned that we wonder
whether it is realized that not only does that just fan the
flames, but that it will now be more difficult to control this
conflagration and that the damage may be quite considerable, including for those who believe that they will derive
advantages from the situation.
21. For that reason, now more than ever we must put
an end to rhetoric and to unbridled aggressiveness.
Whether we do or not will determine whether the Security Council continues to be considered confused and
3

and, in a second stage, the five Centaf American nations.
Sixthly, if appropriate, the Council may wish to decide,
with prior consent of the parties, to send a commission to
SuPemise the cessation of hostilities in the border region
where there have been confrontations or territorial violation. Seventhly, there should be an agreement on immediate measures to curb the arms race and the growing
militarization
of the countries in the area, which in some
cases have unquestionably compromised the presence of
military forces and assistance from third countries.

all the countries of Central America to reduce tensions
and establish the bases for a permanent climate of peaceful coexistence and mutual respect among States through
dialogue and negotiations. Furthermore, States were
urged not to resort to the threat or use of force in their
internationa1 relations, and they were all requested to
refrain from any acts that might worsen the crisis and
create the danger of a widespread conflict that could
extend to the entire region.
31. My country cannot fail to repeat its support for this
language, which constitutes, in our opinion, the basis for
settling a conflict which, should it worsen, would have
unpredictable consequences that would seriously affect
the situation in Latin America and that could even have
implications beyond our continent.

25. My Government
submits these proposals for the
Council’s consideration, in the conviction that they can
provide a reasonable and acceptable basis for the parties
directly concerned in this dispute. We hope that they will
be properly interpreted and accepted in this process
which must be urgently begun and which should lead to
the restoration of harmony and friendship among the
fraternal peoples of Central America.

32. Both initiatives by countries in the region were
expressly supported by the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries at its summit conference in New Delhi. Argentina, in the words of our President, stated there that

26. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Argentina. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

“the profound causes of the crisis we are referring to
lie in anachronistic political and socio-economic situations which eliminated justice as the guiding principle
of community orgnization, in persistent violations of
the principle of non-intervention and non-interference
in the internal affairs of other States, and in harmful
effects of the dispute over world power”.

27. Mr. MmIZ
(Argentina) (interpreiarionfrom
Spanish): Mr. President, I thank you for granting our request
to participate in the meetings of this body. I hope that the
deliberations under your guidance will contribute to the
achievement of a speedy solution of the problem now
before the Council.

33. The principle of non-intervention has its deepest
roots in Latin America, the countries of this area were
the first to suffer from the most varied forms of intervention, and they are still struggling to consolidate their
genuine independence and to ensure their development
in peace. It is an honour for me to recall here the fundamental role that was played by Argentine statesmen in
the enshrinement in law of these principles, ever since
Carlos Calvo formulated his doctrine based on the
national sovereignty and equality of States. Roque Saenz
PeHa, a delegate at the First International
American
Conference, in 1889, stressed solidarity among our countries, “for it means inviolable respect for sovereignty and
concord and friendship among all the States of the continent”. Honorio Pueyrred6n, at the Sixth International
Conference of American States, in 1928, categorically
and precisely said:

28. The President of Argentina, General Reynaldo Bignone, in his statement at the Seventh Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983, expressed his deep concern over the critical situation
prevailing in Central America, which is marked especially by political destabilization, violence and the constant threat of armed confrontation
between sister
nations.
29. This crisis is particularly distressing to the Argentine Republic, for it concerns countries of the region with
which we maintain fraternal relations, relations that have
become even closer as a result of the steadfast demonstrations of solidarity we received from them during the conflict in the South Atlantic.

“The sovereignty of States consists in absolute right,
full internal autonomy and complete external independence. . . , If that right is not enshrined and practised
in an absolute form, international legal harmony does
not exist.”

30. On various occasions and in different forums .my
Government
has offered to make a contribution
to a
settlement and has expressed its agreement with certain
peace initiatives, in particular the Mexican-Venezuelan
proposal and that of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela put forward
on 9 January at Contadora Island, Panama. In the
information
bulletin issued on that occasion’ profound
concern was expressed over foreign intervention, be it
direct or indirect, in disputes in Central America. It Was
noted that it was highly undesirable to view these disputes in the context of East-West confrontation,
and it
was agreed that there was a need to eliminate the external
factors aggravating them. An urgent appeal was made to

Carlos Saavedra Lamas, the Foreign Minister and Nobel
Peace Prize winner, in his closing speech as President of
the special Inter-American
Conference for the Maintenance of Peace, in 1936, stated that the principle that no
State has the right to intervene directly or indirectly in
the internal or external affairs of other States was a delinite victory for international coexistence,
34. These principles, which constantly guide Argentine
foreign policy and diplomatic practice, are enshrined in
4

the Charter of the United Nations, in particular in Article 2. The General Assembly subsequently has developed
them in many resolutions. I shall just mention those concerning the Declaration on the Inadmissibility
of Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of States and the
Protection of Their Independence and Sovereignty,2 the
Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,>
and the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement
of International
Disputes, 4 adopted by consensus on 15
November 1982.

speak on the question which is the subject of today’s
discussions.
41. Nicaragua has once again become a target of naked
acts of aggression and intervention, From the neighbouring territory of Honduras the remnants of the Somozist
mercenaries, specially trained by the United States, have
been unleashed against the Nicaraguanrevolution.
This is
convincingly borne out by the statement made by the
Nicaraguan Deputy Minister for External Relations a
few days ago here in the Council [242&h meeting]. The
facts adduced in that statement cannot fail to arouse
serious concern on the part of the world community, This
new invasion of Nicaragua was not an isolated act carried out by armed gangs of Somozists: no, it was an act
of aggression planned and conceived in advance, whose
purpose was to destabilize the situation in Nicaragua.
Here, one thing is very clear: behind the Somozists still at
large, the interventionists and the entire series of hostile
acts of aggression against the Republic of Nicaragua is
the United States. The progressive changes taking place
in Nicaragua since the victory of the Sandinist revolution
are not something that the imperialists and forces of reaction like. Therefore, in order to bring to a halt the democratic revolutionary process in that country and to return
it to lawlessness, deprivation and foreign domination,
American imperialism has been using every trick in the
book. The arsenal of imperialism
is very extensive,
indeed, including blackmail, threats, political and economic pressure, diversion, naked acts of aggression and
intervention.

35,. Last July we spoke in the fifteenth special session of
the Committee of the Whole of the Economic Commission for Latin America during discussion of the request
for assistance by the Government of National Reconstruction of Nicaragua in the face of the loss of human
life and the material damage suffered as a result of
floods. It will be recalled that the tragedy was also shared
by Honduras. My delegation on that occasion called for
Latin American union and solidarity and a resolution
concerning assistance to both countries5 was adopted
unanimously.
36. My Government is convinced that on the basis of
this spirit of solidarity and with strict respect by all countries for the principles I previously referred to it will be
possible to promote confidence in a speedy solution of
the situation before us.
37, The Argentine Republic, bearing in mind the willingness to hold a dialogue that has been expressed in this
chamber, wishes to recall the appeal contained in the
Political Declaration of the Seventh Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries [see
S/1567.5, annex] for the adoption of a constructive policy
in favour of peace and dialogue in accordance with the
principles of international law,

42, I should point out that the current imperialist acts
of aggression are not only directed against Nicaragua
and its people, but also constitute part of broader strategic plans on the part of Washington in Central America and the Caribbean, which the United States, as is its
wont, has included in its sphere of “vital interests”.
43. Of course, the aggressive designs against Nicaragua
and other countries of Central America dangerously
exacerbate the situation and jeopardize peace and security in that region, as well as in the entire world.

38. In this sense, my delegation wishes to join those
countries which, throughout this debate, have unequivocally advocated the search for a just and lasting solution
to the present crisis. We are convinced that this solution
can only be achieved by an effective dialogue in good
faith based on the principles of the Charter, on the peaceful settlement of disputes, on respect for independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity and on the noninterference in the internal affairs of other States.

44. The events that have been taking place in Central
America recently because of United States policy were
the subject of special consideration in January of this
year at the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Countries in
Managua, At the Seventh Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New
Delhi from 7 to 12 March, the participants denounced
the acts of aggression carried out by imperialism against
Nicaragua, the utilization of the territory of other countries as springboards for aggression and as training
grounds for counter-revolutionary
forces and the perpetration of acts of terrorism and sabotage.

39. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Mongolia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
40. Mr, NARKHUU
(Mongolia) (interpretation from
Russian): Sir, the Mongolian delegation would like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of March. We
should like to wish you every success in carrying out your
important duties. I should like to express the thanks of
the Mongolian delegation to you, Sir, and to all members
of the Council for the opportunity I have been given to

45. The Mongolian delegation is pleased to seethe constructive position of the Government and people of Nicaragua. The peaceful initiatives
of Nicaragua for
instituting a direct dialogue between the parties involved
5

in order to find a settlement for regional problems are
praiseworthy and deserve our support.

tive of the USSR,
yanovsky.

Mr.

Oleg Aleksandrovich

Tro-

46. The Mongolian
People’s Republic has always
stood, and will continue to stand, on the side of the just
cause of the people and Government of Nicaragua. The
Government and people of our country warmly hailed
the victory of the Sandinist people’s revolution as a
turning-point in the history of the Nicaraguan people.
Despite the geographical distance between our countries,
we have been developing relations of friendship and cooperation. Contacts are broadening in the political, economic and cultural spheres. Evidence of this can be seen
in the recent visit to our country of the party and
Government delegation of the Republic of Nicaragua,
headed by the Co-ordinator of the Governing Junta of
National Reconstruction, Daniel Ortega Saavedra. During that visit, important documents were signed concerning further development of bilateral relations.

51. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic would like to thank the Council members for giving US
the opportunity to be able to explain our Government’s
point of view on the important issue that is now on the
agenda.
52. The Council must again deal with aggression
launched against Nicaragua. The Deputy Minister for
External Relations of Nicaragua, Mr. Tinoco, explained
in a very convincing manner the full extent of the new
aggression launched against his country. He revealed its
background and pointed to the serious threat to international peace and security that has arisen. We fully comprehend the seriousness of the situation. The demands
put forth by Nicaragua meet with our undivided support.
53. The facts prove that a large number of Somozist
mercenaries, equipped and financed by the United States,
invaded Nicaragua. They have brought death and terror
to that country. Such action constitutes a further dangerous escalation of counter-revolutionary
acts against Nicaragua and is designed to destabilize the situation in that
country. Indeed, a serious danger to international peace
and security has thus developed. The request to convene
the Security Council in compliance with the Charter of
the United Nations was fully justified.

47, In the joint Mongolian-Nicaraguan
communique
issued on 24 March, the Mongolian side expressed international solidarity with the struggle of the Sandinist
National Liberation Front and the Nicaraguan people to
protect the independence and revoIutionary gains of their
country from the encroachments of American imperialism and its accomplices and internal reaction.
48. Regarding the situation around Nicaragua and the
position of principle of the Government of the Mongolian People’s Republic, the President of our country, Y.
Tsedenbal, recently stated:

54. The continued attempts systematically to destabilize Sandinist Nicaragua are being made against the background of wide-ranging imperialist doctrines-washington’s regional and global strategies-as they were again
proclaimed recently by leading representatives of that
country. This policy of confrontation
and superarmament is designed to trample underfoot the independence of States and to interfere in their internal afairs.
That is true of South Africa, where the apartheid regime,
as an accomplice of the United States, perpetrates persistent acts of aggression against soverign African neighbouring States. It is true of the Middle East, where the
aggressor Israel, as a strategic ally of the United States,
tramples upon the vital interests of the Arab peoples. In
Latin America paid mercenaries now do the work for the
imperialist and reactionary forces. An attempt is being
made to deny the people of Nicaragua the right independently to decide upon its political, economic and
social development.

“The revolutionary measures taken by the Nicaraguan people are, as we know, being carried out against
a background of continuing subversive acts by the
external forces of reaction and the internal forces of
counter-revolution.
“. . .
“The hostile acts of the United States against Nicaragua and other States of the region recently reached
a new height of intensity and have become increasingly unrestrained . . .
“The Mongolian People’s Republic, together with
other peace-loving forces of the world, demands that
the United States put an end to its hostile acts against
Nicaragua.” [See S/156.54, annex 11

55. The director of the Research Institute on International Change at New York’s Columbia University, an
expert on United States policy on Latin America,
Seweryn Bialer, has in an article published in The New
York Times on 6 March characterized the means applied
by the United States Administration to achieve its aggressive aims in Latin America. Among them, one important
means is the attempt

49. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic, I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
50. Mr. OTT (German Democratic Republic): At the
outset, Sir, permit me to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of March and to wish you success in the exercise of your responsible office. At the same time, I should
like to express high appreciation for the successful work
performed by the President for February, the representa-

“to destabiliie the Nicaraguan Government through
politica1, economic and military means. The most
important part of this policy is the covert support for
anti-Sandinist forces across the border in Honduras6

military units trained and armed with Washington’s
help that attack Nicaraguan military and civilian
targets almost daily. It is also possible that the Honduran army or mercenary troops may be used in the near
future to intrude into Nicaraguan territory.”

61. Mr. LA ROCCA (Italy): As your term as President
of the Security Council is drawing to a close, Sir, let me
add to my best wishes for your success my sincere congratulations on the skill and determination
you have
abundantly displayed in the discharge of your responsibilities during the challenging month of March.

56. Such a scenario for the realization of those machinations can clearly be seen in the events of the last few
months. Various emissaries were sent off to Latin America, who upon their return reported to the White House
about the alleged great dangers for the United States that
would arise out of progressive development in Latin
America countries. An orchestrated campaign of smear
and slander against Nicaragua and other States of the
region was launched, A drastic increase in finances for
growing interference in that region has been asked for.
At the same time, mercenaries have been trained in widerange military manoeuvres at the Nicaraguan border and
prepared for the invasion of Nicaragua. The aggression
has now been launched, That policy is a direct consequence of the arrogation of the right to regard the entire
Caribbean-Central
American region as the backyard of
the United States, as its fourth border. That policy is
directed against any progressive development in the area,
and it endangers world peace and the security of all
peoples.

.62. The issues concerning Nicaragua underscore how
the nations of Central America are experiencing a period
of growing tensions and conflicts that have aroused the
attention and apprehension of the international community.
63. Because of the strong bonds of friendship and cooperation existing between Italy and those nations, we
are particularly sensitive to their aspirations and sufferings. Therefore we are directly concerned to see the
return to the region of peaceful conditions, which are
necessary prerequisites for the continuation of their democratic development and social and economic progress.
64. By democratic development we do not mean an
abstract concept isolated from the many real problems
that affect those friendly nations. We are indeed convinced that democratic development cannot be limited to
the sphere of freedom and human rights but should also
be aimed at achieving, on the one hand, an actual pluralistic system and, on the other, progress and justice
through the elimination of social and economic inequalities and the creation of more balanced and harmonious
national communities bound together by the quest for
common goals.

57. The German Democratic
Republic
strongly
condemns the invasion of Nicaragua and is convinced that
this new plot against the independence and right to selfdetermination
of Nicaragua will be foiled. It proceeds
from the fact that today there are no global or regional
problems that cannot be settled on a just basis through
political means. Its attitude fully concurs with that of the
majority of the States Members of the United Nations. It
supports the proposals made by various States of Latin
America and by the States of the Movement of NonAligned Countries at their meetings in Managua and New
Delhi to transform Central America and the Caribbean
into a zone of peace and stability.

65. The efforts that the peoples of Central America are
ready to make in this direction require that the violence
that has already covered the area with blood come to an
end and that negotiations for the restoration of peace
and security for all start without delay among all interested capitals. In Central America violence must give
way to law. The violation of basic principles and rules of
peaceful international coexistence expressed in the Charter of the United Nations must stop.

58. The German Democratic Republic would like to
express its appreciation of the efforts undertaken by the
Government
of Nicaragua aimed at a policy of goodneighbourliness
in the region and the settlement of
disputes with the United States through negotiations.
Such an approach complies with the legitimate interests of
all the peoples of the region.

66. From a legal point of view there is no room for
ambiguities or uncertainties. All Members of the United
Nations must strictly comply with the principles of the
Charter for the achievement of the purposes of the
Organization as set out in Article 1. Among those purposes, in our view, the following deserve to be recalled in
the present debate: the adjustment or settlement, in conformity with the principles of justice and international
law, of disputes or situations which might lead to a
breach of the peace; the development of friendly relations
among nations based on respect for the principle of the
equal rights and self-determination
of all peoples; and
enhancement of international co-operation, in promoting
and encouraging increasing respect for human rights and
f&mdamental freedoms.

59. In compliance with the Political Declaration of the
States Parties to the Warsaw Treaty [S/15556, onnen],
adopted at Prague on 5 January 1983, and the decisions
taken by the Non-Aligned
Movement, the German
Democratic Republic demands that the policy of threat,
provocation
and interference in the internal affairs of
Nicaragua and other States of the region be stopped and
that the road of development chosen by the people of
Nicaragua be respected in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations.

67. Among the principles to which, in conformity with
the Charter, the behaviour of States shall conform, the
following deserve particular emphasis: the duty of all
States to refrain, in their international relations, from the

60. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Italy. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
7

threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or
Political independence of any State; the obligation to settle their international
disputes by peaceful means; and
the obligation
to refrain from any interference-in
our
view, both military
and ideological-in
the internal
affairs of other States, In this context, it is also important
to recall that among the means for the peaceful settlement of disputes the Charter clearly refers to the mechanisms provided by the regional systems of which the
interested countries are members.

the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. We have no doubt that your intimate knowledge
of international affairs and your wide diplomatic experience will help the Council to adopt the necessary measures to avert the aggression threatening Nicaragua,
aggression that has been constantly expanding and taking on a variety of forms. On this occasion I should like
to express our appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Troyanovsky, for the excellent and objective manner in
which he conducted the work of the Council last month.

68. In strict adherence to the Charter, Italy wishes to
recaH these basic principles in the present debate and to
express its belief that an agreement among all interested
countries, based on such principles and rules of behaviour, could be best reached in a regional framework.

75. On 31 March of last year my delegation spoke on
this same issue [2343rdmeeting] to express its full solidarity with revolutionary Nicaragua, a country that is constantly threatened by American imperialism. Imperialism
can prosper and gain strength only by undermining the
revolution, because revolution is progress, it is liberty, it
is the exercise of power by the people and liberation of
the toiling masses, whereas imperialism is full-scale war
and continuous violence against progress; it is resistance
to substitution of the obsolete political and economic
structures of the past imposed by imperialism, not only
on Nicaragua, but on a large number of States, in order
to exploit the peoples in all areas and to rob them of the
fruits of their labour and their natural wealth, as well as
to exercise all forms of exploitation, It is no surprise that
today, a year after its first complaint, Nicaragua is again
raising its voice in the Council to warn that the forces of
imperialism are committing wider and more dangerous
aggression against Nicaragua, both directly and indirectly, recruiting Somoza’s henchmen’ to escalate its conspiracy. The threat to Nicaragua is still continuing and
indeed is increasing day by day, taking forms that entail
the gravest risks for Central America that are bound to
spread and to jeopardize international
peace and
security.

69. Proposals to this effect have already been mentioned during this debate. They were welcomed by the
Italian Government
because we think that they offer a
real basis for an understanding, whatever differences
may separate the countries of Central America today. It
is clear indeed that those countries are confronted with
common
problems which demand common solutions.
Only through
a direct and open dialogue will they
become increasingly aware of their common interests
and lay the ground for an agreement which would open
up the prospect of a better future for their peoples,
70. In this respect my delegation would like to mention
and encourage the efforts that some countries of Central
America are carrying out in order to gather all the countries of that region around the same negotiating table in a
dialogue which could be the first step towards a global
solution of the problems of the area.
71. Central America has the right and the duty to find
within itself an outcome to the present crisis. It should
not be affected by reflections of tensions existing elsewhere in the field of international relations; at the same
time the countries of the area should refrain from acts
which could involve them in contrasts alien to the region
itself,

76, Mr. Tinoco, the Deputy Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua, alerted us to the fact that a new
aggression by the American Administration has this time
assumed the form of a large-scale infiltration by military
and tactical units-to
be more precise, infiltration
by
counter-revolutionary
Somozist elements operating from
the territory of a neighbouring State. Official American
statements and the broad coverage by the American
mass media confirm that the American Administration
is
doing its utmost to destroy the revolution of Nicaragua
by various means, We consider such acts to be not only a
breach of the Charter and of international law; they are
also a new indication that United States policy is by its
very nature inimical to the aspirations of peoples to live
in peace in accordance with the will of the toiling masses.

72. The roots of this crisis are both old and new and
have developed into an overall picture which cannot be
oversimplified.
Nevertheless, even if there are enormous
difficulties,
there are no other choices than to operate in
the only direction which, in our view, could lead to positive results, that is, towards a solution based on reciprocal understanding
and tolerance by which all nations of
the area would be seriously committed to a process of
internal reconciliation
and to strict respect for the indesovereignty
and integrity
of neighbour
pendence,
countries.

77. The United States has not only trained, financed
and provided arms and logistical support to the counterrevolutionary elements, but has also provided them with
a refuge in its territory and a base from which to launch
military aggression against Nicaragua in order to turn
back the clock. There must be a new Somoza waiting in
the wings to return to Managua under the auspices of
Washington to impose his dictatorship over the heroic
people of Nicaragua, but such an attempt is doomed to
failure. When one reads yesterday’s or today’s news-

73. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
74. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation s+-o~ Arabic): My delegation would like at the
outset to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of
8

papers, especially The New York Times, one knows that
every word uttered in the Council by the United States
representative has been but an attempt at obfuscation
and to divert attention from Washington’s aggressive
schemes against Nicaragua.

80. In another article published in the same newspaper
yesterday, an article written by Stephen Kinzer which has
already been mentioned here by a previous speaker
[2424th meeting, pura. 443, it is made clear that Nicaragua’s complaint, submitted precisely and faithfully by
Mr. Tinoco, is based on facts which the United States
authorities are proud to recount in American niwspapers
as though they were acts of heroism, whereas in our view
and according to law and ethics they are but acts of
aggression committed by various means-which
confirms Mr. Tinoco’s assertions, Mr. Tinoco stated:

78. It is an irony that the differences between the
United States Congress and the Administration focus on
whether the constitutional aspects justifying aggression
have been complied with or not, and those differences
are not concerned with terminating the aggressionaggression committed with American aid and planning,
through counter-revolutionary
elements.

“The United States Government, which nurtured
and nursed this dictatorship and which benefited from
the way in which it sold its country down the river for
the sake of its own economic enrichment, is today
behind the new acts of aggression and behind the suffering that the Nicaraguan people is once more undergoing. Those Somozist groups exist only to the extent
that they are financed, trained and directed by institutions of the United States Government, which turns
them into a tool for its own policy in the region,”

79.

Saul Landau wrote an article in yesterday’s The
York Times, entitled “War on Nicaragua”-and
here I must say that I did not understand whether he was
writing in fun or in earnest, but even in irony one can
discern the truth, I shall quote from that article.
New

“War

on Nicaragua:

“Congress should declare war on the Government
of Nicaragua and thereby preserve the Constitution,

[2420 meeting, para, 21.1

81. We listened with a great deal of attention to the
statement of the United States representative, and we are
sure that it was designed to stress three points. First, the
United States is persisting in its present policy to destroy
the Sandinist revolution by the use of force. Secondly,
the United States will continue to intervene in the internal affairs of Nicaragua in order to establish a socalled-and
I insist on the term “so-called”-“democratic” regime. We all know the concept of democracy
envisaged by the United States. Does not the United
States consider Israel, its first ally, a democratic entity,
while Israel “democratically”
commits one act of aggression after another, kills the Arabs, displaces them, desecrates their Holy Places and even poisons their
schoolchildren? I believe that the representative of the
United States reads The New York Times and she must
have read it yesterday and today. Poisonous gases are
used on Arab schools in the West Bank, Such is the
Israeli democracy, which matures in the service of United
States interests in the area. What is the use of murdering
and poisoning our schoolchildren? Do you call that
democracy7 This is the same democracy that you want to
establish in Central America. This is the democracy of
death, of devastation and crime.

“The United States Government is waging war
against Nicaragua and has been for more than a year,
but Congress has not declared war. The Constitution
gives this power to Congress, but someone else has
usurped it-and, by calling the war intelligence activity, they’ve gotten away with it, The ‘someone’ is the
Central Intelligence Agency, commanded by President
Reagan. Here is how the usurpation took place.“*
He continues the article by saying, after quoting William
Casey, who is known to you and who was mentioned
several times in this meeting,
“Congress is now informed, Mr. Casey told the
gathering, referring to the Hughes-Ryan Amendment,
which the C.I.A. has interpreted to mean that Congress is ‘informed’ as soon -as the intelligence committees are told about violent covert actions. Each
intelligence committee member, however, is oathbound not to reveal a word of what he knows, even to
other House and Senate members.“*
The author concludes his article by encouraging
gress to declare war, saying:

Con-

82. Thirdly, the United States exploits the weakness of
some States neighbouring Nicaragua in order to consolidate the interests of American imperialism in the region,
foremost among which is the restoration of the Somozist
regime to rob the masses of their achievements, principally their liberation from American hegemony and
influence.

“The warmaking power is the most important
power Congress has, It is still not too late to call for a
declaration of war. If a majority of members decide
that Nicaragua has not provided cuusus belli, they will
vote against declaring war. Perhaps then and only
then will they exert their constitutional
power and
stop the covert war.“*
Are we to take this information
laugh at it? I do not know.
*Quoted

83. The Syrian Arab Republic, at the Extraordinary
Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the
Non-Aligned
Countries held at Managua in January,
declared its full solidarity with Nicaragua’s revolution
and condemned imperialist intervention in the countries
of Latin America, foremost among which is Nicaragua.

seriously or are we to

in English by the speaker.

9

:

I
:

We must recall that the United States has been encouraging its lackey, Israel, to intervene on its behalf to suppress any progressive movement that is in the interest of
the people and that does not want to serve the interests of
monopolistic
American corporations. Nobody at the
Managua Meeting lost sight of the fact that Israel is a
reliable ally of the United States and, through its arms
sales to some countries in Latin America, is helping it to
strengthen its hegemony on that sensitive region of the
world, Central America.

aggression directly or indirectly undertaken by the United
States to destabilize the States of the region, foremost
among which is Nicaragua. We are certain that Nicaragua’s revolution, which stemmed from the genuine
national interests of the people of Nicaragua and which
represents the aspirations of that people, will not be
defeated, regardless of the arrogance of the United States
and its friends, including Israel and world Zionism.
88. In this regard the Non-Aligned Exiraordinary Ministerial Meeting in Managua was fully aware of the risks
posed by Zionist influence in Latin America. In its final
communiquC [S/15628, annex] that Meeting urged the
Latin American countries maintaining relations of cooperation with Israel to put an end to that co-operation
and to Israeli infiltration, with a view to eliminating it
altogether The Ministers were also aware of the use made
of Israel by the United States in its interventionist practices in Latin America. In this connection they denounced
the visits of Israeli officials to certain countries in Latin
America which Ied, inter a&u, to the conclusion of military agreements and enhancement of intervention by the
United States and Israel in the affairs of the region,
aggravating tension and making the situation even more
volatile. The Ministers condemned the alliance between
the Zionist and Somoza r6gimes.

84. On this occasion, we should like to recall a statement reported by United Press International
on 17
August 1981 quoting Ya’akov Meridor, the Israeli Economic Affairs Minister
“We are going to say to them-the
Americans‘Don’t compete with us in Taiwan; don’t compete
with us in South Africa; don’t compete with us in the
Caribbean or in other countries where you couldn’t
directly do it. Let us do it’, he said. I even used the
expression, ‘you sell the ammunition and equipment
by proxy. Israel will be your proxy’, and this would be
worked out with a certain agreement with the United
States where we will have certain markets which will
be left for us.“*

89. Finally, the delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
supports the statement by the Deputy Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua here in the Council that Nicaragua wishes to hold a dialogue on the problem of
Central America and is ready immediately to discuss the
problems and differences that have arisen as a result of
the military operations in the border region between Nicaragua and Honduras, reiterating its positive position on
any negotiated settlement for the Central American crisis.
We believe that that is a realistic and legitimate approach
likely to put an end to the fire raging in that area.

85. On 14 December 1982 The Chris&n Science Monitor published an article by Susan Morgan, which
included the following:
“Israel has co-operated militarily with Honduras
since 1977. Its sale of French-built Super-Mysthre
bomber jets to Honduras made the Honduran air
force the region’s strongest.
“The unannounced visit and military accord underline Israel’s growing role as US arms broker and proxy
in crisis-ridden Central America. Some six weeks ago,
Israeli Foreign Minister Itzak Shamir visited Costa
Rica, offering to help with internal security.

90. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Bulgaria. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

“Honduras is to send a top-level mission, headed by
General Alvarez, to Israel in the near future, according to the source interviewed.“*

91. Mr. TSVETKOV
(Bulgaria) (interpretation from
French): First of all, I should like to thank the Council
for having given me the opportunity to present my
Government’s position on this question in this forum. I
should also like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of this post of heavy responsibility for the
month of March and express our conviction that, under
your competent guidance, the Council will be able successfully to carry out its responsibilities in this complicated situation. I wish also to pay a tribute to your
predecessor, the representative of the Soviet Union, Mr.
Troyanovsky, who made a broad contribution
to the
effectiveness of the Council’s work last month, for which
we express our gratitude to him.

86. In a fraternal, amicable spirit, I ask the representative of Honduras if this information is true. Why should
Honduras,
a democratic State-as we are told-use
Israeli arms to strengthen itself? These Israeli armaments
sales nourish Israel’s economy with considerable funds.
Israel is the lackey of the United States and wreaks havoc
on relations in Central America, a fact which is known to
many, especially to some Latin American countries that
opted to buy weapons from Israel, inspired by the United
States, which considers the American arms industry as
support for the collapsing economy of Israel.
87. The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic warns
the United States of the consequences of aggravating the
situation in Central America and calls for an end to acts of
*Quoted

92. Reports on the latest developments in Central
America are clear proof of the gravity of the political and
social crisis in that part of the world, provoked by
attempts on the part of reactionary and imperialist forces
to impede the process of progressive and democratic

in English by the speaker.

10

transformations.
The situation is taking an especially
alarming turn because the conflicts being stirred up in the
region are such as might give rise to a chain reaction
fraught with serious consequences for peace and security
both in the region itself and beyond its geographical
limits.
93. At the centre of the Council’s attention today is
Nicaragua’s complaint concerning the flagrant violation
Of its sovereignty. That complaint is substantiated, as
Clearly
as it is convincingly, in the specific and detailed
information
provided the Council by the Nicaraguan
Deputy Minister for External Relations, Mr. Tinoco, and
in the statements made by the overwhelming majority of
the delegations that have already spoken.
94. As we know, almost four years ago the Nicaraguan
people overthrew the rotten dictatorship of Somoza and
launched a democratic revolution, Under the leadership
of the
Sandinist National Liberation Front, that people
devoted itself to peaceful and creative work for the development of the national economy, to resolve important
tasks in the cultural and social fields and to establish a
democratic
and legal order that has restored the fundamental rights and freedoms stifled by the Somozist dictatorship. Nicaragua’s prestige was reinforced within the
international
community thanks to its independent and
sovereign policy and its faithful and consistent attachment to the principles of non-alignment.
95.
However, the choice by the Nicaraguan people of
such a policy, both at the foreign and domestic levels,
proved to be frustrating to the achievement of the imperialist plans of the United States in that part of the world.
Attempts to crush the Nicaraguan revolution began at its
very beginning. At the present time, those attempts have
reached their height, Nicaragua’s territory has been
invaded
by a large and heavily armed gang. Several
details presented during this debate clearly indicate the
style of hegemonistic strategy whose infamous symbol is
the undercover landing in the Bay of Pigs, in Cuba, in
19 6 1. Today the Republic of Nicaragua is the target of an
armed
attack, organized by American imperialism,
which cannot accept the fact that the Nicaraguan people
have rejected domination by imperialist monopolies and
their puppets.

Who are these men and what are their goals? World
96.
mass media, including those of the United States, and
analyses by informed circles and bodies leave no doubt
on that score, These are former Somoza national guardsmen, the executioners of his apparatus of repression,
hirelings devoted to his despotic regime, tradition adventurers trained, paid and sent by the Central Intelligence
Agency. They all make no effort to hide their intentions
of restoring the tyrannical system by fire and blood. They
do not even take the trouble to hide behind the demagogic
phraseology of “freedom”
and “democracy”.
Judging
from a report in Newsweek magazine of 8
November
1982, the killers, while waiting for the sIgna
to attack, openly made the threat that there would be a
blood-bath,
that there were several Counts
to be settled,

that the whole way from the border to Managua would
be strewn with corpses.
97. The aggressive attack on Nicaragua did not surprise anybody. For several months the world had witnessed feverish preparations for the invasion of that
small Central American State. Mention has often been
made of criminal raids across the border with Honduras,
of diversions, of acts of sabotage, of crash trainingcourses for mercenaries by foreign “advisors” and
“instructors” in foreign territory. Many facts concerning
the subversive plans hatched by the special services of the
United States have come to light. In this respect there are
very explicit official statements that prove beyond all
shadow of a doubt the hostile position of Washington
vis-bvis Nicaragua.
98. The world could not remain indifferent to these
dangerous operations. At the Extraordinary Ministerial
Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the NonAligned Countries at Managua in January and at the
Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, at New Delhi earlier this month,
the Governments of more than 100 countries unanimously denounced the slanderous campaign and the acts
of hostility with regard to Nicaragua. The final documents of these representative international forums draw
explicit attention to the systematic armed attacks against
that country and describe them, quite correctly, as Part
of a carefully-thought-out plan to destabilize and overthrow people’s power in Nicaragua.
99. Judging by the present debate and the reactions of
the international community, the aggression against Nicaragua is described as part of the overall strategy of
American imperialism, aimed at confrontation and tension in international relations, which will result in the
intensification of the threat of war.
100. The People’s Republic of Bulgaria shares the deep
concern expressed in this forum by several representatives first and foremost by those of certain countries of
this hemisphere, vis-ci-vis the armed intervention against
independent and democratic Nicaragua. My Government firmly condemns these acts of aggression, which are
incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations,
with the most elementary norms of international law and
with the interests of peace and security in this region and
in the whole world and believes that open and direct
dialogue between the two countries, as proposed by the
representative of Nicaragua, constrtutes a reasonable
path towards solution of the conflict by peaceful means.
The Bulgarian people expressesits sincere sympathy and
total solidarity with the Nicaraguan people. At the same
time my country appeals for the immediate cessation of
the intervention, for the halting of all interference in the
domestic affairs of Nicaragua and for respect for the
right of that country to go forward along the path of
democracy and social progress, a path whrch Its people
has chosen in sovereignty.
101 The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the rePresentative of Cyprus. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
11

northern border by armed bands of former members of
the Somoza National Guard” [see S/15628, annex, para.
371. Moreover, the Ministers

102. Mr, MOUSHOUTAS
(Cyprus): Allow me at the
outset, Sir, to congratulate you warmly on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council during the
month of March and on the exemplary manner in which
you are conducting the work of the Council. Allow me
also to express sincere appreciation to Mr. Troyanovsky
of the Soviet Union, who presided over the Council’s
deliberations last month with his usual competence and
effectiveness,

“appealed to all States in Central America to resolve
their problems themselves, free from all externalinter.ference, and help generate a situation of peace and
tranquillity which will lead to political stability and
economic development in the region and thus contribute to the cause of international peace and security”
[ibid., para. 46].

103. The Government of the Republic of Cyprus is
deeply disturbed by the latest reports concerning the infiltration of some 2,000 heavily armed men into Nicaraguan territory and the armed aggression carried out by
those armed groups against the people and the Government of Nicaragua.

108. In the same spirit, the summit conference in New
Delhi expressed the view that “the cessation of military
manoeuvres or demonstrations of force will reduce tension and facilitate the necessary dialogue for the achievement of political and negotiated solutions
of the
problems of the region” [see S/15675, annex, sect. Z,

104. The critical developments in Nicaragua and in the
Central American region in general cannot but deeply
disturb the international community. For what is happening in that particular area of the world is not only a
reflection of adverse developments on the international
scene but also a further sign of the failure on the part of
the Organization to fulfil its paramount purpose-that of
maintaining international peace and security. This failure, we believe, is due to the lack of an effective system of
international security as a result of non-compliance with
the mandatory Article 43 of the Charter.

para. 1391.

109. We regret that, despite such calls, we are seeing a
worsening of the situation, particularly in Nicaragua.
Being victims of aggression and continuing occupation of
a large part of our territory ourselves, we cannot but
strongly condemn the resort to violence and intervention,
such as is taking plce against Nicaragua, as well as acts of
intervention and destabilization in the whole Central
American region and anywhere in the world. The
Government of the Republic of Cyprus, committed
to
the peaceful solution of disputes through negotiation,
cannot but oppose any form of aggression, against any
country.

1’05. We believe that bilaterial or international problems must be solved peacefully by negotiations, not by
the force of arms. Moreover, respect for the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and unity of a country
by all States, coupIed with the principle of noninvolvement in the internal affairs of others, must be at
the core of international relations.

110. We believe that peace must be sought, maintained
and strengthened through dialogue and that, notwithstanding ideological or other differences which may exist
between States, the right of any State freely to choose its
own political, social and economic system, without outside interference or intervention, must be fully respected.

106. Only this month, at the Seventh Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, the members of the Movement, when referring to
Nicaragua, denounced “the commission of terrorist
actions and sabotage, particularly the attacks of armed
groups of ex-Somoza guards through its northern
border” [see S/1567.5, annex, sect. I, para. 136J

The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

NOTES

’ See A/38/68, annex.
2 General Assembly resolution 2131 (XX).
3 General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
4 General Assembly resolution 37/10, annex.
5 Resolution 447 (PLEN.15) of the Committee of the Whole
Economic Commission for Latin America.

107. A few months ago, at the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the NonAligned Countries at Managua, the Non-Aligned
Countries “specifically denounced the systematic attacks
being carried out against Nicaragua from across its

Litho in United Nations, New York

-

/

00300

60205-October

of the

1990-2,050
