UNITEDNATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL:

OFFICJAL

. .a

RE-CORDS
1 $1 I Wtt),A tfy

TWENTY-NINTH

NEW

YEAR

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional. agenda (S/Agenda/l 769/Rev. 1)

.........................

1

Tribute to the memory of Mr. Franz Jonas, President of the Republic of Austria .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the Middle Fast:
Letter dated 13 April 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l1264).............................................

1

.......................

10

Statement by the representative of Mauritania

S/PV. 1769 and Corr. 1

,.

.’

;‘; r.I ‘D. *. , ( ,Ii .-.I t.,:; I ‘:
I*, j
-.

,.
.-

k,’
. ...<.
z Ll FtLI
F J.:c”’
.1..

.‘.‘yL.‘:
_‘,.C :

5=,

..,

.*-’ f.’
.‘..‘c’
‘j

2

_. ,‘Z+ ,z
‘...,‘. ., ,’

11.:
..

II; ‘.

I,

?I:.
i!:i

-~

.__

a‘>;

(.‘>. .:.,<,

:’ :,.3-i’

;.;

i,;<e;;

.

.*
:

.A*

.

_ -1 .:, .‘,

i 1

,;

.

_..
..’ .,‘, ;

;

‘.
.I
ia ,.
,i ;
, **,

..

‘,’

‘>

.

NOTjZ

I’ .,

_ ;’

:

‘1. ;.

-_

,.

: :;
(
.
Symbols of United .Nations documents are composed of capital letters ‘&rnb&d with
,
figures.
Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United ,Nations’ddcument, I .
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. :.) are normally published m quarterly.
Supplements of .tiie”Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

\. ‘,’

indicates the supplement in which it. appears or in which information about: it_~is given. ‘, -,,,
: The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, ‘which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

.

:
f

,

,.,.,
.;

*

.

-..

‘.,
t

-.

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND SIXTY-NINTH

MEETING

Held in New Yqrk on, Wednesday, B April 1974, at 3 pm.
President: Mr. Talib EL-SHIBIB (Iraq),
Resent: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania, Peru, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Cameroon and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1769/Rev.l)
I.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter &ted 13 April 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/11264)
4. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken by the Council at its 1766th meeting, and with the
consent of the Council, I propose to invite the representatives of Lebanon and Israel, under the relevant Article of
the ‘Charter and in accordance with rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure, to participate in the COW
cil’s discussion without the right to vote.,

Adoption of the agenda.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 13 April 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1264).
The meeting uus called to order at 6.25p.m.
Tribute to the mem&y of Mr. Franz Jonas, President
of the Republic of Austria
1. The PRESIDENT: Before proceeding with the business
before the Council today, I must,, for the.second’time this
month, express on behalf of the Council our sincere
condolences to one of the members of the Council on the
untimely death of his head of State. I refer on this occasion
to the distinguished late President of Austria, Mr. Franz
Jonas, whose passing has been a great loss to the people of
his .own country, of Europe, and indeed
. of the world at
large.
2. I should like to extend on behalf of the Security
Council, and also in the name of the delegation of Iraq, our
condolences to our dear colleague Ambassador Peter
Jankowltsch, and ask him to convey our heartfelt sympathies to the people and Government of Austria, as well as
to the late President’s family.
3. May I, on this occasion, request members to observe a
minute’s silence.
The representatives, standing, obseived a minute’s silence.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra (Lebanon) and Mr Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the Council
table.
5. The PRESIDENT: In addition, in accordance with the
decision taken at the same meeting, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
Egypt, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and the’syrian Arab Republic
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote;
under the relevant Article of the Charter and in accordance
with rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure. 1 request
the representatives mentioned to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber, on the
understanding that they will be invited to take places at the
Council table at the appropriate time.
Ai the invitation of the President. Mr. A. E. Abdel
Meguid (Egypt), Mr. A. Y. Bishara (Kuwait), Mr. J.
Baroody (Saudi Arabia) and Mr. H. Kekmi (Syrian Arab
Republic) took the pIaces reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.
6. The PRESIDENT: Members have before them a draft resolution in document S/l 1275 which has emerged from ‘lengthy consultations that some members of the Council
have had over the past few days.
7. Mr. SALAZAR (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation would like to join in ‘the words of
sympathy which you, Mr. President, expressed a few
moments ago on behalf of all the members of the Security
Council at the .death of the distinguished President of ..
Austria, Mr. Franz Jonas. Austria has lost a great leader. My
country, a sincere admirer of Austria ‘and its statesmen,
deplores that great loss and we convey to Ambassador
Jankowitsch our expression of deep sympathy.

Adoption of the agenda
l’he agenda ws adopted.

.

,*,

8. Unlike most of the delegations that have spoken in the
Council before me, my delegation does not wish to start -.

.

talking in this debate about whom we like or whom we do
not like, if this were the case, in the conflict. We shall strive
to refrain in our statement from passing judgement about
which side is good and which side is bad. We shall avoid
saying anything that would prematurely indicate an emotional attitude In this very serious subject at present under
debate in the Council. This position may help us determine
the role which, to our way of thinking, should be played by
the Security Council with respect to this very delicate
complaint that has been lodged by Lebanon.

growing risk that .the Council will increasingly fail to
perform the essential functions which the Charter assigned
to it and which the world expects of it. That is, it does not
positively safeguard international peace and security if
there is always a desire to secure political success in any
dispute.
15. The Charter, in Article 2, established the principle of
the sovereign equality of all its members, thanks to which
all nations, large and small, participate on an equal footing.
Without prejudice to this essential principle of international
relations, it must be agreed that the Charter, when setting
forth the composition of the Security Council and giving
a permanent seat in it to only fiie States, gave more rights
to the so-called great Powers than to the other States.

9. The debate has been useful in spite of some excesses
because it has provided information about the current
problem and its underlying causes. It has also helped us
think about what role should be played by the Council in
such cases, and a number of questions have come to our
mind to which we have not always found replies.

16. The entire international community agreed that such a
scheme should be maintained, which remains fully valid
today, because as the Foreign Minister of Costa Rica said
when Costa Rica took its seat in this Council:

10. One begins by wondering about the nature of this
organ of central importance, the Security Council. I think it
is worth while to consider exactly what the performance of
the Council has been during the past few days in view of its
heavy responsibilities to maintain international peace and
security under the Charter. One wonders how, in an
essentially political body such as the Council, one could fail
to expect its members to express the views and follow the
political lines of the States that they represent. One is
tempted to query whether in fact the Council customarily
has confined itself to the Charter, which assigns it primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and security

‘6. . . the Charter of San Francisco is based upon one
essential political hypothesis and that is harmony and
co-operation among the great Powers. And since the
maintenance of peace is the primary objective of the
United Nations, its peacekeeping machinery is based on
the theory of joint action by the five great Powers. It is
for that reason that they were given permanent seats in
the Security Council. It is for that reason that the veto
was created, as a guarantee that the Security Council
would not use its powers without the agreement of the
most powerful nations.” [I 76Ist meeting, para. 12.J

11. How can we reconcile its essentially political nature
with the responsibilities which the Charter assigns to it as
guardian of international peace and security? How can one
fail to wonder whether the members of the Council, who,
after all, cannot divest themselves of their political garb, are
always right when they decide on behalf of this important
organ?

17. The international community agreed that greater
rights would be given in this peace-keeping body to some,
confident that that privilege would entail great responsibility for the major Powers. Their joint action is crucial for
maintaining international peace and security, and it is well
known that when a lack of understanding has emerged, the
Security Council has lost its effectiveness in maintaining
peace. It is a heavy responsibility indeed inasmuch as the
major Powers are clearly aware that, because of their
privileges, they are protected from any warning or blockade
or condemnation or armed attack or any other enforcement
action decided on by the Council on behalf of the entire
international community. The responsibility is great indeed,
inasmuch as they are clearly aware that no State in the
world, except them, is protected from punitive action upon
which the Council might agree. They do have enormous
responsibility because they have the rare privilege of never
being punished and being able to use machinery which
makes it possible for them to punish the rest. Those who
realize the most that they have this major responsibility are
the major Powers themselves. What they say here and how
they say it create the kind of climate that is necessary if
there is to be a solution to a given problem. It is surprising,
though, that very frequently the major Powers create the
kind of climate which ,actually works against, which
prevents, a reasonable solution to conflicts. I think I am
saying the truth when I say that my delegation was
somewhat dismayed at the debate that has taken place on
the subject of the complaint presented by Lebanon in the
letter dated 13 April 1974. The Council has avoided its real
responsibility if it believes that all it must do is to

12. Since it is clear that the decisions of the Council which
have a binding and enforcement nature take the form of
real legal rulings, one cannot but wonder how a political
body can provide effective guarantees that its decisions of a
judicial nature will not be termed unjust or one-sided?
What, when all is said and done, is the Security Council: a
political body or a body which, because of its decisions,
rather partakes of the nature of a court of law?
13. Of course the Security Council is not a court of justice.
Nor does it even dispense justice. We should not find this
shocking if we accept that, because of the structure given to
it in the Charter, it was intended to be a political body,
some of whose powerful functions were to be judicial. But
simply that it has those powers and uses them should not
lead to the false conclusion that the Council is an
unimpeachable judge possessed of impartiality and neutrality. Certainly not, and we have all seen this with our
own eyes.‘It is often partial and is not in the habit of being
neutral. It tends to follow political interests, and the
debates here are inevitably marked by the stamp of the
political considerations which its members heed.
14. Wherein lies the problem? it is that political accommodation has played too important a role and there is a
2
i

I

reprimand, to admonish, to repeat warnings. to issue
condemnations, rather than tackle the root of-the difficult
problems submitted to it. It is just not enough to pile draft
after draft in an increasingly bitter and passionate verbal
escalation if it conceals the fact that behind every dispute is
a difficult problem which needs to be solved.

24. Lebanon has denied that the terrorist band came from
that country. Israel has said the opposite. However that
may be, the truth of the matter is that the Security Council
has lacked appropriate information to establish the facts.
The Israeli action cannot be attenuated, still less justified, if
it is established that the terrorist band originated in and in
fact .came from Lebanon” However, if that fact is established, the correct thing to do would be to remind the
Lebanese Government of its duty, in accordance with
international law, to adopt every reasonable step to prevent
the organization in its territory of irregular forces or armed
bands to carry out incursions in the territory of another
State.

18. If it departs from its determining role in the settlement of the most serious international conflicts, the
Council should not deplore the fact that the vacuum is
fdled by those who want to tackle the problem in a
responsible way and find the kind of solution that the
situation requires.
19. In the conflict in the Middle East the Council has a
primary responsibility to discharge. It would be a matter of
regret if it failed to do so and had to consent to be led by
those who are capable of assuming responsibility.

25. My delegation is confident that the action which will
be determined by the Security Council in connexion with
this new outbreak of violence in the Middle East will be
consonant with the desire, which I am sure we all share, not
to do anything to decrease the chances of a dialogue and
negotiations between the parties involved, in whose initial
progress the United Nations has played a leading role.

20. The human problem at the root of the conflict is the
problem of the Palestinian refugees. One should not settle,
however, for the provision of food on behalf of the United
Nations. Nor should one rouse their feelings and incite
them to terrorist action which the entire civilized world
repudiates. A definitive solution to the problem must be
found, without disregarding its complexity in the way the
United Nations gave the Jews a solution when the State of
Israel was established. For equally important human reasons as well as for the fact that one must not be unrealistic
at the start, the solution to the problem cannot be found at
the price of eliminating the State of Israel.

26. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

I now call on the representative of

27. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I should like to associate my
delegation with members of the Security Council in
expressing sincere condolences to the representative of
Austria, his Government and his people on the untimely
passing of the President of the Republic of Austria,
Mr. Franz Jonas.

21. My delegation deplore the violent events which once
again have emerged in the Middle East. We lament the
atrocities of the criminal terrorist act of Kiryat Shmona.
Consistent with the principles of human rights which my
country professes, my delegation has felt repugnance at this
killing of innocent human beings. It is impossible to
imagine the indignation that was caused in Israel by that
act, but we are also in complete disagreement with reprisal
actions undertaken by Israel in violation of the sovereignty
of Lebanon.

28. On 11 April 1974 three agents of a terrorist organization based in Lebanon crossed the Lebanese-Israeli
frontier, murdered 18 persons in Kiryat Shmona and
wounded 15 others. On 12 April 1974 Israeli defence forces
crossed the same border and dynamited 20 village houses of
terrorist collaborators, after having evacuated their inhabitants.
29.. Instead of adopting measures to put an end to the
operation of terrorist organizations on and from Lebanese
soil against Israel, Lebanon lodged a complaint against
Israel in the Council. Instead of undertaking to abide by its
international obligations and eliminating the terror headquarters, centres and bases situated in Lebanon, the
Lebanese Government sought to disclaim its responsibility
for harbouring the terrorist gangs.

22. My delegation represents a country which by unilateral decision practices general and complete disarmament. My
country cannot even try to assert the right of self-defence
appearing in Article 51 of the Charter in case of aggression,
for the exercise of such a right implies possession of
defensive means sufficient to repel aggression. It is not
surprising, then, that Costa Rica in the event of an external
attack depends for its protection on international mechanisms, at the regional or the international level, to which we
have entrusted our security. We could therefore never
accept any action which violates the sovereignty of a
nation, even if it is in response to a horrendous terrorist act.

30. As indicated in my opening statement at the 1767th
meeting, on 16 April, the results of the discussion in the
Council were foreseeable. The merits of the issues were, as
in previous discussions of the Middle East situation, of little
import; the facts apparently of limited interest.

23. If this debate on the complaint by Lebanon were to
lead to a declaration on the part of the Security Council,
then my delegation, respecting the facts, would be pleased
if, together with any warning to Israel as a result of its
incursion into Lebanese territory, there were to be equally
fir/m considerations of the causes which led to that
action-though
they would not justify by themselves the
Israeli action-namely,
to the terrorist
act of Kiryat
Shmona.

31. The formulation of the draft resolution followed the
usual
pattern. Again encouraged by this familiar spectacle
now drawing to its denouement, the Beirut-based terrorist
organization which had acknowledged its responsibility for
the Kiryat Shmona outrage, even while the massacre was
still going on in the townlet, issued the following triumphant declaration, which was published in the Beirut daily
As-Safa the day before yesterday, on the eve of today’s
3
,

concluding meefing. According to a Reuter dispatch from
Beirut, dated 22 April:

nameless? Is the identity
concealed?

of their murderers to be

‘Thi Popular Front General Command said in an
interview published by the Beirut newspaper As-Safa that
it attacked Kiryat Shmona to make it impossible for a
peaceful settlement between the Arabs and Israelis.

36. Without a reference to the Kiryat Shmona massacre,.
and in all its studied one-sidedness, the draft resolution and
-its adoption would be a singularly gross .miscarriage of
justice.
‘.

‘%I the attack on Kiryat Shmona 18 Israelis and three
of the Command’s guerrillas were killed.

37.. On this 4ay when Israel commemorates its sons and
daughters fallen in’ the defence of our independence, my
.delegation will not be a witness to the trtiesty. that
apparently is about to take place here-not even as a
spect&tor. It leaves you; therefore, with the paper presented
for the Council’s vote fid departs with the memory of the
martyrs of Kiryat Shmona and of all victims of Arab
terrorism and aggressitin. As the Bible says, the memory of
the righteous shall be for a blessing.

“There will be more actions like Kiryat Shmona until
all Palestine is liberated, Abou El-Abbas, spokesman for
the group, said. He said he could now reveal the group
was responsible for three other incidents since 1970.
They were:
“*The killing last year of Israeli Military Attache Joseph
Allon outside his Washington home.

.

38. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): Let me offer
my personal condolences and those of my Government to
Ambassador Jankowitsch and, through him, to the people
and Governnient of Austria on their bereavement. The
passing of President Jonas has saddened us all.

“The explosion aboard a Swissair passenger airliner over
Zurich in February 1970, in which 47 people were killed.
“The explosion of an Austrian airlines plane, near
Vienna, in February 1970 in which there were no
casualties.~

39. At a later stage in these proceedings I shall haire a
statement to make regarding @e circums@~~% suirounding
our consideration of the Lebanese complaint. For the
present I wish to make only limited comment on the draft
resolution /S/1227.5].

“Abou -El-Abbas said Kiryat Shmona was carefully
selected as a target for its economic,. strategic and
symbolic significance to Israel.

40. It is clear to mi that a great deal of effort and thought
has gone into this draft. The intent has clearly been, first,
to be equitable, and second to contriiute towards strengthening conditions of stability which are indispensable if a
lasting peace in the Middle East is to be achieved. My
delegation shares these aim&We believe that with a single
amendment the draft before us might command widespread
positive support among the members of the Security
Council.

“He said the Popular Front Generai Command would
attack Israel wherever it showed itself.”
32. The draft resolution before the Council is deserving of
being presented to the tune of tich gory praise of murder
and barbarism. The draft resolution is another example of
the bias and inequity which prevail in Council debates on
the Middle East.

41. Having been informed that amendments are proper at
this time, my delegation proposes that operative paragraph 2 be amended to read:

33. The Government of Lebanon would be committing a
grave error if it thought that the draft resolution, reflecting
the political vie.Ws of member States, could in any way
whatever detract from Lebanon’s legal and moral obligation
to terminate the activities of the murder’organizations on
and from its territory. The people of Lebanon must not be
misled into .such illusions. Israel will continue to hold the
Lebanese Government responsible for any armed attacks
organized in or perpetrated from Lebanon.

Wmdemns all acts of violence, especially those which, :
as at Kiryat Shmona, result in the tragic loss of innoc&nt
civilian life, and urges Ul concerned to refrain from any
further acts of violence”.

34. On 11 April, 18 innocent Israeli, most of them
women and children, were savagely slaughtered in Kiryat
Shmona. On the following day Israeli forces demolished the
stones and bricks of 20 ,Lebanese houses belonging to
terrorist associates.

42. The PRESIDENT: There are no more names on the
list of speakers. Unless any other representatives wish to
peak I propSse that the Council proceed t? vote on-the
amendment that has just been proposed by the representative of the United States. Does any representative wish to
speak on the proposed amendment?

35. The draft resolution before the Council speaks of the
stones and the bricks; it .does not even mention the
massacre of Kiryat Shmona, though we are aware that an
attempt has been made to include such a reference. Is the
shedding of Jewish blood to be again passed over in
silence? Are the innocent victims of Kiryat Shmona

43. Mr. EL HASSEN (Mauritania) (inferpretation from _
French): I would begin by preseniing the condolences of
my delegation to the Austrian repre’sentative- following the I ..
tragic death of the President of the Republic.of Austria. I
should like to assure his delegation of our profound
sympathy.
4

lr.

’

‘1

.

’

:.

,

.

.

‘.

..,.f’.

,~
i

tant strategic points and for hegemony there. in fact, there

44. I should like to state that my, delegation is against. the
amendment of the United States for a verysimpie reason.
The parties before the Council now are Lebanon and i&d.
Any reference to tK&yat. Shmona would necessarily entail
thepresence of another.paity”and the hear&of that party
by the’Council, But’ihis $‘not”tlie ciiSe~.ir;e Co&$ does
not have in its possession sufficient inf&mati&‘m
order to
make a judgement about the rights and obligations’of that
other,party. it is for that reason that my,delegation cannot
accept the amendment just &oduced
by ‘the .United
States.
:. ,I a. “, .,;.‘i-1 ?, :, ..;y 1:’ ,’ 1,..,
45. ‘The PRESIDENT: ,_Smce no ’ ,o&r *representative
wishes to speak on ‘the amendment’ proposed orally by the
Unitep States, I shall now put that amendment to the vote.
A vi& was taken by &w*of
‘

han&.

“-

‘is tie dZtente in the Middle East situation, let alone Lasting

pe.ace. On the contrary, the rivalry between the superPowers in the Middle East:has become ever fiercer. In the
‘Middle .East ‘war l&t October the two super-Powers vied
with each other ‘in deploying their forcei and confronted
each other with’ daggers drawn. This provides the best
proof. The people of the world have &cerning eyes. No
matter what high-sounding and fine words the super-Powers
‘may “use, they cannot cover up the truth about, their
contention for hegemony in the Middle E&t. is this, not
clear, enough? in advertising .a so-called “‘just and lasting
PeG$,in the Middle East”, the purpose of the super-Powers
is to ‘suit their needs of contention .for hegemony’; spread
ilIu&oris about peace and lull the ‘f@hting will of the Arab
and Palestinian peoples who are waging valiant struggles to
recover their lost territories and regain their national rights.
All this can only be to the benefit of Israeli zionism and
super-Power hegemony but to the detriment of the just
cause of the Arab and Palestinian peoples.
1
1

.~ 1

In favour: Australia, Austria, ,C!osta Rica, France, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
United
., Ireland,
;
Statesof America.
(.
I. ‘:
.*Aghst:
China, Indonesia, ‘Iraq, Kenya; Mauritania, Peru,
United Republic of Cameroon.

50. The draft. resolution further calls on “all parties to
refrain from any action which, might endanger negotiations
aimed at achieving a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East”. What does this mean? To put it bluntly, this means
asking the. Palestinian and other Arab peoples to submit
servilely to the manipulations of the two super-Powers and
forbidding them from taking any action of resistance in
self-defence, or they .would be charged with “endangering
peace negotiations”, This ia a language implying threats.
However, the times have changed. The great Arab and
Palestinian peoples are experiencing daily awakening. it is
not the one or two super-Powers but the united Arab
peoples who dare to struggle and dare to win that will
decide the fate of the Middle East. In their attempt to seek
hegemony and rule the fate of the people in the Middle
East, the super-Powers will only end up by dropping
on their own feet the rock they have lifted. No force on
earth can stop the just struggle of the Arab and Palestinian
peoples for the recovery of their lost territories and
national rights.

Abstaining: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union
..
of Soviet Socialist Republics.
r
~.
.’
:‘,
The result, if the v&e ws
2 abstentions.

6’ ii favour,

7, against, with

l%e amendment was not adopted, having failed to obtain
the affirmative votes of nine members.

46. The PRESIDENT: Before proceeding to put to the
vote the draft resolution before the Council, I shall call on
those representatives wishing to explain their vote before
the vote.
47. Mr. CHUANC Yen (China) (translation from CTzinese):
Mr. President, allow me, in the name of the Chinese
delegation, to express condolences on the passing away of
the President of Austria, Frti Jonas,, and our solicit,ous
sympathy to Ambassador Jankowitsch and his colleagues in
the Austrian delegation.

51; Second, condemnation of all acts of violence contained in the draft resolution is something that the Chinese
delegation cannot agree to. We have never favoured
adventurist acts by individuals or a few people divorced
from the masses, because they are detrimental to the cause
of national liberation and the people’s revolution, Nevertheless, on the question of violence, one must fust of all
distinguish between two categories of violence which are
entirely different in nature: the .vioLence used ‘by the
aggressors and oppressors is unjust, while the violence used
by the victims of aggression -and the oppressed to resist
aggression and win liberation is just. All justice-upholding
countries and people condemn the former and support the
latter. The Israeli Zionists have been using reactionary
violence to carry out aggression and oppression against the
Palestinian and other Arab peoples. But the draft resolution
makes no d@nction between the right and the wrong,
between the aggressors and the victims of aggression,
between justice and injustice. Instead, it makes an indiscriminate condemnation of all acts of violence. Does not
this mean asking the Arab and Palestinian peoples who are
subjected to aggression and oppression to lay down their

48. The I3mese ‘deiegation has ‘&died‘ draft resolution
S/l 1275. The draft resolution condemns Israel’s violation
of Lebanon’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and calls
on Israel to stop its military act&s and threats against
Lebanon and forthwith to return to the latter the abducted
Lebanese civilians; These are n&mum
and justified
demands which the Chinese delegation. supports;.However,
we haveto point out with regret tiiat the draft resolution
,. ‘I
embodies very harmful contents. ’ -:
49. First, the draft resolution twice’mentions achieving “a
just and lasting peace in the Middle East”. We understand
the good _desire: of some peace-lov,mg countries ,which
earnestly hope to obtain peace in the Middle East. Yet, as,is
known to ah, Israel has dared to act so truculently precisely
because it has the connivance and support of the superPowers. The crux of the Middle East question lies in the
two super-Powers’ contention for oil resources and impor5

arms before Zionism and hegemony and wait for death with
folded arms? What kind of logic is this? The Palestinian
people will never accept it, nor will the Arab peoples and all
the justiceupholding countries and peoples in the world.

injustice and with the condemnation.of aggression against a
country-Lebanon-which,
to defend itself, has only its
right. and its unshakeable faith in the United Nations and its
most competent body, the Security Council. While this
condemnation of Israel is justified by the gravity of the act
which led Lebanon to lodge a complaint with the Security
Council, it is also a response to Mr. Tekoah’s insult to you,
Mr. President, and, through you, to all the members of the
Council. I know Mr. Tekoah is no longer present to hear
this, but I thought it my duty, as a member of the Council,
to put it on record at this meeting.

52. It must be pointed out that the Chinese delegation had
made active efforts in order to have those very harmful
contents, deleted from the draft resolution. Regrettably,
however, our just request has not been accepted. In these
circumstances, the Chinese delegation has decided not to
participate in the voting on the draft resolution.

60. We know that there are conflicts between men, States
and blocs. Those conflicts have always had their repercussions here in the form of bitter and sometimes vehement
statements. But we have never heard here or read in United
Nations documents words like those addressed at the
1768th meeting of the Security Council by Mr. Tekoah to
the President of this Council.

53. In conclusion, the Chinese delegation reaffirms that
the Chinese Government and people firmly support the
Palestinian and other Arab peoples in their just struggle to
oppose Israeli Zionism and super-Power hegemony and to
recover their lost territories and regain their national rights.
This position of ours is firm and unshakeable. We believe
that the Arab people’s cause for liberation is just, and a just
cause will eventually triumph no matter what twists and
turns and hardships it may encounter. This is an irreversible
law of history.
54. Mr. EL HASSEN

(Mauritania)

(interpretation

61. Had Mr. Tekoah addressed the representative of Iraq
in bitter terms there would have been no particular surprise,
but that he should have addressed the President of the
Council as he did, and using the language that he did,
justifies, on the part of all of us, a clear censure. All of us
are called upon to guide the proceedings of this Council,
and we can do so only if we enjoy the respect attaching to
that serious and complex responsibility.

from

French): I should like very briefly

to explain the vote
which my delegation will cast on the draft resolution. My
delegation has decided to support that draft.resolution for
the following reasons.

55. The Security Council has had before it only one
complaint of Lebanon against Israel. It was Israel which in
fact violated the sovereignty of Lebanon, destroying v&
lages, killing or abducting innocent, peaceable Lebanese
civilians. In other words, my delegation feels that this draft
resolution concerns only two parties: Lebanon and Israel. It
is in that spirit that we will support this draft, and in that
spirit too that we interpret its provisions.

62. The PRESIDENT: There are no further names on my
list of members wishing to explain their votes before the
vote. I shall accordingly, now put to the vote the draft
resolution in document S/l 1275.

56. For my delegation, the condemnation of all acts of
violence and the full respect for the provisions of the
Charter and for the international obligations flowing
therefrom embodied in operative paragraphs 2 and 3 are
addressed only to the two parties to the present complaint
before the Council.

nYo members (China and Iraq) did not participate in the
voting

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted by 13 votes to none.1

63. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those representatives who wish to explain their votes after the vote.
64. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): The situation
in the Middle East presents grave risks and great opportunities. During the last few months the first concrete steps
towards peace were taken-after decades of strife between
Arab and Israeli. All principal parties to the conflict have
accepted Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) as
a basis for peace. A framework for negotiations, the Geneva
Peace Conference, has been established. New foundations
of stability required for further progress have been created.
These include the dispatch of the United Nations Emergency Force, the implementation of the cease-fire on the
Israeli-Egyptian front and the Egyptian-Israeli agreement on
the disengagement of forces.

57. Now, it is clear that Lebanon has committed no act of
violence of any nature whatsoever and that it has always
respected, and continues to respect, its international obligations. It is Israel alone which has committed acts of
violence on Lebanese territory, thus violating that country’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. It is Israel alone which
has acted, and continues to act, as it pleased, in defiance of
the Charter and of international law and Security Council
resolutions.
58. Consequently, we understand the provisions of operative paragraphs 2 and 3 of the draft resolution as being
addressed to Israel, which is making violence the very
cornerstone of its policy. We also feel that the explicit
condemnation of Israel in operative paragraph 1 is a logical
consequence of the foregoing.

65. Despite this promising diplomatic progress, however,
acts of violence and terrorism threaten to undermine the
prospects of permanent peace. Clashes between Israeli and
Syrian military forces on the cease-fire line increase in

59. Hence, in voting in favour of this draft resolution, we
wish to associate ourselves with the condemnation of

1 Seeresolution 347 (1974).
6

r

intensity. We must most emphatically deplore such resorts
to force in violation of the ceasefire demanded by the
Council, and in contradiction to the disengagement being
actively pursued at the present time.

receive the necessary support in this Council. We believe,
however, that the resolution before us condemns all
violence whatever its origin, including the tragedy at Kiryat
Shmona.

66. Once again we meet here to consider the massacre of
innocent men, women and children. On 11 April, three
terrorists brutally killed 16 civilians in Kiryat Shmona.
Alleging that the terrorists came from Lebanon, Israel
launched a reprisal raid two days later against several
villages in southern Lebanon, which reportedly resulted in
civilian casualties as well.

72. But we must move forward from condemnations of
violations to encouraging moves toward a just and durable
peace. Above all, our efforts in this Council .must contribute to the climate of peace and mutual goodwill which
is indispensable if negotiations are to succeed.
73. Mr. ANWAR SANI (Indonesia):
Allow me fmt,
Mr. President, on behalf of my delegation, to join you and
other colleagues in expressing to the delegation of Austria
and, through it, to the Covemment and people of Austria
sincere condolences on the sad occasion of the passing away
of the President of Austria, Mr. Franz Jonas.

67. We do not presume to make a judgement about the
respective claims as to whether or not the terrorists came
from Lebanon. The fact is, however, that innocent people
were brutally murdered, and spokesmen for the murderers
held a press conference in Beirut to boast of their callous
act. Once more we have been faced with mounting violence,
ugly language and harsh retribution. This is a familiar tale,
but with a significant difference. This time the cancer of
terrorism not only takes innocent lives; it threatens the new
and more promising trends toward peace in the area. This,
indeed, may have been the principal motive of the
attackers.

74. My delegation would like to thank those delegations
whose efforts made it possible for the Council to have a
draft resolution before it for consideration. It is a pity that
at the last moment they decided.to remain anonymous.
75. My delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution,
though we did not do so without entertaining some doubts.
It has always been the considered view of my delegation
that the Council cannot and should not treat acts of
violence committed by desperate and frustrated victims of
aggression, suffering from spiritual and material hardships
as a result of expulsion from their homes and their land on
the same level as acts of aggression committed by a country
as part of its avowed official policy.

68. Despite these difficulties, the United States pledges to
continue its efforts to move the parties towards peace.
Simply put, my country seeks through discussion, negotiation and accommodation
to move, on the basis of
resolution 242 (1967), toward a just and durable peace, a
peace which will transform the atmosphere, the relations
and attitudes in the Middle East for the benefit of all
concerned. This is a goal to which the vast majority of the
United Nations membership subscribes and to which the
United Nations itself is making a key contribution.

76. Much as we would prefer to have a truly balanced
resolution which took into account the view I have just
expressed, we are very much aware that such a draft would
have had little chance of winning the necessary support
under the present circumstances. We therefore decided to
vote for the present resolution, especially in view of
paragraphs 1 and 4, which apparently meet the immediate.’
interests of Lebanon.

69. Sadly, this objective is still repudiated by groups of
terrorists, uninhibited by law and unrestrained by common
standards of human decency. The group which claims
responsibility for the murders at Kiryat Shmona is categorically opposed to the process of negotiation through the
peace conference at which the Soviet Union and the United
States are co-chairmen. Indeed, one spokesman who claims
to speak for that group has reportedly claimed that Kiryat
Shmona was just the beginning of revolutionary violence
aimed at preventing a permanent Arab-Israeli settlement.

77. Mr. MALIK

(Union

of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translation from Russian): The Soviet delegation, associating itself with the condolences expressed on behalf of the
Council by the President of the Council on the occasion of
the death of the President pf Austria, Mr. Franz Jonas,
would like for its part directly to convey its sympathy and
profound grief to the representative of Austria in the
Council, Ambassador Jankowitsch,
on the death of his
President. In this connexion we should like to point out
that the presidency of Mr. Jonas was marked by the
development and further strengthening of relations of
friendship, mutual understanding and co-operation between
the Soviet Union and Austria. We share the sorrow of
Austria and its people on the occasion of this heavy loss.

70. We in the Council have invested much of our labours,
resources and goodwill during the past months in an
attempt to turn the Middle East away from a cycle of
violence and retaliation. We cannot allow recent achievements to be destroyed by the mindless terrorism of a small
band which seeks to destroy the fragile peace WI; are
seeking so arduously to construct.
71. Neither should this Council jeopardize its constructive
work of recent months by resort to worn and one-sided
rhetoric devoid of practical effect or reality. It is, of course,
natural and right that we voice here our condemnation of
senseless acts of terror such as occurred at Kiryat Shmona,
just as we condemn the violence undertaken in retaliation
in southern Lebanon by Israeli forces. We regret that our
amendment to refer expressly to Kiryat Shmona did not

78. As we are all aware, a group of members of the
Council from the non-aligned countries prepared a stronger
draft resolution condemning the new act of’aggression
committed by Israel against Lebanon on the pretext of
“reprisals”-a
pretext which is inadmissible, illegal and
condemned by the Council. It made specific references to
previous resolutions of the Council, condemned the aggres7

sive acts of Israel against Lebanon and contained the
tiality and. competence ‘,in your ‘delicate functions as
necessary stern warning to Israel. That draft resolution also
President of the Council during the present ,month We
provided for a firm condemnation of the repeated military
would also like to take this opportunity to-say how very
attacks by Israel on Lebanon and of the Israeli ,ofiicials’- i much we.admire ,the contributions,that your country, Iraq,
threats with regard to the further use of force against this
has always made .to,the cause of peace and emancipation.,of
.-. ., 1 . . ., , .. ‘ . .;*I
.,: ,. :, -,,‘.;.
peace-loving State. The draft resolution also included the
peoples. . ,.:i,
. , . “,
.I
demand that Israel refrain from the threat or use of force
85; By vd;ing:m iavDur ‘oithe’resolutionjust
‘ah~~tth by
against Lebanon and a strong warning to Israel that, in the
event of a repetition of such attacks on Lebanon, the : the Council, my delegation. has, wished unreservedly to
Council would take appropriate action to carry out its, ‘ condemn. Israeli : aggression -against ‘ILebanon and; further?
decisions in accordance with the provisions of the Charter.
more, to draw the attention of. the :international corn-. :.
munity to the need to find a just solution, as.a matter of
urgency, to the crisis inthe JM$ile., East. That position
79. At the time, the Soviet delegation supported t&t draft
emerges clearly from the statement made in the Council on._ .
resolution and it would unquestionably have preferred to
16 April last by my Foreign Minister.
see the Council adopt precisely that draft. Subsequently,
I ‘, ‘:,
^
however, for reasons and circumstances well known to all,
86. Like many representatives who have spoken before
the draft resolution prepared by the non-permanent
members of the Council, the non-aligned countries, was me, I should like, on behalf of my Government, to state for
the record the following in connexion with paragraph.2 of F
unfortunately not submitted to the Council for considthe resolution just adopted. Because of its general imprecise.
eration.
language,, .my Government interprets this paragraph. as,an
80. The draft resolution finally adopted by the Councilis, ,~ expression,of the compassion of the Council for innocent
in the view of the Soviet delegation, not sufficiently strong
civilians who were killed in the. specific &vents at ‘present
being considered by the Council. That attitude of the
and effective. The Soviet delegation considered, however,
Council cannot mean the condemnation of the activities of
that it could go along with the adoption of this draft
resolution, bearing in mind the acceptability of the text to
political liberation movements; the justice and legitimacy of
the country which complained to the Council of aggression their struggle has been recognized in the relevant ,resolur
tions of the various bodies of the United
:
against it by Israel and with due regard for the views of that
,.._ Nations.
country.
87. The ‘PRESIDENT: I have no further namesbn my list
81. As for the latest slanderous statement by one represenof representatives wishing to. explain their ‘vote, after the
tative at today’s meeting, I can say only that if he believes
vote. I wish, therefore, with the permission of the Council,
to say a few words as representative of IRAQ in explanaeverything he said I am sorry for him. And if anyone is so
,,
.
naive as to believe everything he said, one can only feel
tion of my delegation’s vote.
sympathy for such naive people.
88. My delegation has refrained from participating in the
82. Now 1 believe it would be appropriate to inform the
vote on the draft resolution which the Council has just
Council and its -members about the position of the
adopted. In explanation of its position, allow me to state at
genuinely socialist countries ,and the genuinely socialist
the outset that Iraq stands fully behind a brother country,
community on the Middle East question. I have in mind the
Lebanon,, in the defence, of .itg. sovereignty and territorial
official document adopted recently at the Conference of
integrity which has been repeatedly violated by Israel.
.“,’ ‘L
the Political Consultative Committee of the States Parties
to the Warsaw Treaty: the People’s Republic of Bulgaria,
89. The latest act of aggression by Israel which led to the
the Hungarian People’s Republic, the German Democratic
present complaint was even more bloodily conceived and
Republic, the Polish People’s Republic, the Socialist Redangerous than .all previous acts.. Its ,arch perpetrator,
public of Romania, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
General Moshe Dayan, has promised a repetition of such
and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. The conference
acts of aggression against Lebanon which will in his view
was held, as is well known, on 17 and 18 April 1974 in
render the southern part of Lebanon barren and uninhabitWarsaw. I shall read out the document:
able. Such dangerous. threats, when viewed. against the
background of Israel’s aggressiveness,.and its defiance of
JFor the text see document s/11276, annex Il..]
previous Council resolutions, demands the Council’s most
serious consideration. When. it, is recalled that the Council
83. Mr, BOOH BOOH (United Republic of Cameroon) - had previously warned .Israel, in .resolution 280 (1970),
(intetpretationfiom
French): Mr. President, first, we would
against the.repetition of such acts of aggression and that
like to join in -the words of condolence which you
these solemn warnings have. gone unheeded by Israel, it has
expressed on our behalf to the Austrian delegation upon
become the Council’s unavoidable duty to seek a remedy
the passing of President Franz Jonas.
for the situation in accordance with the power invested.in it
under the Charter.
84. Mr. President, after listening to the discourteous words
” ,.
that one representative uttered at the 1768th meeting of
901 Our past experience l&s proved’that a mere condemthe Council about your country and questioning your
nation of Israel, though -just and necessary, does not by
itself constitute a sufficient ,deterrent to, such an aggressor
performance as President of the Security Council, my
and habitual law-breaker as Israel. Firmer action in thiscase
delegation feels that it is necessary on&C again to say that it
was certainly required. Unfortunately, and for. reasons well
places its trust in you and admires your dignity, impar8

‘,

known to all of us, the Council failed to take such -action.
That is our first reservation.
, I
91. Our second reservation concerns the attempt to view
individual acts of violence on a level with premeditated acts
and wilful acts of aggression by one Member State against
another. In our view, any such attempt, no matter how well
intentioned and regardless of how deplorable individual
violence may be;will only result In the erosion of a State’s
responsibility to act in strict accordance withits rights and
obligations under the Charter.

because we understand the reasons why they did not
participate.
99: In the long and arduous negotiations that took place
we accepted the draft resolution that was adopted by the
Council as reflecting our minimum demands. We had hoped
that the Council would move one step further by taking the
effective ineasures or steps that it had promised us it would
take in”the event Israel repeated its attacks against
Lebanon.
:,. i , 1
100. In its resolution the Council recalls its previous.
resolutions1 it is quite obvious to members of the Council
and to us’ which resolutions are being recalled. They are
resolutions 262 (1968), ,270 (1969), ,279 (1970), 280
(1970), 285 (1970), 313 (1972), 316 (1972), 317 (1972),
332 (1973) and 337 (1973). Those ‘( resolutions were
adopted between 31 December 1968 and 15 August 1973
following several acts of aggression committed by Israel
against Lebanon. Israel has been condemned six times for
its premeditated and repeated attacks against Lebanon. The
Council has demanded that Israel should forthwith withdraw all its military forces from Lebanese territory. The
Council has constantly called upon Israel to desist or refrain
from any military action against Lebanon, or demanded
that it do so. The Council has warned against the repetition
of such attacks and has committed itself, if such attacks
were repeated, to consider taking adequate and effective
steps or measures in accordance with the relevant Articles
of the Charter to implement its resolutions.

92. We also feel that where acts of individual violence are
concerned all the facts pertaining to such incidents are
never fully made available to the CounciI hi order for it to
be able to passjudgement.
93. The resolution which has. just’ been adopted refers
more than once to negotiations and diplomatic efforts
which are being undertaken in the Middle East. My
Government has consistently reserved its position on these
issues and there is very little reason for us to change our
position.

’

94. Finally, we must stress to the Council once more our
firm belief that the tragic events in the Middle East with
which the Council has had to, deal so ‘frequently can be
eliminated only by restoring to the peoples of Palestine
their inalienable rights in their homeland. I wish once again
to reiterate the full support of the people and Government
of Iraq for the just and rightful struggle of the people of
Palestine.

,101. In the present case we were warned after the last
attack that Israel would strike again against the Lebanese
people and the civilian centres of Lebanon and that the
population of southern Lebanon would be forced to leave
their area and that their homes would be destroyed. This is
a flagrant case of a premeditated terrorist campaign
organized at a State level. And the Council did not deem it
possible to take the effective measures that it had promised
us in the past.

95. Now, as PRESIDENT, I call on the representative of
Lebanon, who wishes to make a statement.
96. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): Mr. President, I wish to
associate my delegation with the words of sympathy and
condolence that you and other members of the Security
Council have expressed to the representative of Austria and
to the Austrian Government and people on the sad occasion
of. the. death of the President of Austria, Mr. Franz Jonas.
97. On behalf of my delegation I wish to express to you,
Sir, our appreciation of the efforts that you have deployed
.during these meetings of the- Security Council. The performance of a President reflects on the collectivity of the
Cound, for it is the collective trust of all its membership.
Your contribution to enhance its prestige and authority is
in the best and fairest traditions of this Council. The
patience, forbearance and thoroughness that you have
demonstrated have kept the presidency at the level at which
past Presidents have maintained it and at which future
Presidents should maintain it, that of .dlgnity. My delegatiai wishes to pay a vibrant tribute to your performance as
President a tribute with which, I am certain, all fair-minded
representatives will agree is well deserved.

102.. The resolution ‘once again condemns Israel for its
violation of Lebanon’s territorial integrity and sovereignty
and calls once more on the Government of Israel to refrain
from further military action and threats against Lebanon, I
wonder whether these condemnations are sufficient for the
Government of Israel, because we have seen that in the past
condemnations have not yielded any positive results. On
the contrary, our people have been suffering from the ..
repeated assaults of Israel against Lebanon. One hundred
and fifty innocent people of Lebanon have died during the
last four years as a result of these assaults. Hundreds were
injured, several towns were affected, several hundred houses
were destroyed, many civilian installations were completely
demolished. In addition to that, Israel maintains a campaign of threats and intimidation against Lebanon and its
people.

98. I wish also to express our appreciation to all delegations that have supported us in our caseof the aggression
launched by Israel against Lebanon. I wish to thank them
for their kind statements and I wish also to thank them for
their positive votes. I express our deep appreciation even to
those delegations that did not participate in the voting,

103. The resolution, among other things, calls on Israel
promptly to release and return to Lebanon the abducted
Lebanese civilians. We take it that the Council wishes Israel
to do that at the earliest possible moment. That is very
imp&ant for us. We are not going to allow our people who
have been abducted and kidnapped by those who have the
9

‘i-\

.;

habit of kidnapping people from our territory to remain in
Israel’s hands. We demand that they be returned immediately and unconditionally
to Lebanon and to their
families.

therefore, express to you, Mr. President, and all members of
the Council who have joined you so generously. the’
the Council and by members of the Council area source of
comfort .and consolation for the Austrian people. Let me,
profound gratitude of the Austrian delegation and my o-wn
gratitude.

104. In paragraph 5 of the resolution the Council calls
upon all parties to refrain from any action which might
endanger negotiations aimed at achieving a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East. We are cognizant of our
commitments and obligations under the Charter and under
international law to refrain from the use of force or the
threat to use force and to support all efforts and actions
aimed at the promotion of conditions of peace and the
solution of problems by peaceful means. Over the years we
have made positive contributions to that end in many ways.
If we have at our doorstep a recalcitrant State bent on
disturbing the peace in ‘the Middle East, on committing
aggression, on carrying out provocation and intimidation
and on constantly widening the area of conflict, it is not
Lebanon and its people that should be held responsible. If
that State, namely, Israel, has for 25 years scuttled every
attempt at a peaceful solution, certainly it is not Lebanon
that must be blamed. I am certain that no fair and
reasonable person could point the finger of culpability at
Lebanon, its Government and its people for having impeded
any action for a peaceful solution of the Middle East
problem. This is not a self-serving statement that I am
making. This is a reflection of truth about a country and a
people that pursue a moderate and peaceful policy.
Lebanon will pursue that policy in the future.

109. Franz Jonas, one of the elder statesmen of the
Austrian Republic, devoted his life to public service and the
promotion of the economic and social welfare of his
people. His stations in public life include 14 years asMayor
of Vienna, the capital city of Austria, which owes to him its
spectacular rehabilitation after years of destruction and
occupation. For nine years and until the end of his rich life,
Franz Jonas held the highest elected office the Austrian
people can bestow, an office in .which he was confiied
after a first term in 1971. His were years of unprecedented
progress and well-being for the Austrian people, built on
the solid foundations of democracy and tolerance at home
and on the constant development of friendly relations with
all peoples of Europe and the world. As President of
Austria, Franz Jonas visited many countries, some of them
represented here around this table. On his travels and in his
constant concern for peace he was the faithful interpreter
of the peaceful disposition of the Austrian people towards
the people of the world. His life was a life of service, and
the supreme accomplishment of his life is the rich heritage
of selfless devotion to the welfare of his people. In
honouring his memory, the members of this Council have
shown that the message that was his life has been well
understood.

105. The solution of the Middle East problem, as we were
reminded today by the representative of the Soviet Union,
must be based on some basic elements. To be just and
lasting it must accomplish a complete withdrawal of the
Israeli troops from all the occupied Arab territories. It must
restore to the Palestinian people their rights-their inalienable rights recognized by many resolutions of the United
Nations-so that they can live in their homeland in dignity.
It must put an end to the expansionist and militaristic
policy of Israel. This is the kind of peace we hope will be
achieved, and we hope that Israel will see the light and not
only heed the various calls of the Security Council but also
collaborate in the efforts which are being made for the
settlement of the problem of the Middle East.

110. The PRESIDENT: No other delegations have expressed the wish to speak on the item inscriied on our
agenda. I shall, therefore, take it that we have concluded
the discussion of the complaint by Lebanon.
Statement by the representative of Mauritania
111. Mr. EL HASSEN (Mauritania) (inferpretution from
French): The problem that I should like to mention has no
direct connexion with the problem at present under
consideration, but there is perhaps a link, because it is a
question of respect for the sovereignty and independence of
States. It is a question of international peace and security. I
think that this information should be brought to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.

106. Once again, Mr. President, I thank you and members
of the Council for your patience and for your support for
Lebanon. I am certain that all the members can appreciate
that Lebanon relies, as it has always relied in the past, on
the goodwill of the Council and of the United Nations,
because we are not a militaristic State and we do not have
any shield of protection except the Charter.
107. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Austria, who wishes to make a statement.

112. On 22 April 1974, at 1.10 p.m., five fighters from
the Portuguese colonialist army flew over the territory of
the People’s Republic of the Congo and flew over Banga,
near the Congo-Ocean railroad. At 1.30 p.m. the same day
three Portuguese aircraft flew further over Congolese
territory. This action on the part of the Portuguese Army is
part of the policies of the Lisbon authorities; who wish to
extend their colonial wars to the territory of independent
African States.

108. Mr. JANKOWITSCH (Austria): Mr. President, in the
early hours of this morning Franz Jonas, the Federal
President of the Republic of Austria, passed away in
Vienna. At this hour of national grief the words of high
_ tribute and warm sympathy expressed by you on behalf of

113. That repeated violation of Congolese air space over
an economically important area could be a prelude to other
Portuguese military actions of a more serious nature. The
Congolese Government, through me, wishes to advise
members of the Council of the potential dangers of such
10

I

L

actions. So it is solely by way of information
made this statement.

that I have

114. The Ambassador of the Congo to the United Natiops
has already placed the matter before the President of the

Security Council to inform him of the situation. He
certainly will seize the Council of the matter if the
seriousness of the situation so requires.
7Re meeting rose at 8.10 p.m.

11
:

\

,

‘.

.

:

_

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite1
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

or

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
write to: United

and distributors
Nations,
Sales

DES

UNIES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
d&ositaires
du mondo edtier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de vofre libraire
ou adressez-vous
B : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Genkve.
KAK

IlOJlYPHTb

Z13Aanxfff
3HWax

Omann3aqnn
m 8reHTCTBax

HJAAHliSl
ao

OPI'AWU

3AqUEi

OfYbe~uxemrb~x

Haqdi

Bcex

MUpa.

paRoHaX

OG’bEAHHEHHhIX

HAlUiH

~SOXKHO rynsirb
a xmo~zrb~x
uaracnpasxn
06 HsAaHHllX
B
: OpraHusaqns
06’berraxexr3blx

HaBonKTe

sameM KXKU(AO~~ Yarasuzie
nn~ minniTe
no anpecy
HausB.Ce~qna
nonpo~a~e~3~a~uR.~bHI-I?OpKKn~~e~esa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las pubIicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estan en venta en librerfas
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

I&ho

in United

Nations,Ne%v

York

Price:

su.s.

1.00

7442001-May

1980-2.200
