UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
THIRTIETH

YEAR

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1824) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situatiun in Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..i................‘..............

1

SIPV. 1824

^

:

-.
.~

__

.’

_

.

--

;.
..-..
_..

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfJicial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the suppIement in which._.it appears
or in which infor_
mation about it-is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordat& with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Cokil, The new system, which has been applied .
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
I
-..
on that date.

,

.

.,

.

.

.
:..

:

‘.

._

.

.

.-.

.

. .

1824th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 2 June 1975, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Abdul Karim AL-SHAIKHLY (Iraq).

rules of procedure to the representatives of Burundi,
Ghana, India, Liberia, Nigeria,- Senegal, Somalia and
Zambia, to participate at their request in the current
discussion without the right to vote. In view of the
very limited number of seats available around the
Council table, I am regretfully obliged to resort to
the practice followed on such occasions and to request
the representatives of the delegations I have just
mentioned kindly to take places reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber. It is understood,
naturally, that I shall invite them to take places at the
Council table whenever. they wish. to address the
Coun&. Accordingly, with the consent 6f the Council,
I now invite the representatives of the aforementioned
eight Member..%& to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following
States: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China,
Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan,
Mauritania, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Cameroon,
United Republic of Tanzania and United States of
America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1824)
1.

Adoption of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia

At’ihP &itation of the President, Mr.- Mikanagu
(&undi), Mr. Boat& (Ghana), Mr. Jaipal (India),
Mr. Dennis (Liberia), Mr. Ogbu (Nigeria), Mr. Fall
(Senegal), Mr. Hussein (Somtilia) and Mr. Mwaanga
(Zambia) took the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

The meeting was called to order at 335 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1 . The PRESIDENT: First of all, as President of the
Security Council, it is my pleasant duty and privilege
to express the admiration and appreciation felt, I am
sure, by all members of the Council for the outstanding
services rendered to the Security Council by the deie&tion of Guyana during its occupancy of the post of
President of the Security Council for the month of
May 1975. Mr. Rashleigh E. Jackson, representative
of Guyana, performed admirable service in conducting
the informal consultations which occupied the
Council’s attention during the early part of the month.
Thereafter, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guyana,
Mr. Shridath S. Ramphal, was most generous in
offering his wide experience arid exceptional abilities
in presiding ovei the two very important meetings
of the Security Council which took place at the end
of the month of May. I know that I can speak for
all my colleagues in saying how much we have
appreciated the courtesy, efficiency and statesmanship
shown by our co&agues from Guyana.

31 The PRESIDENT: In accordance with a further
decision taken at the 1823rd meeting, I now invite
the President and the delegation of the United
Nations Council for Namibia to take places at the
Council table.
At the invitation of the. ‘President, Mr: Banda
(President of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the members .qf .th-e delegation to+ places
at the S4cti~it~ C6uncil table.
4. The PRESIDENT:. 1. should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have receiyed in addition
letters from the representatives of Dahomey, Romania? Sierra Leone and Yugoslavia requesting to be
invited to paiticipate in the discussion in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure. Pursuant to the
-usual practice I propose, if I hear no objection, to
invite- the representatives I haye just mentioned to
participate..in the discussion with&t the right to vote.
.As there, is no objection, I invite the above-mentioned
representatives also .to take the. places reserved for
them at .the side of the council table and shall invite
them to take places at the table whenever they wish
to address the Council.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The dtuation in Namibla
2. The PRESIDENT: It will be recalled that at its
1823rd meeting, the Security Council decided to extend
invitations-in accordance v@th rule 37 of its provisional
i

At the invitation of the President, Mr. AdjibadP
(Dahomey), Mr. Datcu (Romania), Mr. Blyden (Sierra
Leone) and Mr. PetriC (Yugoslavia) took places at the
side of the Council chamber.

unjust and condemned systems of racism, colonialism
and apartheid which are so repugnant to the Charter
of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, the very concept of human dignity and
the rights of all people to self-determination. It is
therefore perfectly justified for them to employ all
means at their command to bring. those systems to
an end.

5. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Liberia, Mr. Cecil Dennis.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.

9. Liberia’s position is clear. We would prefer to
see these problems resolved peacefully and in good
faith. We believe that were that to be done the rights
of the people in those areas could be ensured
in accordance with democratic principles, and truly
equitable and just multiracial societies would be
created. But regrettably there are those who continue
to believe that by sheer brute force they may be able
to perpetuate, for the benefit of a minority racial
group, the exploitation, oppression and degradation
of an African majority, deprived of all rights and
without any voice whatsoever.

6. Mr. DENNIS (Liberia): Mr. President, allow me
first to indicate how pleased we are to see you, the
distinguished representative of Iraq, assume the
presidency of the Security Council as we continue to
deliberate upon a question of great importance
to all freedom-loving peoples of our one world. It is
a happy coincidence of history that Iraq has been
called upon to play this significant role, for there were
periods in your own history when colonialist oppression had to be squarely confronted and vigorously
opposed, self-determination assured and human dignity
restored to your people. Iraq can therefore have full
empathy in regard to the question of which the Council
is seized. I want to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and wish you success as you guide these deliberations.

10. Racism is a source of grave danger to world
peace and security. It gives rise to irrational and
blind hatreds. It is totally contradictory to mankind’s
highest hopes for the establishment of a world order
based on freedom, justice, equality and meaningful
co-operation. It stifles human development and
advancement and appeals to the basest instincts of
greed, fear and selfsihness which have so many times
in the past, and most recently in the Second World
War, exposed humanity to profound depths of horror,
tragedy, suffering and sorrow.

7. Let me take this opportunity also to express
gratitude to Mr: Jackson, the representative of the
Republic of Guyana, for the efficient, effective and
very able manner in which he conducted the affairs
of the Council during the month of May. But to this
I want to add an expression of special thanks and
appreciation to Mr. Shridath S. Ramphal, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Guyana, for having taken the
time from a very busy schedule to travel to New
York and be with us as we began discussion of the
question of Namibia. That-, to us, is another positive
manifestation of Guyana’s continued commitment to
the advancement of human dignity the world over
and the cause of African liberation.

1 1 . Yet all of this can be avoided. And if it were,
the victory would be one not for any nationality,
race or special group but for all mankind. More than
that, it would be a resounding victory and a sure
step forward to the happy dawn of a new era in
which fear would give way to trust, suspicion to
confidence, and hatred to understanding among all
nations and peoples. For after all, whether we like
it or not, we are but one human family, inhabitants
in common of a finite planet. Our salvation therefore
lies in the timely recognition of the brotherhood of
man and of the fundamental fact that ultimately our
happiness and security rest upon our ability to work
together for the common good.

8. Let me now say how much I welcome this
opportunity to address the Council on a matter which
is of great importance and concern not only to the
continent of Africa but to the entire international
community. Liberia has always been firmly and
unequivocally committed to the total liberation of
Africa and to the eradication of all systems designed
to deprive the African peoples of their inherent right
to decide their own destiny in complete freedom,
to uphold their dignity as human beings and to find
proper expression for their just and legitimate aspirations. The preservation of Liberia as a nation during
the long dark night of colonialism and racist oppression, rampant throughout the African continent, served
as a beacon of hope that the dawn of African independence would surely one day arrive. For most of
Africa that time has come. And that is why it is the
more diflicult, painful and intolerable to be confronted
by the continued exploitation of the peoples of
Zimbabwe; Namibia and South Africa itself. The
people of Africa will never accept the inhumane,

12. When the Prime’ Minister of South Africa
indicated a desire to meet President Tolbert, the
President allowed him to visit Liberia to discuss the
withdrawal of South African forces from Zimbabwe
and the termination, without procrastination, of
South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia. It was
the hope of the President that with the new situation
created by the impending liberation of Mozambique
and Angola, and the developments in Zimbabwe,
Mr. Vorster might have had something of importance
to relate in connexion therewith.
1 3 . Liberia has endeavoured in the past, as it does
today, to spare no effort in assisting the transition
2

of unliberated Territories of Africa to self-determination and independence. It was before the Council
in 1961 [943rd to 946fh meetings] that for the first
time the question of Portuguese colonialism in Angola
was raised, by the Liberian delegation [S/4738, of
20 February 19611. It is indeed ironic that a few
wilful and stubborn men were able by their intransigence, to delay independence for Portuguese
Territories in Africa until a heavy toll in human lives
had been exacted.

1 9 . Because of the decisions of the United Nations
which terminated South Africa’s Mandate over the
Territory of Namibia, South Africa has no legal
right to conduct or supervise elections in that Territory.
Owing to the continuance of that illegal presence in
Namibia and its designs for exploitation, South Africa
would never be considered a neutral actor, but rather
one whose inherent bias and intimidation would
prejudice the outcome of any election and render
invalid the result thus obtained.

1 4 . In 1960 Ethiopia and Liberia, representing independent African nations, also initiated contentious
proceedings before the International Court of Justice
on the question of Namibia. Although that action,
by a strange twist of Justice, was circumvented at
the time, the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the International Court of Justice have all
subsequently confirmed that South Africa’s presence
in Namibia is illegal and must be terminated.

20. The full participation of the South West Africa
People’s Organization (SWAPO), the organization
recognized by the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity (OUA) as the only liberation
movement in Namibia, is also necessary at every stage
of the process leading to a determination of Namibia’s
future. If SWAP0 is to participate fully and effectively,
all its leaders and members must be allowed to move
about freely in Namibia without the threat of arrest,
and all political prisoners and detainees would have to
be released and exiles permitted to return and all
of them allowed to participate without hindrance in
the process leading to their independence.

1 5 . The establishment of the United Nations Council
for Namibia [resolution 2248 (S-V) of the General
Assembly, of 19 May 19671 was to ensure the orderly,
peaceful and just transition of that Territory to independence. Namibia must and will be an independent
and united country governed on the basis of majority
rule. The grave responsibility for determining whether
this shall be accomplished peacefully or through more
bloodshed now rests squarely on the shoulders of the
South African Government.

21. Prime Minister Vorster has said that South
Africa is not occupying Namibia but that South Africa
‘is there by the wish of the Namibian people. We
would ask how the wishes of the Namibian people
have been determined, and under what circumstances
an occupying foreign Power can ever objectively
determine the wishes of the people over whom it
exercises oppressive control.

1 6 . During his visit to Monrovia, the South African
Prime Minister told President Tolbert that South Africa
did not desire an inch of Namibian territory; in fact,
the South African Government would be happy to get
Namibia off its back. But up until now the South
African Prime Minister has not honoured what
appeared to us an expression of good intention.

22. It is completely unacceptable that South Africa
should arrogate to itself the responsibility for supervising and determining Namibia’s future, in preference
to the United Nations, which has special responsibilities for the Territory. It is a perversity and an
outright insult to the peace-loving nations of the world
to suggest, as the South African Government has
done, that it alone genuinely wishes to see the true
aspirations of the Namibian people expressed and that
the nations represented in this world body would
subvert that process.

1 7 . The future of Namibia and the form which the
independence of Namibia as a unitary State shall take
can only be determined by the Namibian people
themselves. We in Liberia will never accept the divisive
concept that the Namibian people are composed of
several nations. This is a flagrant attempt to
perpetuate the Bantustan policy in that Territory,
undermine the fundamental unity of the people of
Namibia and promote the balkanization of the country
as well as the continuation of South Africa’s political
and economic domination of the Territory. We reject
this most emphatically.

23. The plain fact is that South Africa has failed to
respond in a meaningful manner to the clear and
unambiguous terms of Security Council resolution 366
(1974), adopted by the Council in December of last
year.
24. It must be recalled that when the African nations,
supported by Third-World and other sympathetic
countries, laid before the Council the question of
the expulsion of South Africa from the United Nations
[S/11543 of 24 October 19741, three of the permanent
members of the Council-namely, France, Great
Britain and the United States of America [see 1808th
meeting+jointly exercised, for the first time in the
history of the United Nations, the triple veto, thereby
allowing South Africa to remain a Member of the

1 8 . Moreover, we construe the provisions of paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 366 (1974),
concerning the transfer of power to the people of
Namibia with the assistance of the United Nations,
as meaning the holding of elections in the Territory
under the supervision of the United Nations.
Consequently we request the Security Council to affu-m
and uphold the legal right of the United Nations to
hold such elections.
3

United Nations against the wishes-of the-vast majority:
of the membership of the Organization. In reaction,
President-Tolbert had this to say:
“The African nations and a great. number of
other States Members of the United Nations had
considered the expulsion of South Africa from the
Organization a timely measure towards finding a
solution to this most vexing problem. But this course
of action having been denied them, they reasonably
expect that those who exercised their right of veto
wiIl be dictated by good conscience to live up to
their responsibility inherent in that action and in the
timely discharge of their obligation consistently
lead the way in finding a just and acceptable
solution to this serious problem which continues to
defy sacred and fundamental principles upon which.
‘the United Nations is-founded.”
Continuing, President Tolbert said:

-

“I surely believe that. a formula can be found
and men .of goodwill everywhere should continue
to aid and co-operate in the search for that formula.
It should guarantee that all the peoples of southern
Africa will be able to live together in peace, justice
and harmony, achieve and enjoy .those inalienable
- rights of equality, self-determination and ‘freedom
with human dignity.?’
These are noble words, spoken by a God-fearing and
courageous leader, and I am honoured and proud
_to reecho them. at this time. We on our part have
never relaxed in aiding ihe search for .a solution to
this problem. _
25. The Council and the General Assembly have
adopted nemerous resolutions which are replete whith
expressions
deploring,
deprecating,
decrying,
denouncing, castigating, censuring and. condemning
the South African racist regime for its oppressive
policies in Namibia. Such resolutions can be found
in documents weighing tons, but yet there is not a
single instance where South Africa has complied with
the spirit of any of them.
26. What we must now do is to “think like men of
action and act like men of thought”. Those of you
on the Council upon whom the Charter of the
United Nations has conferred special responsibilities
-in particular, those who cast the triple veto in the
Council-should now demonstrate to the world their
genuinely good intentions in the continuing fullilment of their international responsibility by their
active participation in the adoption of effective and
positive measures to ensure the speedy liberation of
theTerritoryofNamibia,~
.__. -.. -.. ..- -.
27. I consider the following to be among the least
that the Council could do at this time: to institute
a mandatory arms embargo against South Africa; to
call for democratic elections in Namibia under the

-auspices of the .United .Nations within the shortest
possible period; and to. call upon South Africa to
desist from any action designed to impose upon ,the
people of Namibia its Bantustan policy under a
Constituent Assembly chosen -in an atmosphere of
coercion and intimidation.
28. The Liberian Government would not like to see
the creation of an irreversible climate of confrontation and hostility in Namibia. We hope that the
transition of power to the Namibian people as a whole
can be accomplished peaceably and without more
brutality, boodshed and rancour. But the hour is
growing late, and the continuing intransigence of South
Africa has brought us face to face with the stark
reality of an intensifying armed struggle. We should
like to have seen this situation avoided ifat alI possible.
But thismuch is clear: the right of the Namibian people
to live out their lives in freedom, justice and human
dignity. cannot be compromised and is worthy even’
of the most fearsome sacrifices, should these become
n e c e s s a r y .
29. .The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia, Mr. Mwaanga,
and 1 invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
30. Mr. MWAANGA. (Zambia): Mr. President,
permit me to congratulate you on your. deserved
assumption of the high office of President of the
Security Council for the month of June. We are sure
that under your wise leadership the Council will
achieve a just peace for Namibia and thereby make
a significant contribution to the relaxation of tension
in southern Africa.
31. My congratulatory remarks would be incomplete
if ‘I did not pay ‘a tribute to your predecessor,
Mr. Jackson of Guyana and his Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Ramphal, who so ably presided over the
deliberations of the Council during the month of May.
Zambia and Guyana are active members of the Group
of Non-Aligned Countries which have shared many
common policies on major international issues. Therefore it was. a pleasure for us. to see them preside
over. these important
. . deliberations.
32. Mr. President, I should like-to-thank you and all
members of the ‘Security Council for having given’
me ‘an opportunity to address you on the important
question of Namibia, which has the. distinction ~of
being’ the oldest unresolved colonial question on the
agenda of the United Nations.
33. The Security Council is meeting at a very crucial
time .in the ,history of the great continent of ,Africa.
It is also meeting at a time when some of the permanent members of the Council must provide answers to
very important moral questions which arise as 8 result
of their not having supported either armed struggle
in southern Africa or peaceful change.

34. Namibia is part of southern, Africa, and I submit
that it cannot strictly be discussed inisolation. What
happens in Namibia has a direct b;earirig bn. Rhodesia
and on South Africa itself: For many years both the
Security Council and the General Assembly .have
passed countless resolutions calling on South Africa
to withdraw from Namibia; to accept the principle
of self-determination and independence for Namibia;
to accept the territorial integrity of. Namibia; to
abandon Bantustans and “homelands”; to i-eiease all
political detainees and restrictees; to grant unconditional amnesty to -&ll Namibians .in exiie; to -permit.
free political activities; and to hold free national
elections under United Nations supervision.

.

achieved &ithm one day .and bjr a mere stroke of the

peh.

j6. The .South African rL&onse to Security Council
resolution 366 (1974) is far from satisfactory. It leaves
.a number of fundamental differences unresolved and
many important questions unanswered. It in fact
raises new questions which do not help us in our
search for a negotiated solution of this important
problem. The South African response undoubtedly
weakens the position of--those who have always
preferred a negotiated political settlement.
37. Our objective in Namibia is immediate independence for Namibia as a unitary State, and thereafter
it. will be up to the people. of Namibia freely to
‘-‘choose what sort ofGovernment they @I have or what .
sort of system they will adopt. Where do we go from
here,’ and how best can we make progress given the
situation in which we find oqrseives? We have come
to the Security Council with a view to finding &formula
which will express our condemnation of South Africa’s
continued illegal occupation of Namibia, its continued
defiance of United Nations resolutions and its refusal
to comply with Cotincil resolution 366 (1974). At the
sami -time, we must work out measures aimed at
putting’ more pressure on South Africa to relinquish
its illegal occupation of Namibia, because this is the
crux of the matter.

35. R!hat has been the South African response to all
these demands,.tid why have we; in-the first-place,
made such demands of an occupying Power? The
South African Government has always rejected the
demands made by the international community with
impunity and with defiance almost unparalleled in the
history of the United Nations, and yet the United
Nations has done nothing ‘tangible .tg punish South
Africa for refusing -to carry out .its obligations under
the Charter. Each time Africa and other States have
demanded punitive measures against South Africa,
the Western members of the Security- Council, and
particularly the permanent members, have come to
its aid .by using triple vetoes -and the like to enable
.
South Africa to continue defying the international
community. If the United Nations accepts that South 38. We have said we will’ encourage SWAP0 to
Africa is occupying Namibia illegally, why have we negotiatd -the mechanics of -transfer&g power from
made demands which go beyond mere withdrawal South Africa to the people of Namibia as far as possible,
but we have also stated our firm intention to support
and which would then lead to the establishment .of
an effective United Nations presence? The mere fact the intensification of an armed struggle in Namibia,
that the United Nations is demanding a- number of with all its consequences, should a negotiated settlethings from South Africa which go beyond withdrawal ment prove unattainable. In both cases, we have
is, in our opinion, a. recognition of both the de jure
demonstrated what we are prepared to do in practice
and the de facto status of Namibia. There are times
to support these two courses of action. We have no
when we have entertained serious doubts as io
quarrel with the Socialist countries; because they
whether there are no contradictions between have always given practical support to the struggles of
demanding South Africa’s withdrawal from Ntibia the African people, but we certainly have a quarrel
with the Western Powers -for their anti-liberationon grounds that its presence there is. illegal and at
movement :attiiudei, which have only served to
the same time asking the occupying r&ime to do
certain things, which amounts to recognizing its .strengthen the white minority regimes.
‘.
illegal occufiation. This raises serious legal questions
concerning&e status of South Africa in this matter;
39. We Africans have had enough of statements from
It must be made clear that the main stumbling Western countries .and their representatives to the
effect that “we remain committed to the cause of
block in Namibia is the South African presence, and
peaceful .change in southern erica’*. or “we are
no solution can be found to all the other problems
unless and until the external factor--namely, South committed- to non-violent stiiutions”. Such meaningAfrica-is removed. In terms of priorities, this must. less cliches only serve to destroy the credibility of
be considered priority number ‘one, because, if South
Western Powers in the eyes of Africa, especially
Africa withdraws from -Namibia, the United when they have no co@rnctiye alternatives to armed
Nations, which is the legal authority, would then struggle to Gffer..Common sense alone should by now
assume its rightful place and advance the Territory have taught the Western Pokers that privileged
towards self-determination and independence in
minorities. do not forswear their privileges except
accordance with Gene&. Assembly- resolution- 2145
under some sort of ‘duress. When the privileged
(XXI). All the other .demands bein& tiade; -hike the .- minority .and. the -dispossessed majority _are defined
abandonment of Bantustans and “ho&elands”, free racially, and where the his&y of repression has been
political activities, the release of political detainees long and often violent, voluntary accommodations are
and restrictees, to mention but a few, would be
doubiy’iiiusory. It is not very helpful to favour self-

5
Y

‘;
-‘

determination and at the same time inveigh against
violence when they have nothing better to offer.

those imprisoned or detained in eonnexion with
offences under so-called security laws, whether such
Namibians have been charged or tried or are held in
Namibia or South Africa;

40. This attitude is both unrealistic and unhelpful.
We surely cannot call for freedom in southern Africa
and at the same time deny any assistance to those who
are fighting for it when we know, as they do, that
every other means of achieving the freedom we are
talking about has beenexcluded by those now in power.

-Seventhly, demand the abolition in Namibia of
all racially discriminatory and politically repressive
laws and practices.
-Eighthly, demand that South Africa should accord
unconditionally to all Namibians currently in exile
for political reasons full facilities *in a return to
their country without risk of arrest, detention,
intimidation or imprisonment;

41. Resolution 366 (1974) of the Council, the last
one on Namibia, went further than any of the
previous resolutions, short of applying Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations. This was, in our
opinion, a clear demonstration of the anxieties in the
Council about South Africa’s intransigence. We
expect the Security Council not merely to reiterate
previous resolutions but to go further than resolution 366 (1974) so that South Africa can be left in
no doubt as to where the international community
stands on this matter.

-Ninthly, welcome the initiatives taken by the
United Nations Council for Namibia to ensure the
protection of the natural resources of Namibia, and
request the United Nations Commissioner for Namibia
to proceed with all the necessary preparations for
the implementation of the decree for the protection
of the natural resources of Namibia;

42. We hope that this debate will not be one of those
aimed merely at scoring debating points and making
speeches in order to hide behind screens of inaction.
It must address itself to the problems of Namibia
and adopt practical solutions which will advance the
cause of freedom. We therefore hope- that the
Security Council will, among other things, do the
following:

-Tenthly, make known to South Africa that no
constitutional formula for Namibia worked out without
United Nations approval will be acceptable;
-Eleventhly, demand that South Africa accept the
principle of a unitary State in Namibia, and reject
any interpretation of territorial integrity for Namibia
which is not based on the principle of a unitary
State;

-First, condemn South Africa’s refusal to comply
with resolution 366 (1974);

-Twelfthly, declare now that should South Africa
not comply with these demands by 30 September
1975 the Security Council will meet and take stem
measures under Chapter VII of the Charter, which
might include suspension or expulsion of South Africa
from the United Nations.

-Secondly, call for an effective arms embargo
against South Africa as a punitive measure for its
refusal to comply with United Nations decisions on
Namibia;
-Thirdly, demand once more that South Africa
unconditionally withdraw from Namiiia or unambiguously state its intention to do so by 30 September
1975;

43. We believe that these minimum measures should
be taken in order to avoid confrontation in the
Security Council which could be misconstrued to mean
support for the Pretoria regime at a time when
international pressure and the changed circumstances
in southern Africa are beginning to create excellent
conditions for the oppressed masses to register heavy
political and military blows against their oppressors.
Events in Indo-China and in the former Portuguese
colonies of Mozambique, Angola and Guinea Bissau
have clearly demonstrated, now more than ever before,
that victory is always on the side of those who are
fighting for justice.

-Fourthly, demand an immediate end to the
creation of Bantustans and so-called homelands, which
are intended to divide the people of Namibia into
tribal groups and entities. In so doing the Security
Council must also make clear that it will under no
circumstances accept any independence formula for
Namibia which is based on Bantustans or “homelands”;
-Fifthly, demand that South Africa accept the
holding of free elections in Namibia within 12 months
from now for a constituent assembly, conducted on
the basis of universal adult suffrage under the supervision of the United Nations or any other international
organization empowered by the United Nations.

44. In conclusion, let me say that in our humble
opinion the choice for the Security Council and the
international community is not between peaceful
change and no change. The choice is between peaceful
change and conflict. It must be made clear that in the
absence of peaceful change and. real prospects of
its continuing, the African people of Namibia, led
by their party, SWAPO. and supported by the rest of

-Sixthly,
demand that South Africa release all
Namibian political prisoners and restrictees, including
6

independent Africa and the progressive world, will
fight for their rights until final victory is achieved.
The question we must ask ourselves is when and
how this change will come about. We have stated
our preferences; we have also stated our priorities.
It now remains to be seen whether the outcome of
this debate will strengthen the forces of peaceful
change or strengthen the high priests of oppression
and suppression. The choice as to which one of the
two paths we take is in your hands.
45. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Ghana, whom I invite to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
46. Mr. BOATEN (Ghana): Mr. President, I am grateful to you and to the members of the Security Council
for this opportunity to address the Council on the
question of Namibia. The question of Namibia, after
many years, continues to be one of the thorniest
issues of which the Council is seized. I am, however,
encouraged to entertain some optimism that, under
your guidance, the discussions here will produce
results which will fully demonstrate the Council’s
concern and determination to see the issue resolved.
47. I should also like, Sir, to express my appreciation to your predecessor in the presidency of the
Council, Mr. Shridath S. Ramphal, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Guyana, for the arrangements he
made for this series of meetings of the Council. It
was more than a fortuitous coincidence that he should
have presided over the first meeting of this series
devoted to the question of Namibia. During his term as
President of the Council for Namibia, he distinguished
himself by the loyalty, dedication and the dignity with
which he served the interest of the Namibian people.
The country that he represents is one whose dedication
to peace, justice and human equality has won the
hearts of all who love peace and justice.
48. It is a little over six months ago since I had a
similar privilege of addressing the Council on an
equally important subject. Then, as now, my country
felt compelled to participate in the debates because
of the importance that we attach to peace in Africa
and our fear that unless the situation in southern
Africa genetally is handled with firmness and with
justice and equity, it could develop into a Viet-Nam
type of situation, but one likely to have consequences
far more severe. My statement today, then, should
be seen as a sign of my Government’s willingness
to contribute towards fmding the kind of solution that
could prevent the situation in southern Africa from
degenerating into violence.
49. When the African Group, in December 1974,
called for a meeting of the Security Council [S/11575]
to discuss this question, it was, to quote the words
of my colleague from the Upper Volta, to demand of
the Council that “in its wisdom, [it] take measures
to defuse the explosive situation prevailing in Namibia” [ZBZlth meeting, para. 481.

50. During the debate that ensued, as indeed was
the case during previous meetings of the Council on
the subject, many of my colleagues, representing
different continents, argued strong cases which we
thought might have led the Council to take those firm
and effective measures, which it had itself long
promised to take in the event of South Africa’s
refusing to withdraw its presence from the Territory
of Namibia. What we got instead from the deliberations of last December was another warning, in
Security Council resolution 366 (1974), that if South
Africa failed to comply with the “resolutions and
decisions of the United Nations and the Advisory
Opinion of the International Court of Justice” by
30 May 1975, the Council would consider “the
appropriate measures to be taken under the Charter”.
51. Needless to say, there were many of us who
felt disappointed by this decision, a decision which
we saw as indicating either the inability ofthe Council
to make progress on the Namibian question or an
unfortunate conspiracy on the part of some members
of the Council, for some reason or reasons known
to them, to maintain the status quo. We were more
inclined to the latter view. But in spite of our disappointment with resolution 366 (1974), we held out some
hope, albeit forlorn, that the strength of international
concern might compel South Africa to do what was
required of it in order to defuse the situation in
Namibia. We were obviously too optimistic in our
expectations because the situation in Namibia remains
today very much the same as it has been for the past
50 years: it is a Territory that is the captive of South
Africa and suffers from the harmful effects of
apartheid and policies of barbarism and cruelty.
52. The historical evolution of the tragedy of Namibia
needs no restating, particularly before a distinguished
and an informed audience such as the members of
the Security Council. I will therefore resist the temptation of being tedious and will confute myself to
reminding the Council of certain key developments of
the evolutionary process.
53. When the General Assembly, in resolution 2145
(XXI) of 27 October 1966, decided to terminate South
Africa’s Mandate over the Territory of Namibia, it
was reacting to an unimpeachable realization that
South Africa had failed to fulfil its obligations in
respect of the administration of the Territory in the
sense that the racist Government had failed to ensure
the moral and material well-being and security of the
indigenous inhabitants. That decision was not taken
lightly nor was it meant to be treated as a joke. But
that serious decision made no impression on South
Africa, as was evidenced by the fact that South Africa
sought to intensify its control over the Territory.
54. The tone of serious concern contained in Council
resolution 245 (1%8) was understandable, particularly
as that resolution was taken after the South African
Government had refused to allow the United Nations

Council for South West Africa, established in 1967,
to discharge the functions entrusted to it: namely,
to establish contacts with the South African authorities
and to lay down procedures for the transfer of control.
Indeed, it had been envisaged that South West Africa,
as it was known then, would become independent
on a date to be fixed in accordance with the wishes
of the people. As you know, Sir, the date that the
General Assembly had. in mind was June 1%8. Just
as it had refused to accept the Assembly decision
to terminate the Mandate, so did South Africa
refuse to co-operate with the Council for Namibia
to enable it to fulfil its mandate.

59. South Africa’s reaction to resolution 366 (1974)
is contained in the letter of 27 May of the. representative of South Africa [see S/11701]. There have
been varying assessments of the contents of that
document and its. attachments. There. are some who
see South Africa’s statement as concessive in tone and
content; to others, it is vague and unsatisfactory in
terms of Security Council resolution 366 (1974).
60. The view of- the Ghana delegation, whatever
our assessment of the Statement might be;- is that
we .can all agreee that it is unacceptable in one
fundamental aspect, namely, that South Africa has
not yet accepted the legal role of the United Nations
in Namibia. When that Government agrees to hold
discussions on the Territory with the Council for
Namibia, it does so out of its own generosity and.
not in compliance with any legal obligation. The statement, as we see it therefore, constitutes further proof
of South Africa’s challenge of three important decisions of the Organization: first, General Assembly
resolution 2145 (XXI); secondly, Security Council
resolution 276 (1970); and thirdly, the Advisory.
Opinion of the International Court of.Justice delivered
on 21 June 1971.’ That opinion, members will recall,
was delivered in paragraph 133 in clear language:
“that the continued presence of South. Africa in
Namibia being illegal, South Africa is under obligation to withdraw its administration from Namibia
immediately and thus put an end to its occupation.
of the Territory”.

-55. Despite the legitimate struggle of the Namibian
people for freedom and the frustrations involved
in that struggle, my. Government saw Assembly
resolution 2145 (XXI) as representing an important
constitutional development which though of limited
institutional importance, could point to a possible
path for future action. As with resolution 2145 (XXI),
SO with Council resolution 246 (1968). Resolution
246 (1968) fell short of.our expectations, but we admit
that we saw it as marking a certain advance, which
is why the Afro-Asian Group accepted it as the basis
for future action in regard to Namibia.
56. The members of the Council will recall that resolution 246 (1968), inter da, reaffirmed the inalienable
right of the people of Namibia to freedom and independence; recognized the illegality and great consequence of South Africa’s continued occupation of the
Territory, which the Council considered to be
detrimental to the interests of both Namibia’s
population and the international community; and
decided that in the event of South Africa’s failure to
comply with the resolution, the Security Council
would meet immediately to determine necessary
steps or measures in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter.

61. The South African statement came as no surmise
to my delegation; at least it contained familiar elements.
What would be surprising’ would be the failure of
the Security Council at its current series of meetings
to respond in an appropriate manner to the South
African challenge-a challenge which is unprecedented
in the history of the United Nations:
62. When the Commissioner for Foreign Affairs of
Ghana addressed the General Assembly at its twentyninth session, he made the following remarks regarding
document S/11519 of the Security Council of 26 September 1974:.

57. The particular &iificance of resolution 246
(1968) lies in the fact that with it and. for the first
time the Security Council assumed its proper role in.
the task of translating into reality the assumption by
the United Nations of direct responsibility for the
Territory of Namibia.

“the statement constitutes one riiore insult which this
Organization has had to tolerate from South Africa.
It is the hope of my delegation that this Organization will tell South Africa in no uncertain terms
that the ultimate responsibility for the future of
South West Africa lies with .the United Nations.
What is at issue here is South Africa’s continued
defiance of this Organization and its flouting of the
decision of the International Court of Justice on the
status of that Territory. What we would like to hear
from South Africa is when that country will abandon
this defiance.“*
-_.

58. I need not remind members of the Council that
resolutions 246 (1%8) and 366 (1974) are not the only
resolutions in which the Security Council has indicated
its intention of taking effective measures against
South Africa, an offending Member of the Organization. The Council is therefore faced with .a situation
where, in spite of repeated warnings and admonitions,
a Member State has persistently, almost with
contempt, refused to fulfil its obligations under the
Charter, especially under Article 25. The Security
Council therefore has a duty to keep faith with the
highest interests of the Namibian people by making
good its professed intention of taking effective
action against South Africa.

63. South Africa’s defiant posture is of course
intended to test the effectiveness of the Council and to
bring it into contempt and ridicule. South Africa has
8

blatantly refused to comply with the decision of the
Security Council and is therefore in serious breach
of Article 25 of the Charter. It is partly in the light
of this fact that we invite the Council to take effective
measures against South Africa.

political and military cotiexions that existed and
still exist between South Africa and certain Western
countries.
68. Admittedly, in the matter of arms embargo we,
have drawn some encouragement from the fact that
the Governments of the United States and the United
Kingdom have largely complied with the Security
Council sanctions. However, the same is not true of
French arms sales to South Africa and the economic
support given to South Africa by other Western
countries.

64. If my country has been disappointed with the lack
of action by the Council in the past, it is because
we feel that with such evidence as is available to
us we have no option but to expect effective measures
to be instituted against South Africa. To do any less
would be to allow the situation in Namibia and
southern Africa to degenerate to the level where it
would engulf the world in a racial conflagration; for
the truth is that, in spite of the impression being
created by South Africa, the oppressed people of
Namibia will, unless they can see the United Nations
acting effectively on their behalf, resort to all means
to secure their freedom. They will, with the assistance
that many of us are ready to offer them and under
the leadership of (SWAPO), break out inevitably
from the oppression to which they have been subjected
for so long.

69. The second decision that we expect of the
Security Council is for it to give the Council for
Namibia the support and the means to establish its
presence and authority in Namibia and to guide the
Territory to independence. If South Africa prevents the
Council from doing this, then the Council must suspend
its privileges and rights deriving from membership
of the United Nations. Indeed the Council in that
event should not exclude the possibility of expelling
Squth Africa from the United Nations.

65. It is preposterous that we have allowed one
Member State, in a calculated manner, to bring the
world to. the brink of chaos. Therefore, however
belatedly, we wish to call on the Security Council
to show foresight and courage and put an end to
South Africa’s effrontery and put a stop to its
expansionist designs. It is necessary to condemn
South Africa for all it represents; but we must do
more .than that. The Council must decide at this
meeting, on firm, even if drastic, measures against South
Africa, as provided for in the Charter.

70. It is full 30 years since the peoples of the United
Nations, “to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war” and “establish conditions under
which justice and respect for the obligations arising
from treaties and other sources of international law
can be maintained”, agreed on the Charter and
established the United Nations. We must not allow
the situation in South Africa, or any situation of
that kind, to lead us to another period of suffering
and sorrow. We must act now in order not to vindicate
the prophets of doom who see no future for the
Organization. We still have faith in the United Nations
and the Security Council. We have reason therefore
to expect that the Security Council will act decisively at
this time when decisive action is required.

66. The question of sanctions against South Africa
is not new; it first arose in the Council in 1960.
Of particular .significance
is General Assembly resolution 1761 (XVII) of 6 November 1%2, which
required Member States to take the following measures
against South Africa: first, break off diplomatic reiations with the racist Government of South Africa;
secondly, close their ports to all vessels flying the
South Africa flag; thirdly, enact legislation prohibiting
their ships from entering South African ports; fourthiy,
boycott all South African goods and refrain from
exporting goods,inciuding all arms and ammunition,
to South Africa; and fifthiy, refuse landing and
passage facilities to ail aircraft belonging to the
Government of South Africa and companies registered
under the laws of South Africa.

71. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of India. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
72. Mr. JAIPAL (India): Allow me, Sir, on behalf
of my delegation to offer you our felicitations on
your assuming the functions of President of the
Security Council and to extend to you our good wishes
for fruitful discussions and decisions under your
guidance. Permit me also to express to the Council
as a whole and to its members our gratitude for
giving us this opportunity to explain our views on
the impotint question before the Council.

67. The Council, in resolution 181 (1%3), solemnly
called on all States to cease forthwith tbe sale and
shipment of arms, ammunition of ail types and military
vehicles to South Africa. In resolution 182 (1963)
the Council renewed its appeal to all States to comply
with its prohibition of the shipment of military equipment to South Africa. The same appeal was again
renewed in resolution 191 (1964). Those resolutions
might have had the desired effect but for the economic,

73. India’s interest in Namibia has been demonstrated on’ many occasions in the United Nations.
Indeed it goes back in history to the very origin
of the mandates system. Fortunately, this ill-fated
Mandate was terminated by the General Assembly
at its twenty-first session, in its resolution 2145 (XXI),
and the General Assembly then assumed direct
responsibility for this Territory. Later, when the Inter9

.

..

national Court was asked for its advisory opinion
as to the legal consequences of the failure of the
Government of South Africa to vacate Namibia, India
submitted a written statement and also appeared
before the Court to make an oral statement. Thus
we have shown continuing interest in this question.

accepts: and the principle that the development of
the people forms a sacred trust of civilization, which
South Africa rejects, because it regards the development of the people not as a sacred trust of civilization
but rather as the exclusive trust of South Africa. Here
again we are at cross purposes with South Africa,
with different interpretations of “the sacred trust of
civilization” .

74. As we see it, there are two principal documents
before the Council The first is Council resolution
366 (1974), which called on South Africa to withdraw
its illegal presence from Namibia and to transfer
power to the people of Namibia with the assistance of the United Nations. That is really the crux
of the matter. The other relevant document is the
reply of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of South
Africa [ibid.], in which he has made several points,
the most fundamental of which is that he has virtually
served notice on the United Nations that the Govemment of South Africa proposes to consult the people
of Namibia about their future without the assistance
of the United Nations.

‘78. The Security Council may represent a civilization
of sorts, but apparently South Africa is unimpressed
by it. The situation facing us is a serious one. It
involves the usurpation by South Africa of an intemational Territory for with the United Nations has
resumed responsibility. The Council declared in its
resolution 269 (1969) that the continued occupation of
Namibia by South Africa constituted an aggressive
encroachment on the authority of the United Nations.
That position still continues.
79. The General Assembly in its resolution 2678
(XXV) invited the Security Council to consider taking
effective measures, including those provided for in
Chapter VII of the Charter. That was five years ago.
In 1971 the Security Council declared in its resolution 301 (1971) that South Africa’s refusal to withdraw
from Namibia created conditions detrimental to the
maintenance of peace and security in the region.
That declaration was reiterated by the Council in
1972.

75. Quite simply, South Africa does not accept that
the United Nations has any role in Namibia, despite
the assumption by the United Nations of direct
responsibility for that Territory. The Mandate is dead
and so South Africa now states that it is in Namibia
because the peoples of the Territory want it to be
there. Surely this is one of the several incredible
statements emanating from the Pretoria regime. As
to the international status of this Territory, which was
never questioned by South Africa, its Prime Minister
informs us quite unnecessarily that South Africa respects the Territory’s status and does not claim a single
inch of its soil. As to the right of self-determination,
he tells us that the inhabitants themselves will decide
upon their future, apparently by methods to be devised
solely by South Africa. In our opinion, that would
mean the denial of self-determination as envisaged
in the Charter.

80. South Africa’s refusal to withdraw from Namibia
has now stabilized, and this in our opinion could be
interpreted as a case of aggression and a threat to
peace and security. In the absence of other measures
that are effective, the Council should proceed to
consider measures in accordance with Article 41 and
42 of the Charter, measures which were forecast by
the General Assembly five years ago.
81. The Security Council has never before faced
such an unusual situation. We have here the case of
an international Territory and a people whose wellbeing and development are the sacred trust of civihzation and the direct responsibility of the United Nations
but which is illegally ruled by a Government that
perversely claims that the people want it to continue
its illegal domination. No question of territorial claim
or of domestic jurisdiction of South Africa is involved.
Nor is it a situation in which the interests of the big
Powers or their military alliances are involved. There
is no danger of a world war, as we see it, nor is this
a matter that is of exclusive concern to the OAU. It
is a much wider issue concerning all of us. It poses
a simple and direct challenge to the United Nations,
for essentially. it is a conflict between the United
Nations and a Member State over an international
Territory.

76. We are thus in a quandary. The Territory has
international status but the United Nations has no
effective role concerning it or the future of its people.
There is thus a conflict here between de jut-e responsibility and de facto authority. The International Court
stated in paragraph 127 of its Advisory Opinion of
21 June 1971 that
“all States should bear in mind that the injured
entity is a people which must look to the intemational community for assistance in its progress
towards the goals for which the sacred trust was
instituted.” Evidently the South African Prime
Minister considers that there is no injured entity
and that the people freely look only to him for
assistance.
77. This unilateral view by South Africa is contrary
to the Charter and is even a violation of the original
Mandate, which recognized two principles-namely,
the principle of non-annexation, which South Africa
I

82. Since other measures have failed, there is a clear
case for mandatory measures in terms of the Charter.!
Some members of the Council have a greater responsi10

biity than others for implementing the resolutions
on Namibia and enforcing the authority of the
Council. I am sure that every State Member of the
United Nations will watch with close interest how
the Security Council uses the powers it undoubtedly
has to implement its decisions on Namibia. Above
all, we trust that the Council will do nothing that
will prejudice or jeopardize the legal position of the
United Nations in relation to Namibia.

South Africa, expressed in the speech of 20 May
and the letter of 27 May‘ [ibid.] is ambiguous. It
is contradicted by facts, and it is not sufftciently
responsive to the modem process of decolonization.
88. The South African response is ambiguous first
of all as regards the unity of the Territory. At no time
is there any mention of the Namibian people or
population but on several occasions there is mention
of “the peoples of South West Africa.” These, we
are told, can themselves choose their political future
and “all options are... open to them, including that
of independence as one State”. This sentence, I regret
to be compelled to emphasize, leaves us particularly
perplexed, because it can be thought that, among
the possible options there is the opposite possibility,
that of fragmenting the Territory into a series of small.
States independent of one another or grouped together
in federations. We cannot be satisfied with so loose
a formula, which leaves room for the fear that several
Namibias may be formed and which does not take into
account the resolutions whereby the General Assembly
and the Security Council requested South Africa to
respect the unity of the country. Namibia must not
be cut up on the basis of apartheid criteria. It
must accede to independence as a single State. Our
position on this subject is extremely firm. This is,
furthermore, why we draw an essential difference
between the concept of unity and that of territorial
integrity, in respect of which the South African
Government gives us satisfactory assurances when it
states that it does not claim “one inch of the Territory
for itself.”

83. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD (France) (interpretation
from French): Mr. President, first of all I should like
to congratulate you on your accession to the presidency
of the Security Council. I am sure that under your
enlightened guidance our work will proceed in an
atmosphere of co-operation and serenity befitting the
supreme organ of the Organization.
84. I also wish to pay a tribute to the manner in
which the delegation of Guyana presided over the
Council during the month of May. My tribute is
addressed first of all to Mr. Jackson, who guided
our consultations on a very important subject, but
also, and above all, to Mr. Ramphal, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Guyana, who honoured us by coming
to preside over the Council at the meetings at the
end of the month. His presence emphasized the scope
of our work and Guyana’s devotion to our institutions as well as its ideals, and also underscored the
importance of the debate we are now engaged in.
85. The delegation of France wished to participate
relatively -early in this high-level debate, which is
honoured by the presence of several Ministers for
Foreign Affairs and of African representatives to whom
we have listened most attentively. We have done so,
I hardly need say, because of the interest and sympathy
we feel concerning the just cause of Namibia and of
understanding among the peoples and countries of
southern Africa.

89. What is said about the stages that would lead
to self-determination is also ambiguous. While it is
obvious that it is for the inhabitants themselves
to decide on their future once and for all, it is also
essentially for the Pretoria Government at long last to
promote the independence of a Territory which has
been under trusteeship for more than half a century.
Apart from the hope expressed by the South African
authorities that the inhabitants of the Territory will
express their views as soon as possible, we have no
specific indication of which timetable is under
consideration.

86. The debates of the Security Council on the
question of South West Africa go back many years.
To mention only our most recent efforts, in 1972 we
endeavoured to make progress towards a solution
through the intermediary of the Secretary-General of
the United Nations and his Special Representative.
That failed. We then adopted resolution 366 (1974)
and pinned certain hopes on consideration by .the
Government of South Africa of the requests addressed
to it by the Council. The authorities in Pretoria
have also been approached by three countries
including France, which wished to state their views on
the political future of Namibia. This move at that time
emphasized in particular the importance those
countries attach to a settlement of the question in
such a way as to enable the people of Namibia
rapidly and freely to express their views on the
political future and the constitutional structure of the
Territory.

90. The South African statement, I have said, is
contradicted by facts. The Minister for Foreign Affairs
of South Africa, in his letter to the SecretatyGeneral [ibid.], affirms that the Namibian peoples
must express their choice freely, without any external
interference. It is, nevertheless, our clear impressiori
that during recent years the South African Govemment has taken decisions which contradict the concept
of free choice.
91. The Development of Self-Government for Native
Nations Act of 1968, which provided for the establish:
ment of “six indigenous nations” within South Africa,
already tended to prejudge the future political direction
to be taken by the Territory. The law of 28 February

87. We are bound to note that our hopes were largely
disappointed. The response of the Government of
11

1973 in granting more autonomy to the “homelands”,
merely reinforced the tendency to divide Namibia into
a certain number of tribal homes. The local population
has never been asked whether it conceives its political
future in a different form. Is that free choice? Is it
legitimate to consult the inhabitants of a single
Territory and persuade them that they are “peoples”
in the plural without giving them the opportunity to
consider themselves as a nation or a future nation?

Territory, and the United Nations, which considers
that Territory to be within its competence.
95.. We have been in the same deadlock for more
than 10 years, to the detriment of the local population,
which is prevented from exercising its rights as its.
African brothers have for a long time done. Can this
situation last? Is it not necessary for us at least to
call for United Nations supervision of the process of
selfdetermination and independence, which South
Africa assures us it wishes to respect?

92. Finally, we are bound to note that in general
the South African reply does not sufficiently take
into account the requirements of the situation in
Africa and in the world. France has sufftcient
experience of the problems of the African continent to
know that rivalriesamong populationgroups, wherever
they exist, have never prevented a country from
embarking on the course of selfdetermination and
acceding to independence. We for our part consider
that these concepts are obsolete and belong to another
era. Just as it is for each independent State to find
its own internal balance by ensuring the protection
of its minorities, likewise any outside State, particularly in Africa, should avoid promoting a superBalkanization. In the case of Namibia and its 800,000
inhabitants, a policy so contrary to the evolution of the
modern world and to the wishes of all Africans
would constitute a step backwards and not the progress
to which we aspire.

%. Moreover, if we consider that the South African
Government does not challenge the international
character of the Namibian Territory, we would.
normally arrive at the conclusion that ways and means
must be sought that will genuinely enable those
chiefly concerned to make known their views on
their future, objectively, freely and in-conditions that
can be and have been ascertained, as is customary
in democratic tigimes, and as is all the more to be.
required in an international Territory. In the specific
case of Namibia, a Territory which south Africa neither.
owns nor wishes to own, this assumes that some
control other than that of Pretoria should be exercised
to ensure that nobody tries to counteract the necessary
course of events.
97. That, I repeat, is the cmx of the problem, the
necessary condition and, I would hope, the sufficient
condition for the achievement of an agreement in
the problem with which we are dealing. I cannot
therefore fail to deplore all the more the reference
in the letter of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
South Africa [ibid.] to the fact that his Government
cannot accept United Nations supervision. My delegation solemnly appeals to the South African leaders
to review their position, which seems to me to be
based far more on superficial, unfounded reactions than
on a complete analysis of the situation. It would be
thoroughly deplorable if South Africa were to refuse
any discussion and avoid any agreement with the
international community on what should be the means
of enabling the inhabitants of an international
Territory to pronounce themselves openly, before
the world, on their future. That would be deplorable
and, I might add, damaging to South Africa itself,
and would justify the condemnation which many wish
to direct against it; and in--these conditions I fail to
see how South Africa could one day be accepted
by the rest of its continent unless it establishes
normal, fruitful relations with all its neighbours.

93. I now come to what is obviously the crux of the
problem: the genuine expression by the inhabitants of
Namibia of their views on their political future. The
Namibian situation is the subject of suspicion on the
part of world public opinion, which is astonished at
the exclusion of particularly important parties from the
political life of the country. I shall refer here to the
opinion of a newspaper which is authoritative in this
city and which says:
“The world would never regard as valid any
elections or constitutional conventions controlled
by the Government that has ruled for 50 years
a land that it never owned and that is clearly a
United Nations ward”.*
94. One might also wonder, and one should even
put the question directly to the South African Govemment, what is the exact meaning of the letter dated
27 May [ibid.], in which we read that Namibians
“should exercise their choice freely and without interference from South Africa, the United Nations or any
other outside entity.“. Since it is hardly open to
challenge that South Africa directs the affairs of
Namibia, simple justice would indicate that the
United Nations should equally have. a share in the
preparation of the necessary consultations. I am not
unaware that there is a conflict between the South
African authorities, who declare themselves to be
responsible for everything in the South West African

98. After this critical part of my statement, I should
like to analyse the means of harmonizing or attempting
to harmonize opposing points of view. To this end, it.
might perhaps be useful to compare the texts before us.
99. Resolution 23 (IX) on Namibia, adopted by
the Council of Ministers of the OAU at its Ninth
Extraordinary Session held from 7 to 10 April 1975
in Dar es Salaam sets three prior conditions for

* Quoted in English by the speaker.

12
--

cmntaits with South Africa: the right of the Namibian
people to self-determination and independence; respect
for the territorial integrity of Namibia: and recognition
of SWAP0 as the sole representative of the Namibian
people. The second of these prior conditions can be
considered to have been accepted by the Pretoria
Government; not so the third. As for the right of
self-determination, it issubject to ambiguities and to
differences of opinion, and its solution requires the
participation of the various political parties, including
SWAPO. The question which arises is that of trying
to find a line of possible understanding and of
defining the terms of a negotiation, taking into
account the objectives sought .by -the OAU and the
United Nations.

preparation and organization of the elections. These
elections, however, should take place as soon as :
possible and, in any case, within a year.
103. As for the composition of the mission, it should I
first, in our view, be studied by Africans because of
the essential purpose of the proposed contacts, namely,
I repeat, a constructive discussion of the ways and
means of achieving self-determination for Natiribia.
I wonder--but this is simply a suggestion-whether
that contact committee might not, in the spirit of.
Article 33 of the Charter, include the Special Committee of the OAU adopted by resolution 23 (IX) at
Dar es Salaam, the President and one or two members
of the United Nations Council for. Namibia, a
representative of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, and the Administrative Secretary-General of
the OAU.

100. In our view-and this goes without saying, but
it is worth while recalling it, because the international
community cannot compromise on fundamental
questions-the Council should, first of all, once again
stress the provisions of resolution 366 (1974).

.

104. My delegation does not agree with the opinion
stated by some, according to whom the situation in
Namibia comes under Chapter VII of .t.he Charter
or under one of its Articles. We could not go along
with such a proposal. However, we admit that a serious
difference does exist in regard to Namibia. We are
prepared to insist on the fact that under the terms
of Article 33, “parties to all disputes must seek a
solution.” My delegation believes that after the failure
of recent years, direct contact between Pretoria and
the organizations, African ones in particular; which
are dealing with Namibia, would constitute a new
step. Only this procedure would make it posstble to
dispel the ambiguities which we have all noted in the
statements of South Africa on the self-determination of
the Territory. The Africans who recently, at Dar es
Salaam, aftirmed their wish to settle the problem
preferably by negotiation, might find therein the
beginning of a way to do this, and South Africa
should not refuse to consider the adoption of a perfectly
democratic and simple system which consists in
appealing for the vote of the entire population
concerned. I would add that this procedure would
enable it to clarify its responsibility regarding the
future political structure of Namibia since, after
the election of the constituent assembly, that structure
would be defined by the elected representatives of the
population.

101. We believe, furthermore. that a concrete
measure likely to promote new developments would be
to try to benefit from the OAU resolution 23 (IX)
which has set up the Special Committee to deal with
all problems concerning Namibia, and from one of the
positive elements of the South African letter, namely,
the offer of the Pretoria Government to receive the
President of the United. Nations Council for Namibia
and the Special Committee of the OAU. We are
aware of the fact that positions are currently very
far apart and that some wonder whether it would be
desirable to send a mission to Pretoria, given the
apparent rigidity -of South African attitudes: However, it seems tilear that the only way to have the
Namibian affair progress peacefully would be to follow
this course.
102. We could thus entrust a contact committee with
the task of rapidly getting in touch with the South
African Government and inviting it to negotiate on
means that would permit the earliest possible attainment of independence by Namibia, with respect for
its territorial integrity and unity. My delegation
considers that one of the most appropriate means to
attain that objective lies in the organization, under
international supervision, of general elections throughout the territory on the basis of universal suffrage.
Such a consultation should enable Namibia freely to
pronounce itself on -its .future as an independent,
sovereign State. It goes without saying that those
elections should be held with the participation of all
interested parties and movements--a participation
to which South Africa seems favourably disposedincluding the party which is probably the most
important of all, SWAPO, since the free exercise of
democratic rules is the only- way of measuring the
real authority of the organizations that assure us that
they represent the Namibian people. Finally, it seems
to us that if that procedure were to be adopted,
it would be useful to discuss the time-table for the

105. It goes without saying-and I am sure that
the Council would have no objection -that in accordance with the Dar es Salaam resolution, the mission
of which I have just spoken would remain in touch
with SWAP0 as the political party which will be
called upon to play a definite role in the negotiated
settlement of the Namibian problem. The absolute
declaration adopted by OAU in regard to that party.
cannot be endorsed by the Council for reasons that
are readily understandable. Let us not facilitate South
Africa’s .avoidance of its duties by leading to believe
that we wish to impose from outside a single
party system in Namibia. It is no less true that
nothing can be done at present without the participa13

tion of SWAPO, a participation which the South
AfricanGovernment should accept, since, if1 correctly
read the letter of 27 May: “any political group in the
Territory is free to campaign for and propagate any
constitutional changes it likes and to participate
without hindrance in any peaceable political activities . ..” [Ibid.]
106. I shall not surprise the Council by reaffrming
at the end of my statement the faith of my country
in the United Nations. Just as France has faith in the
United Nations with regard to. dialognes and talks,
which we must now have.more of, so we also have
confidence in the role which the Security Council
can exercise, with the assistance of the OAU, in
bringing about general free elections in Namibia.
Turning once again to the-Government of Pretoria,
I would invite it to renounce the imposition of purely
South African solutions in regard to the manner of

consulting a peaceful population which for 55 years
has been awaiting an end to its dependence and which
threatens no one. What my delegation proposes today
is that negotiation and reason be given another chance,
thus clearly calling on the South African Republic,
which has inherited in Namibia more duties than rights,
to favour or at Ieast not to oppose the expression of
sincere selfdetermination; on Africa not to lose heart
and on the United Nations to prepare for a new
work of truth.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.
Notes

l Lepol Conseauences
for States of the Continued Presence
of Sou‘ih Ajltica ik Nami&a (South W&t Africa) notwithstanding
Security Council resolution 276 (1970). Advisory
I.CJ.
- OMzion.
_
Report; 1971. p. 16.
2 See Ofickd Records of the General Assembly, Twentyninth Session, Plenary Meetings, 2258th meeting.

14
Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

82-61202-October

1983-2.200
