S/2020/736

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 July 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 23 July 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General; Mr. Khalil Shikaki, Professor
of Political Science and Director of the Palestinian Center for Policy and Survey
Research; and Mr. Daniel Levy, President of the US/Middle East Project, as well as
the statements delivered by His Excellency Mr. Miguel Berger, State Secretary of the
Federal Foreign Office of Germany, and by the representatives of Belgium, China, the
Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, Indonesia, the Niger, the Russian Federation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam, in connection with the
video-teleconference on the agenda item entitled “The situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian Question”, convened on Tuesday, 21 July 2020. A statement
was also delivered by the representative of Israel.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for
this video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written
statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Brazil, the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, the European Union, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Ireland, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, the League of Arab States, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Morocco, Namibia, Nigeria, Norway, Peru, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates.
Pursuant to the letter by the President of the Security Council addressed
to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused
by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these briefings and statements will be issued
as an official document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Christoph Heusgen
President of the Security Council

20-10163 (E) 030820 220920

*2010163*

S/2020/736

Annex 1
Statement by the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Nickolay Mladenov
I brief the Security Council today as Palestinians and Israelis are grappling
with a complex and potentially destabilizing three-pronged crisis: first, an
escalating health crisis, as both struggle to contain the rapid spike of coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) cases; secondly, a spiralling economic crisis, as businesses
close, unemployment soars, protests increase and the economy suffers the financial
impact of months of lockdowns and restrictions; and, finally, a mounting political
confrontation driven by the threat of Israeli annexation of parts of the occupied West
Bank and the steps taken in response by the Palestinian leadership.
Those developments are not happening in a vacuum. The unfolding dynamics
have shed a stark light on the daily reality of the conflict and the imperative to
resolve it through negotiations between the parties. They have further exposed the
unsustainability of the occupation and the need to update agreements that define the
relationship between the two sides in the interest of peace.
In recent weeks, the region and the broader international community have
continued to express their firm rejection of annexation. Among these, on 1 July,
the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom published an op-ed in a leading Israeli
newspaper expressing his opposition to annexation and asserting that such a
step would violate international law and run “contrary to Israel’s own long-term
interests.” Two joint statements issued on 7 July — one by the Foreign Ministers of
Egypt, France, Germany and Jordan, and the second by Foreign Ministers of nine
Arab States and the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States — stressed
their staunch opposition to the move and called for a return to negotiations based on
United Nations resolutions and international law.
On 2 July, leaders from Fatah and Hamas held a rare joint video press
conference in an effort to restate their opposition to annexation and to commit to a
unified Palestinian front against it.
Palestinian and Israeli women are also making their voices heard. On 9 July,
I engaged with some 100 Palestinian women in a high-level dialogue organized by
UN-Women, marking the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). Participants shared their deep concern and uncertainty in the face of both
COVID-19 and annexation threats. Ten Palestinian women leaders, supported by
180 women, issued a joint appeal against annexation, calling for the right to live in a
democratic State of their own — in freedom, dignity and equality.
A separate appeal issued by 22 Israeli women leaders, and later signed by more
than 100 others, highlighted that annexation plans pose an irreversible danger to
Israelis, Palestinians and regional stability. Responding to both initiatives, 45 global
women leaders signed a joint call against annexation and for peace, highlighting the
importance of heeding women’s voices in situations of conflict.
The Secretary-General and the United Nations will continue efforts to
resuscitate a dialogue among all stakeholders, with no preconditions, and in the
interest of peace and a negotiated resolution to the conflict. For those efforts to stand
a chance of success, there must be political will from all parties. Otherwise, the
path to a negotiated solution risks quickly becoming unnavigable, moving instead
towards a one-State reality of perpetual occupation and conflict.
Regrettably, the situation on the ground is rapidly being affected by the
dramatic increase in COVID-19 cases in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
and in Israel.
2/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

To contain the pandemic, the Palestinian Authority (PA) has re-imposed
movement restrictions across the West Bank, as well as some closures in the worsthit governorates. Israel has also re-imposed limitations on gatherings and certain
non-essential businesses, as well as lockdowns in specific areas. Movement between
Israel, the West Bank and Gaza remains heavily restricted, and the Rafah crossing,
between Gaza and Egypt, has been closed in both directions since 15 May.
The challenge of confronting the rapid increase in cases in the West Bank
and boosting prevention efforts in Gaza has been significantly compounded by the
ending of coordination between the Palestinian Authority (PA) and Israel. The PA’s
refusal to accept any clearance revenues transferred by Israel has exacerbated an
already concerning fiscal crisis and impacted service provision. It has effectively
blocked the ability of patients to travel from Gaza for treatment outside of the Strip
and has led to delays in delivering humanitarian assistance and materials intended
for the COVID-19 response and other health-support and services.
In response, the United Nations has engaged with all sides to ensure the
continued and unimpeded provision of humanitarian assistance. Against the
backdrop of the COVID-19 crisis, the Organization has reached an agreement with
the PA to make exceptions for coordinating humanitarian deliveries, and with Israel
to streamline its administrative procedures. I want to thank the authorities for their
openness and cooperation with the United Nations on these challenges. Nevertheless,
I am also concerned that we are far below the level of coordination that existed in the
beginning of the year, when the first wave of the virus hit, which could have serious
repercussions on the ability to control the spread of the virus and mitigate its impact
on people’s lives.
Over the past weeks, because of the unprecedented circumstances, the United
Nations has offered to increase its role as an intermediary between the parties,
including in the COVID-19 response and in the facilitation of patient referrals from
Gaza. Nevertheless, there are limitations to what the United Nations and other
organizations can be expected to do. Any such increased responsibilities should be
limited and time-bound, and not designed to replace the roles and responsibilities of
the Palestinian Authority or the Government of Israel.
While the COVID-19 pandemic and the breakdown in cooperation between
Israeli and Palestinian authorities have raised new concerns and complicated the
speedy transfer of patients outside of Gaza, it is important to recognize the longstanding, underlying fragility of Gaza’s own health-care system.
On the economic side, the Palestinian Ministry of Finance announced on
2 July that it would pay partial Government salaries for the month of May. The May
salary payments were delayed due to an 80 per cent reduction in Palestinian revenues
resulting from the economic impact of COVID-19 and from the PA’s refusal to accept
the monthly transfers of its clearance revenues. It is unclear whether the Palestinian
Government will have sufficient resources to make any future salary payments or,
indeed, to continue to carry out its governing functions in the coming months.
The suspension of coordination between the PA and Israel has also impeded
the ability of Palestinian security forces to move through Areas B and C of the West
Bank, thus undermining their capacity to enforce COVID-19-related restrictions.
During the reporting period, daily violence continued throughout the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Overall, the Israeli security forces killed
one Palestinian. In addition, 65 Palestinians, including 10 children, and two Israeli
soldiers were injured in various incidents.

20-101633/95

S/2020/736

Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza organized protests against Israel’s
plan to annex parts of the West Bank. Overall, those protests remained peaceful.
On some occasions, Israeli security forces used rubber-coated bullets and tear gas,
declared closed military areas and set up checkpoints near protests.
On 9 July, Israeli security forces shot and killed a 34-year-old Palestinian man
and shot and wounded a 17-year-old Palestinian in the central West Bank village
of Kifl Hares. Israeli security forces released a CCTV video allegedly showing the
two throwing Molotov cocktails towards a military patrol and soldiers opening fire
in response.
Meanwhile, settlers perpetrated some 13 attacks against Palestinians, resulting
in nine injuries and damage to property, about half the number of such incidents
recorded during the previous month.
There were also some 25 incidents in which Palestinians threw stones
or Molotov cocktails at Israeli-owned vehicles, injuring seven Israeli civilians,
including one child, and causing damage to property.
In Gaza, while the relative calm continued, Palestinian militants fired five
rockets towards southern Israel. One fell short inside Gaza, one was intercepted by
the Iron Dome system and the others hit in open areas in Israel, causing no injuries
or damage. On all occasions, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) carried out retaliatory
strikes against Hamas targets, including underground infrastructure in the Strip,
with no injuries reported. Over the month, militants also test-fired an unusually
high 69 rockets and mortars towards the sea, with 44 projectiles launched on 1 and
3 July alone.
Economic tensions brought out dozens of Palestinians on 5 July, who
demonstrated in front of the Palestinian Legislative Council in Gaza City against the
deteriorating situation, poverty and unemployment.
In the past month, the Israeli authorities demolished 48 Palestinian-owned
structures due to a lack of Israeli-issued building permits. Another five structures
were self-demolished by their owners following the receipt of demolition orders. Of
the buildings demolished, 39 were in Area C and 14 in East Jerusalem. Consequently,
34 people, including 17 children and 10 women, were displaced, and over 250 people
were otherwise affected.
I note that the latest information available from Israeli authorities indicates
that, as of 31 May, the number of Palestinian detainees, including minors, in Israeli
prisons is at its lowest level in years. The number of Palestinian minors in Israeli
prisons has declined by some 30 per cent — from 201 in February to 142 in May.
While still too high, I welcome that development, particularly in the light of the recent
calls to release detainees and reduce their numbers during the COVID-19 crisis.
Turning briefly to the region, the economic situation in Lebanon continues
to deteriorate, with inflation rising as the Lebanese lira falls against the United
States dollar. As the health and education sectors come under increased stress, and
with growing concerns over food insecurity, the Government and the International
Monetary Fund remain engaged in talks over a potential assistance package. In
parallel, Lebanon has witnessed a spike in daily COVID-19 infections, with 2,542
confirmed cases as of 15 July.
The situation in the area of operations of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) remained mostly stable, notwithstanding several instances of
weapons being pointed between the IDF and the Lebanese Armed Forces along the
Blue Line. On 2 July, under COVID-19 restrictions, the UNIFIL Head of Mission

4/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

and Force Commander chaired a tripartite meeting attended by senior delegations
of the Lebanese Armed Forces and the IDF to prevent tensions along the Blue Line.
On the Golan, while generally calm, the situation remained volatile, with
continued violations of the 1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement. On 15 July, the
Alpha side informed the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)
that they had eliminated a position within the area of separation that they believed
was a violation and a threat. UNDOF did not observe that activity but did observe
an explosion in the area of separation consistent with the report from the Alpha side.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that confronting the current
crises requires unity of effort, strength of purpose and a clear understanding of
the multifaceted risks we are facing. The ferocity of the COVID-19 virus and its
devastating human and economic toll demand extraordinary measures — measures
that must rise above politics as usual. Immediate efforts to curb the virus and to
mitigate its impact must be prioritized.
Israeli and Palestinian leaders have a duty to protect the lives and livelihoods
of their populations. With unemployment in Israel surging to over 20 per cent,
and with thousands of Israelis taking to the streets to demand greater financial
support from their Government, many have highlighted the staggering financial
and, potentially, human cost of moving forward with potential annexation plans. I
reiterate the Secretary-General’s call on the Israeli Government to abandon plans to
annex parts of the occupied West Bank.
With an 80 per cent reduction in its income, the Palestinian Authority faces the
risk of a total collapse at a time when Palestinians throughout the occupied territory
need the services and support of their Government more than ever.
I call on both sides to work with the United Nations in ensuring that the forms
of civil and security coordination that are vital to preventing the continuing spread
of the coronavirus are reinstated immediately. That should be done without prejudice
to the political position of either party. It is necessary to do that in order to protect
lives in the face of rapidly growing infection rates. We will continue to work with all
sides to ensure that humanitarian and health needs are met.
For the United Nations, protecting lives will always remain our highest priority.
The complexities of the pandemic also require us to examine how we arrived at this
pivotal and destructive point in the history of the conflict and what it will take to
reverse the current course.
Last week, I spoke with representatives of Palestinian and Israeli civil society
organizations engaged in peacebuilding efforts. Their resilience, creativity and
commitment to a peaceful solution are deeply inspiring and we, in the international
community, would do well to follow their lead.
Today, however, it is not enough to restate our opposition to annexation.
Today we should discuss what can and must be done to improve the situation on
the ground, preserve the prospects for a two-State solution, increase the chances
of meaningful negotiations for a peaceful resolution of the conflict and protect
these efforts from spoilers, radicals and extremists. To this effect, I reiterate today
the Secretary-General’s call to the members of the Middle East Quartet, the Arab
countries and the Israeli and Palestinian leadership to urgently re-engage. We need
to restart diplomacy.
Over these past years, these types of discussions have been dormant for too
long, allowing both parties to move further apart along diverging paths. Unilateral
action and the threat of unilateral action have made the goal appear ever more distant.
Only by engaging together on the basis of shared principles and aspirations can we
20-101635/95

S/2020/736

identify realistic steps to avoid increasing polarization and advance the goal of two
States, living side by side in peace, security, mutual recognition — and integrated
into the region. We must use the opportunity presented by the current crises to move
forward to regain the path towards a negotiated two-State solution, built on a just and
sustainable resolution to the conflict in line with relevant United Nations resolutions,
bilateral agreements and international law.

6/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 2
Statement by the President of the U.S./Middle East Project,
Daniel Levy
I would like to thank the Security Council and the German presidency for
giving me this opportunity to brief the Council today.
As of today, there has been no further Israeli annexation on the West Bank.
That does not translate into this being a moment for self-congratulation — we should
keep the champagne on ice. Refraining from de jure annexation must of course
carry no reward; avoidance of criminality is normative, not prizeworthy. De jure
annexation would exacerbate and accelerate existing negative trends. But whether
it happens or not, annexation is a symptom of a deeper crisis: the permanent denial
of freedom, rights and equality to Palestinians. The annexation focus also ignores
and neglects the 2 million Palestinians in Gaza living under permanent conditions of
inhumane enclosure. The collective challenge is not just how to prevent annexation,
but how to address occupation and these deeper entrenched structural problems.
The peace process as currently framed and pursued offers a place of refuge
from hard choices, a comfort zone where the law of diminishing returns has a lock
hold. It has brought us to the brink of annexation, and the Palestinian Authority to
the precipice of financial collapse. It is not a question of trying harder or of resuming
negotiations. More of the same guarantees further deterioration; it is a failure of
learning, politics and imagination. We must look not to quick fixes but to creating
the conditions and the building blocks for future progress that can deliver equality,
dignity and security for Palestinians and Israelis alike. This is not a conflict of two
equal parties pursuing equally destructive unilateral actions. Focusing primarily on
the Israeli side reflects the relationships of power and of an occupying party whose
actions pre-eminently determine outcomes on the ground.
I would therefore humbly propose the following items for the consideration of
this body.
First, with regard to accountability, if the unlawful and peace-negating policies
of Israel continue to be met with impunity, then there should be no expectation of
positive change. It is that simple. Israel pursues policies in violation of international
law and United Nations resolutions because it can; no tangible cost or consequence
is attached. Rhetorical condemnation unmatched by real accountability and sanction
invites derision. While it should be costly, the occupation has become cost-free
for Israel.
Secondly, with regard to rights, human rights and international legality should
be our guiding star and no longer be subordinated to maintaining a peace process that
has so palpably failed to deliver. That means, for instance, supporting Palestinian
and Israeli human rights defenders, backing serious investigations into grave human
rights violations, including at the International Criminal Court, and prioritizing a
permanent ceasefire to protect civilians, in particular in Gaza and southern Israel.
To place issues of human rights and international law front and centre is not to
hark back to the stale and boring; it is to insist on the timeless and necessary. That
includes the right to be free from anti-Semitism and Islamophobia.
Thirdly, the two-State outcome is not an infinitely elastic concept. There is no
“State-minus”, which is tantamount to continued occupation. A plan that empties the
yet-to-be established State of all attributes of sovereign statehood cannot offer a path
to peace. Pre-emptively normalizing regional relations with Israel while occupation
continues is to indulge maximalism.

20-101637/95

S/2020/736

Fourthly, going beyond partition, and given the gap between what is necessary
for a genuine two-State outcome that could emerge by mutual consent and what is the
reality on the ground as dictated by Israel, it might be necessary for members of this
body to consider, alongside expressing a preference for two States, acknowledging
a readiness to engage with other ideas so long as any alternatives respect one
irrevocable standard, namely, full enfranchisement and equal and democratic rights
for all those who are within the political and physical space in question. In 1947, it
was the United Nations that determined in favour of partition. However, there were
majority and minority positions and even an abstention. I would draw the Council’s
attention to the prospect of the partition question needing to be revisited in the nottoo-distant future.
Fifthly, with regard to values, we should also look to nurture shared values
of equality and humanity in navigating a way forward. For instance, we should
try to understand and mutually engage with the experience and dispossession of
Palestinian refugees, on the one hand, and with the Jewish impulse for a shelter of
last resort, on the other hand. At this time where historic issues of racial justice have
belatedly come to the fore, and as we mourn the death of American civil rights leader
John Lewis, it is important to remember the many Palestinian and Israeli voices
that have stood up for and continue to stand up for justice and equality. As a recent
example, I would urge Council members to look at an essay by American-Jewish
intellectual Peter Beinart entitled “A Jewish case for equality in Israel-Palestine”
and to consider the mobilizing and liberating power now — today — of a narrative
of equality over separation — of dignity over real estate — whatever the eventual
political dispensation.
As some of the options I mentioned are examined, Israelis should be more,
not less, engaged. There should be wide-ranging discussions with different sectors
of Israeli society, including those supportive of the existing trajectory and those
dissenting from it. Similarly, there should be engagement with the varied Palestinian
constituencies, both inside and outside the occupied Palestinian territories, as well
as with Palestinian Arab citizens of Israel.
Finally, and as is evident from this briefing, the Palestine-Israel situation
is going through a quite profound transition, as indeed is our global geopolitical
system. The call of Secretary-General Guterres to avert a great fracture and maintain
a universal system should be strongly supported, alongside the Secretary-General’s
recognition that the coronavirus disease pandemic has underscored the need for a
strengthened and renewed multilateralism, as well as his call to re-examine longstanding assumptions and reconsider approaches that have led us astray. It would
send a strong signal if this body were to explore, together with the SecretaryGeneral, a mechanism to assess and evaluate its record and effectiveness on IsraelPalestine and to examine convening a commission or other appropriate vehicle to
appraise anew approaches to resolving this long-standing conflict with its attendant
debilitating effects.

8/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 3
Statement by the Director of the Palestinian Center for Policy and
Survey Research, Ramallah, Palestine, Khalil Shikaki
My daily job for the past 27 years has been to measure the pulse of the
Palestinian and Israeli streets. This is one of those confusing and depressing moments
for the two societies. Palestinians are witnessing the crushing of their dream of one
day seeing the end of the Israeli occupation of their land and the building of their
own independent and sovereign State. Last month more than three quarters did not
believe that a Palestinian State would be created in the next five years. Most are
torn between insisting on their national aspiration for decolonization and building
a State of their own, on the one hand, and their recognition, on the other, that that
aspiration is no longer feasible because of the grim reality on the ground, where
Israeli settlement expansion is destroying, day by day, the chance for peace based on
partition. Many Palestinians, particularly youth — driven not only by this reality,
but admittedly also by a high degree of discouragement given our own domestic
shortcomings — have come to embrace a one-State solution, one in which democracy
rules — a one person, one vote system for all Jews and all Palestinians — indeed,
a struggle for equality. The trend over the past decade is unquestionable: support is
gradually tilting in favour of one State.
In their search for the means to regain freedom and dignity, Palestinians are
also torn between the desire to fight by all means, including armed struggle, to end
the Israeli military occupation, on the one hand, and their own responsibility, on the
other, to put food on the table for their own families, particularly under the current
conditions created by the coronavirus crisis, especially in the Gaza Strip. Support
for violence, which declined to less than a fifth during the early days of Oslo, began
to rise five years ago and has now reached almost half the population. The most
recent spike was triggered over the past six months by the release of the Trump plan
and the annexation dynamics it triggered.
Most Israelis have come to the same conclusion: that settlement expansion is
making the two-State solution less and less practical. They conclude that such an
outcome means greater violence in the future of the two peoples, as well as greater
questioning of their State’s identity as Jewish and democratic. However, a main
difference between the two societies lies in the fact that Palestinians feel too weak
and abandoned, not only by the international community but also by their own Arab
brothers, and the Israelis, who are much more comfortable with the status quo, feel
they can get away with doing what they want with few consequences because the
United States and recent history shield them from sanctions.
Unlike in the past, when they demanded full justice, Palestinians today are
content with what international legitimacy provides. But this legitimacy is now under
attack, not only from Israel but, most important, from one of the main architects of
the modern international system. The designers of the Trump plan do not hide their
disdain for international legitimacy: their own point of departure is to embrace the
views of the most extreme and fundamentalist segment of Israeli society — those
who represent less than a third of the Israeli public, according to the joint PalestinianIsraeli surveys that we have been conducting with colleagues at Tel Aviv University
since 2016.
With a lethal combination of political expediency and national-religious
messianism, the Trump plan destroys much of the progress made over the past
50 years in resolving the conflict. If implemented, it will create a one-State solution
in which Palestinians are denied their basic right to elect those who set the important

20-101639/95

S/2020/736

rules by which they are governed. It is an invitation to greater discrimination,
transfer and violence in the Palestinian-Israeli future.
The Trump plan and its annexationist corollary send the message to
Palestinians and Israelis that the two-State solution is out of reach, perhaps dead
and buried. According to our surveys, the Palestinian consensus is not only to reject
that plan but to also see it as the means by which to take the conflict back to where it
started — to its existential roots. Annexation and the Trump plan are not at all about
national self-preservation for the Jewish people; it is not surprising that at least half
of the Israeli public is not rushing to embrace it.
Because of the despair and pessimism about the future, our joint PalestinianIsraeli surveys show that public opinion on both sides is not a force for peace. At
the same time, however, our findings clearly show that the two publics are not an
impediment to peace. With the right leadership and the right incentives, the two
publics could be brought to support a detailed identical vision of peace based on a
real — not make-believe — two-State solution.
In conclusion, replacing a rules-based international system with one based
on greed and Evangelical Christian religious myths is a threat not only to us, the
Palestinians, but also to all members of the Security Council. It is definitely the
responsibility of our own leadership to address our shortcomings, division and lack
of reconciliation, our inability to find our way back to democracy, good governance
and elections, and our inability to work jointly with our Arab partners and the
international community to put forward a detailed counterplan for a vision for
peace. Nonetheless, the Security Council and its members who are still committed
to international law — the defenders of international legitimacy — should not hide
behind our shortcomings to evade their own responsibility to stand up to the Trump
and Netanyahu Administrations and protect the norms and rules of the international
system. After all, protecting that system is the Council’s raison d’être.

10/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 4
Statement by the State Secretary at the Federal Foreign Office of
Germany, Miguel Berger
I would like to thank our invited briefers, Mr. Levy and Mr. Shikaki, for
sharing with us their observations and assessments. Their research into the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict and their thorough knowledge of public opinion reminds
us that both sides strive for a life with dignity and security.
The coronavirus disease crisis is significantly affecting the lives of both
Israelis and Palestinians. Be assured that we stand by the side of both peoples. We
are convinced that, particularly now in this time of crisis, we need more willingness
to cooperate from both sides, not less.
Our briefers cited voices that call into question whether we can still speak
of a peace process 26 years after Oslo. Yet their briefings underscore that the
negotiated two-State solution remains the only viable solution to the conflict and
that it still enjoys public support. It meets Israeli and Palestinian security needs,
fulfils legitimate Palestinian aspirations for statehood, ends the occupation, resolves
all permanent-status issues and guarantees equal rights for all inhabitants based on
international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions.
It is true that we keep repeating this message. We reiterate it because it reflects
our strong conviction and firm commitment to the rules-based international order,
to the security of Israel as a Jewish and democratic State and to the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination and statehood. We reiterate it because it
remains the only viable, if not the best, framework for a truly negotiated solution.
We are alarmed by the stated intention of the Israeli Government to annex
parts of the occupied West Bank. If implemented, this would constitute a violation
of international law, including of the Charter of the United Nations and of Security
Council resolutions, irrespective of the size of the territory affected and the
terminology used.
Annexation would severely undermine, if not render impossible, the
resumption of direct negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians. Instead, it would
bring them closer to a one-State reality. Annexation would also have fundamentally
negative implications for regional security and stability.
While the European Union wishes to intensify and deepen its cooperation
with Israel, annexation would have consequences for the close relationship between
Israel and the European Union and its member States. This would probably also
have implications for the prospect of further normalization and deepening of Israel’s
relations with Arab States — a positive process, which we very much welcome.
Since his visit to Israel and Jordan in June, Foreign Minister Heiko Maas has
continued his diplomatic engagement to strongly advise against the implementation
of any unilateral measures; he did this most recently in a video-teleconference
with the Foreign Ministers of Egypt, France and Jordan, in the so-called Munich
format. We believe that exchange between European and Arab States on regional
security matters is crucial. Promising proposals have already been made, including
in connection with the Arab Peace Initiative, on which we can build. Together, we
seek to re-establish a constructive agenda and engagement between the parties.
This requires, first, a resumption of direct and meaningful negotiations
between the parties. For this to happen, we would need flexibility and openness on
all sides. We believe that reactivating the Middle East Quartet would be the best

20-1016311/95

S/2020/736

format option to discuss the way forward. We reiterate our full support for the efforts
of Special Coordinator Mladenov.
Secondly, we call on Israel to end the expansion of settlements, including
in critical areas around Jerusalem, the confiscation of Palestinian land and the
demolition and seizure of Palestinian-owned structures, which often leaves families
homeless in harsh times.
Thirdly, both sides need to fully implement resolution 2334 (2016), with regard
to settlement activities, as well as all acts of violence against civilians, including acts
of terrorism, incitement and inflammatory rhetoric. Germany condemns all attacks
on, and threats from, Hamas and other terrorist groups against Israel.
Fourthly, intra-Palestinian reconciliation, reuniting Gaza and the occupied
West Bank under a single Government, renewing the democratic legitimacy of
Palestinian institutions and strengthening governance and responsiveness to the
needs of the Palestinian population are also key for achieving a two-State solution.
What I have outlined are the building blocks for a positive agenda. I would
like to ask the Council, and the parties, to consider them. Such an agenda would open
much needed space for dialogue. Unilateral measures would close it. Let us work
together and turn this situation around.
Germany aligns itself with the statement submitted by the Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations on behalf of the European
Union (annex 28).

12/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 5
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Belgium aligns itself with the written statement submitted on behalf of the
European Union (EU) (annex 28).
I would like first to thank Special Coordinator Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for
his briefing. I also thank Mr. Daniel Levy and Mr. Khalil Shikaki for sharing their
insights with us today.
Last month, an overwhelming majority of the Security Council took a clear
stance against the stated intention of the Government of Israel to annex parts of the
occupied West Bank, considering that to do so would be an illegal act.
Indeed, a unilateral decision formalizing an annexation, regardless of its size,
would constitute a flagrant violation of international law, including the Charter of
the United Nations. The Charter strictly prohibits the acquisition of territory by
force. Such an act would be considered null and void and could not change the status
of the West Bank, which will remain occupied territory; nor will it change Israel’s
obligations as an occupying Power under international humanitarian law, and, more
specifically, the Fourth Geneva Convention. In line with the EU’s position, we will
not recognize any changes to the pre-1967 borders, including Jerusalem, other than
those agreed upon by the parties through direct negotiations. We will also continue
to distinguish between the territory of the State of Israel and the territories occupied
since 1967.
Annexation would have far-reaching consequences. First, it would risk gravely
imperilling the security situation on the ground, including Israel’s security, which
is not negotiable for us. Secondly, pursuant to our obligations under international
law and EU law, annexation would have an impact on the bilateral relations between
Belgium and Israel. It would also inevitably have significant consequences for the
relationship between Israel and the European Union.
Furthermore, we are deeply concerned that annexation would lead to
the intensification of human rights violations and a further deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in the occupied territory, including through the potential
imposition of a two-tiered system of unequal political, social and economic rights
based on ethnicity.
Finally, annexation would undermine all efforts aimed at restarting
negotiations and would mean the end of the two-State solution. We therefore urge
Israel once more to refrain from any unilateral decision that would imply a de jure
or a de facto annexation of any part of the occupied West Bank, and we call on the
international community to take a strong stance against any such a decision.
At the moment, the threat of annexation is already exacerbated by the
destruction of Palestinian-owned residential, livelihood-related or essentialservice structures in Area C of the West Bank, while humanitarian aid is also being
destroyed for similar arbitrary or unlawful reasons. We are deeply concerned about
this destruction, as well as the recent announcements of construction plans in Har
Homa and Givat Hamatos. If put into practice, these plans would further detach East
Jerusalem from the West Bank and jeopardize the future of Jerusalem as the shared
capital of both Israel and Palestine. We call on Israel to abandon these plans.
It is more than ever time for the parties to turn away from unilateral actions
and declarations and engage in direct and meaningful negotiations. In this regard,

20-1016313/95

S/2020/736

we stress the importance of intra-Palestinian reconciliation and the necessity of
holding elections once conditions permit.
The peaceful resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict can be an important
driver for peace and stability in a volatile region. It is therefore necessary that the
international community redouble its efforts with a view to achieving a just and
durable peace that is rooted in international law, including the resolutions of the
Security Council. Belgium will support all efforts in this regard, including in the
framework of the Middle East Quartet.
Allow me, in conclusion, to voice Belgium’s strong support for the mandate of
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and the crucial role the Agency plays in the absence of a durable political solution
to the conflict.

14/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 6
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his informative briefing. I also
thank Mr. Shikaki and Mr. Levy for their presentations.
Over the past few months, the international community has been following
the situation in Palestine with growing concern. It is very unsettling that the planned
annexation may provoke a new round of tensions and put the Middle East peace
process in jeopardy.
The international community has been loud and clear in voicing its rejection
of annexation. During the open video-teleconference in June (see S/2020/596), the
Secretary-General warned the Council that we were at a watershed moment. As
he put it, the annexation would constitute a most serious violation of international
law. China shares his sentiment and supports his call for abandonment of the
annexation plans.
China is also deeply concerned about reports of the plan to annex part of the
occupied Palestinian territory. Such a plan, if implemented, will seriously violate
international law and relevant United Nations resolutions and imperil the two-State
solution. We urge the relevant party to refrain from taking any unilateral actions and
to do its best to de-escalate conflict and tension. It is also our firm position that no
country should support unilateral actions.
It is equally imperative to stop settlement activities, the demolition of
Palestinian structures and violence against civilians. The Security Council should
discharge its mandate and play its part to ensure that its decisions, including
resolution 2334 (2016), are fully implemented.
It is a critical moment to advance the Middle East peace process and resume
equal and meaningful peace talks between Palestine and Israel.
International agreements, such as relevant United Nations resolutions, the
land-for-peace principle and the two-State solution are important parameters in the
Middle East peace process. They embodied the wisdom and hard work of several
generations and should be observed and implemented.
China supports President Abbas’s call for an international peace conference
and an enlarged multilateral mechanism for peace and will positively consider
participating in appropriate ways.
It is important for us to heed the voice and concerns of the Palestinian people
as well as countries in that region. We call on the international community, especially
countries having influence on Palestine and Israel, to remain impartial and just in
promoting peace talks.
We should never lose sight of the humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory and the hardship the Palestinian people are suffering. The
continued blockade of the Gaza Strip has aggravated the humanitarian situation on
the ground. The suspension of bilateral agreements and coordination in response to
the annexation plan have brought about consequences felt by ordinary Palestinians. In
addition, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic further added to Palestine’s
economic and social fragility.
We commend United Nations agencies, including the World Health Organization
and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), for helping Palestine to address the humanitarian challenges. We
20-1016315/95

S/2020/736

call on the international community to provide more support to Palestine, including
through UNRWA. We also call for the prompt lifting of the blockade on the
Gaza Strip.
China is a sincere friend of the Palestinian people. The Palestinian people
can always count on China’s support to their just cause to restore legitimate national
rights. During a phone call with President Abbas yesterday, President Xi Jinping
reiterated China’s firm support for Palestine’s just demands and for the two-State
solution, as well as all for efforts conducive to resolving the Palestine question.
President Xi also assured President Abbas that China will continue doing
what it can in providing material and technical support, and continue implementing
the projects conducive to advancing Palestine’s economy and improving
people’s livelihood.
To help Palestine in the fight against COVID-19, we have provided medical
supplies and sent a team of experts to Palestine. We will soon deliver our financial
contribution of $1 million to UNRWA and, through UNRWA, provide personal
protective equipment to Palestinian refugees in Palestine, Jordan, Lebanon
and Syria.
The Middle East is now at a crossroads between peace and turbulence.
Shouldering the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, the Security Council should and must stand with peace and justice,
with righteousness and conscience, and play its active role in bringing about a
comprehensive, just and enduring solution to the Palestine question.

16/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 7
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
We thank Special Coordinator Nikolay Mladenov for his briefing on the
current situation in the region. We also thank Mr. Daniel Levy and Mr. Khalil
Shikaki for their presentations.
The Dominican Republic reiterates its deep concern regarding the IsraeliPalestine conflict, the current prospects of further destabilization and the enormous
potential consequences for the civilian population. The continuing trends of conflict
in the occupied Palestinian territory, as well as the worsening deterioration of the
humanitarian and socioeconomic situation there, exacerbate the level of uncertainty
about the future of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process.
Dialogue is the only fundamental way to improve the lives of people affected by
the conflict and to move forward with firm steps towards sustainable development —
one that is based on justice, equal opportunities and a peace that can be replicated
throughout the Middle East. Such dialogue needs to lead to the immediate cessation
of all actions that contravene international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law, and United Nations resolutions. But, above all, it needs
to be people-centered, prioritizing the health, dignity, security, freedom and wellbeing of a population hit by years of violence and conflict.
As an international community, we need to understand that our collective
action must be aimed at contributing in an impartial and effective way to the search
for real solutions to a conflict that so often endangers the lives of so many civilians.
We need to move forward and reduce any empty demagogic diligence.
The situation in Gaza continues to be of high concern for the Dominican
Republic, as it is for others. We all know the long-standing dire situation of the
health system, particularly in the Gaza Strip. And now, with the global coronavirus
disease pandemic, its collapse is imminent.
As stated by the Secretary-General, the challenges in Gaza ultimately require
political solutions and the political will to pursue them. All acts of violence by any of
the conflicting parties, including discrimination and displacement, have a particular
impact on women, and notably on those in the marginalized Palestinian territories.
Therefore, the Dominican Republic calls for the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in all actions leading towards peace, including the centrality
of the disproportionate impact of violence on women and girls.
Turning to the current situation on the ground, we are saddened by the deaths
of seven Palestinians, including one child, involving the Israeli Defense Forces
during demonstrations, clashes, security operations and other incidents across the
occupied Palestinian territories. We also remain concerned about the number of
Palestinian children killed or maimed and the disruption of children’s education due
to air strikes and rockets, as recently indicated in the Secretary-General’s report of
the on the matter. This is unacceptable.
For children, the impact of such an environment is too often profound. Children
are exposed to experiences that shape attitudes for a lifetime and have lasting
psychological consequences. We therefore urge Israel and the State of Palestine to
continue working with the Special Representative on Children and Armed Conflict
and make concrete and honest commitments to prevent and end grave violations
against children.

20-1016317/95

S/2020/736

In conclusion, we reaffirm that meaningful and fair dialogue around the
numerous current obstacles that threaten the two-State solution must continue
without delay and on the basis of international consensus. The Dominican Republic
will stand with both parties in their efforts towards that end. But we believe that
Palestinian national unity and Israeli political will need to precede any meaningful
dialogue. Both countries’ political leadership need to realize that the only way
forward for Palestinians and Israelis is to negotiate their way out of this long and
painful conflict and forge their own paths towards lasting peace for present and
future generations.

18/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 8
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Estonia to
the United Nations, Gert Auväärt
I would like to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov, Mr. Daniel
Levy and Mr. Khalil Shikaki for their briefings.
First, Estonia would like to express its solidarity with the Israeli and
Palestinian people in the fight against coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Unity and
solidarity are even more important during this challenging time, and we underline
the importance of continued cooperation between Israeli and Palestinian authorities
to tackle the pandemic.
Estonia remains committed to a negotiated two-State solution based on
internationally agreed parameters and relevant United Nations resolutions, taking
into account the legitimate aspirations of both parties and Israeli security concerns.
We have taken note of the announcements on the readiness of the Palestinian
Authority to resume peace negotiations as well as the counterproposal submitted
to the Middle East Quartet. It is now essential that both parties take steps towards
resuming direct and meaningful negotiations to resolve the final-status issues and
achieve a just and lasting peace. We also urge the regional and international players,
including the Middle East Quartet, to continue efforts towards those negotiations.
Estonia calls on the parties to refrain from any unilateral steps that would
undermine the efforts towards peace. A possible annexation by Israel of parts of
the occupied West Bank would undermine the prospects for a negotiated two-State
solution and threaten the stability of the region. We are also concerned about Israel’s
continued settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territories, including in
East Jerusalem. Furthermore, we are concerned about the announcement by the
Palestinian leadership with regard to the suspension of agreements with Israel,
including in the area of security cooperation. We call on the Palestinian Authority to
reconsider this decision.
Both parties must prevent all acts of violence against civilians, including
acts of terror, incitement or provocation, as called for in resolution 2334 (2016). We
condemn the continued firing of rockets from Gaza towards Israel and any other
form of violence targeting the civilian population. An escalation of violence would
be negative for all sides and further undermine the prospects for a resolution to the
conflict and the common fight against the COVID-19 pandemic.
We encourage all Palestinian factions to work towards reconciliation. This
would enable them to address common challenges and the needs and expectations
of the Palestinian population; it is essential for reaching a two-State solution. Also,
in order to engage in direct negotiations, both parties need Governments with
legitimate and democratic mandates. We therefore strongly encourage Palestinians
to announce elections.
I would also like to reiterate the important role played by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in the
region, in particular its efforts to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on
Palestinian refugees. Estonia will continue supporting the work of UNRWA.
Finally, I would like to state that Estonia aligns itself with the statement
submitted by the delegation of the European Union (EU) on behalf of the EU
(annex 28).

20-1016319/95

S/2020/736

Annex 9
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I thank the Special Coordinator, Mr. Levy and Mr. Shikaki for their briefings.
France supports the statement submitted by the delegation of the European
Union (EU) (annex 28).
Because it impacts the stability of the region, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
remains a subject of prime importance. The parameters of its settlement are well
known: two States, living in peace and security, along secure and recognized
borders, with Jerusalem as their respective capitals. It is not only a question of law
but also of pragmatism: only the two-State solution will respond to the aspirations
of the Palestinians and guarantee Israel’s security, with which France will
never compromise.
In this context, France reiterates its appeal to Israel to abandon any plan to
annex parts of the West Bank, whatever the perimeter. As the overwhelming majority
of Council members recalled last month, any annexation would constitute a clear
violation of international law (see S/2020/596). It would be a flagrant violation of
the international order, whose rules we have together established, starting with the
Charter of the United Nations, which enunciates the principle of refraining from the
acquisition of territory by force.
Any annexation of territory would also deal an irreversible blow not just to
the peace process but also to the two-State solution. It would strengthen the enemies
of peace, to the detriment of efforts to achieve regional peace and guarantee Israel’s
security. Annexation would not be in the interest of either Israelis or Palestinians.
France will not recognize any modification to the June 1967 lines, except those
agreed by both parties, in accordance with international law, the resolutions of the
Security Council and the internationally agreed parameters on which the two-State
solution is based.
As the EU High Representative has said, any annexation decision would have
consequences for the European Union’s relationship with Israel. French Minister for
Europe and Foreign Affairs Jean-Yves Le Drian also indicated that such a decision
could not go unanswered in view of its seriousness. It is therefore the responsibility
of the Council to remain mobilized to prevent any such decision.
France also expresses its deep concern about the continuing colonization in
violation of international law. In particular, France calls on Israel to put an end to the
expansion of settlements in Givat Hamatos and in Area E-1, which are particularly
sensitive with regard to the viability of the two-State solution. The planned opening
of the bidding procedure for the construction of more than 1,000 housing units in
Givat Hamatos and the continuation of the procedure for the construction of 3,500
housing units in Area E-1 are worrisome in this regard. France is also concerned
about the continuing demolitions, confiscations and evictions in Area C and East
Jerusalem, despite the fact that the Israeli authorities committed themselves to
suspending demolitions due to the coronavirus disease.
Together with its partners, in particular Arab and European partners, France
is determined to continue to work towards the resumption of credible and ambitious
negotiations between the parties, based on international law, the resolutions of the
Security Council and internationally agreed parameters. It is up to the parties, with
20/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

the support of the international community, to negotiate the concessions necessary
to move forward on the path to peace.
The conflict will not be resolved through unilateral decisions. The path to
peace will be long and difficult. It will require courageous political decisions.
Progress towards inter-Palestinian reconciliation would be an important step in
that direction.
In conjunction with its Arab and European partners, France is ready to play its
full part in this process. On 7 July 2020, the Foreign Ministers of France, Germany,
Egypt and Jordan jointly reiterated the importance of resuming a fruitful dialogue
between the Israeli and Palestinian parties. They also offered their support to
facilitate progress in the negotiations.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm France’s full support for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and to call
for a surge of mobilization to enable the Agency to overcome its financial crisis and
continue to implement its full mandate.

20-1016321/95

S/2020/736

Annex 10
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
Let me first thank the German presidency of the Security Council for
convening today’s timely and important meeting. We concur with what Ambassador
Matjila of South Africa said yesterday at the Nelson Mandela commemoration, when
he reminded us once again of Mandela’s message of freedom. I also thank Special
Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov and the other briefers — Mr. Daniel Levy and
Mr. Khalil Shikaki — for their important and insightful contributions.
We are gathered once again to express our great concern about the situation in
Palestine and Israel’s formal annexation plan. This concern is being loudly expressed
by various members of the international community, including parliaments, civil
society and The Elders. These voices are united in denouncing the Israeli plan,
which would destroy the fundamentals of the peace process, inflict adverse impacts
on millions of Palestinians and destabilize the region and beyond. The voice is clear,
and the message is explicit.
For now, the implementation of the formal annexation may seem to be on
pause, but the occupation continues. Nonetheless, the Palestinian suffering is real
and deep, and it is never on pause. On that note, let me focus my statement on three
pertinent points.
First, we urge Israel to abandon its annexation plan. The pause in formal
annexation is not good enough. With the uncertainties surrounding the annexation
plan, one thing remains certain: any form of annexation is illegal and harmful.
Annexation is an act that flagrantly violates international law, including the Charter
of the United Nations, the Fourth Geneva Conventions and various United Nations
resolutions. Israel’s continued pursuit of such a policy is a direct challenge to the
very principle of the international rules-based order that the United Nations was
founded on.
Annexation is also harmful. It destroys any prospect for peace. It will put
millions of Palestinian families in peril, further destabilize an already volatile
region and create an unpredictable future, not only for the Palestinians but also for
the Israelis. Mr. Levy reflected on five important elements, and I would stress that
the current situation reflects the permanent denial of freedom, rights and equality
for Palestinians.
Secondly, we call for all parties to restart the negotiations process. The
outpouring of support for the Palestinians and the condemnation of Israel’s
annexation plan need to be translated into action, because words without actions bear
consequences and will neither prevent annexation nor end the occupation. We would
like to echo Special Representative Mladenov’s points on restarting diplomacy.
Indonesia urges the international community to mobilize support for a resumption of
credible multilateral negotiations, guided by the internationally agreed parameters,
with the aim of implementing the two-State solution. We welcome every effort
initiated by the Secretary-General, together with the Special Coordinator, towards
engaging and opening talks and finding a fair and sustainable solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict.
Thirdly, we call upon all parties to ensure access to humanitarian assistance.
Our fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is far from over. The number
of positive cases and casualties is surging, including in Israel and in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The looming annexation and the COVID-19 pandemic add
significant burdens to Palestinians, who have suffered decades of occupation,
22/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

increasing demolitions and displacement, as well as constant deteriorating living
conditions. The uncertainties surrounding the annexation do not change the fact
that all parties need to ensure access to humanitarian assistance in the occupied
Palestinian territories, as well as health services and the movement of goods and
people. In this regard, I appeal for continued support for the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
It is now more important than ever for the international community to fully
deliver on its commitment to supporting the Palestinian people and bring their
suffering to an end. I would like to add what Mr. Mladenov mentioned in his briefing
(annex 1), namely, the need for unity of effort, strength of purpose and a clear
understanding of the multifaceted risk. The risk, peril and suffering of the people of
Palestine and their children make the possibility of a grand future seem bleak.
My country’s support of the Palestinian cause has been consistent and an
integral part of Indonesia’s foreign policy. We will continue with our policy position
until Palestine establishes a contiguous independent State within the pre-1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital. We reiterate that it is the obligation
and solemn duty of the Security Council not only to stop Israel’s vicious annexation
plan but to ensure that Palestinians receive the justice that is their right and for which
they have suffered and waited for so long.

20-1016323/95

S/2020/736

Annex 11
Statement of the Permanent Mission of the Niger to the
United Nations
A month ago, in this very place, Secretary-General Guterres and Special
Coordinator Mladenov sounded the alarm that Israel’s plan to annex parts of the
West Bank “grievously harm the prospect of a two-State solution and undercut the
possibilities of a renewal of negotiations” (S/2020/596, annex 1) and “would have
serious implications in terms of ... the prospects of a negotiated, sustainable peace”
in the region (ibid., annex 2). Such a prospect, about which we all had a legitimate
reason to worry in view of its imminent realization, would certainly have put an end
to all hopes.
And yet, since 1967, the United Nations, in particular the Security Council, the
parties themselves and the international community as a whole, have made efforts
to pave the way to the peace that we have been seeking for nearly 70 years, a peace
that necessarily involves the abandonment by Israel, the occupying Power, of the
annexation of the Palestinian territories and the destruction of Palestinian homes,
with their attendant violence and deprivation of all kinds.
In the briefings that we have just followed with great attention, Mr. Nicholas
Mladenov, as usual, gave us, without complacency, the picture of the situation on the
ground (annex 1), which is quite worrisome, to say the least. I thank him for that. I also
thank Mr. Daniel Levy and Mr. Khalil Shikaki for their briefings on the situation in
the Middle East and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict (annexes 2 and 3, respectively).
Now more than ever, it is time for us to give hope to the peoples of the
Middle East so long exposed to the torments of instability, violence and war. These
populations, mostly young, many of whom are women, whose genius extends beyond
the borders of this region, deserve our solidarity and our unwavering support.
The current grave situation triggered by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic compels us individually and collectively to show ingenuity and a greater
sense of solidarity. It is this reality that, a few months ago, prompted the Government
of Israel and the Palestinian Authority to overcome their differences and build
cooperation to respond effectively to the consequences of the pandemic for their
respective peoples.
With its devastating effects, the pandemic has added to an already complex
health situation, with a lack of adequate medical equipment and products and a
disastrous economic situation induced by a blockade on the Gaza Strip, thereby
increasing the vulnerability of the Palestinian people. We therefore rightly commend
all countries that have shown great generosity by agreeing to contribute to the
financing of the United Nations COVID-19 intervention programmes as well as
the daily activities of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East on the ground.
In conclusion, it is incumbent today on the Security Council, the Quartet
and the international community to spare no effort to exploit this glimmer of hope,
however small, with a view to relaunching the Israeli-Palestinian peace process on the
basis of universally accepted ideals and principles, in particular through resolution
1515 (2003), which enshrines the two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine living
side by side in peace and security and in strict compliance with the 1967 borders, as
the basis for resolving the conflict.
Was it not Mr. Ban Ki-moon who stated in his time that

24/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

“[t]he path out of the current political deadlock requires commitment,
compromise, mutual respect and leadership on both sides. It also requires the
acceptance — demonstrated by deeds as well as words — that the two-State
solution is the only road to peace” (S/PV.7673, p. 4)?
These words are still relevant today.

20-1016325/95

S/2020/736

Annex 12
Statement by the First Deputy Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations, Dmitry Polyanskiy
We welcome you, Sir, as President of the Security Council. We thank Special
Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing, and we listened carefully to
Mr. Daniel Levy and Mr. Khalil Shikaki.
The situation in the Middle East remains in the spotlight owing to numerous
conflicts and crises affecting peoples and countries of the region. Unfortunately, the
underlying problems persist. Even more concerning is the fact that generally crises
are either provoked from outside or complicated by external interference. That is
compounded by the conviction of those who interfere that they know how to solve
a particular issue while trying to promote one-sided approaches. The opinions of
local populations and tribal, ethnic and religious groups are often ignored. The core
principles of international assistance for overcoming crises are being twisted. The
international community, and the United Nations in particular, should help countries
to break deadlocks, prevent conflicts and render mediation efforts. Our starting
point should be the principle of doing no harm.
The Palestinian question is central to the entire Middle East. We have passed
the date of 1 July, after which the Israeli Parliament threatened to begin discussing
plans for the annexation of the West Bank of the Jordan River. No action has yet
been taken, but it is important to understand that the implementation of those plans
may close the door for the prospect of a two-State solution and only exacerbate the
situation. We see no alternative to two States — Palestine and Israel — peacefully
coexisting. In that regard, we reaffirm the call to abandon provocative actions and
unilateral steps. International cooperation and joint steps must accompany the
Middle East peace settlement. At the same time, we note again that the whole range
of final-status issues should be resolved in direct negotiations between Palestinians
and Israelis. Such negotiations should be launched as soon as possible.
As a permanent member of the Security Council and of the Quartet of
international mediators, Russia is ready to undertake efforts in the interest of reaching
a settlement within the internationally recognized parameters — all the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative —
which provide for the creation of an independent, sovereign and territorially
contiguous Palestinian State within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. We urge our partners in the Quartet — the United Nations, the European
Union and the United States — to intensify their collaborative efforts. We are also
ready for dialogue with key regional players, with the facilitation of the Quartet.
Apart from those fundamental issues, it is important not to forget about daily
challenges — the continuation of settlement activity, the demolition of Palestinian
property and eviction of Palestinians, ongoing clashes and the threat of missile
launches on Israeli territory. The coronavirus disease multiplied those problems,
which can only be overcome collectively. We share the ongoing concern about the
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. The work of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the international
community’s support of the Agency is needed more than ever. In support of the efforts
of our Egyptian friends, we call for Palestinian unity and are actively cooperating
with various Palestinian representatives to help them overcome the internal split.
In conclusion, I would like to stress once again that the only viable solution
is one reached by both parties through negotiations and based on the internationally
recognized principles. No recipe or plan disregarding — let alone clearly
26/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

rejecting — that reality can be imposed or become a deal-breaker. We also reaffirm
that any attempt to divert the attention of the international community and put the
blame on other regional actors, no matter how big and influential they are, will not
lead Palestinians and Israelis to a feasible solution to the current situation.

20-1016327/95

S/2020/736

Annex 13
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
We begin by thanking Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his
comprehensive briefing. Let me also thank Mr. Daniel Levy, Professor Khalil
Shikaki and the representatives of the State of Palestine and Israel for sharing their
assessments and perspectives on the evolving situation in the Middle East.
The question of the implementation of the internationally agreed parameters
to achieve a just and peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains
a significant concern for Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. As the situation on
the ground has drastically evolved over the past decade, leading to the continued
expansion of illegal settlements across the occupied Palestinian territories and the
associated threats of annexation, that question has become even more acute.
Recent developments underscore, more than ever, the need to support the
people of Palestine. In particular, we remain deeply concerned about the continued
demolitions and seizures of Palestinian properties and structures, which, according
to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, climaxed in June to
the highest levels since January 2017. In line with resolution 2334 (2016) and other
related United Nations resolutions, we condemn the illegal demolition of homes and
the displacement of Palestinian civilians. Given the vast humanitarian concerns in
the occupied Palestinian territory, which have been exacerbated by the coronavirus
disease, we call on the international community and other actors to provide increased
funding for the revised inter-agency response plan, which remains underfinanced.
In a positive development, we welcome the Palestinian Authority’s willingness
to resume negotiations with Israel under the auspices of the Middle East Quartet,
with international involvement. We call on the Quartet to engage and step up
consultations with the relevant parties and key regional actors in an effort to restart
talks in the near term. Despite many setbacks, direct negotiations can bolster the
prospects for a negotiated two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and
promote lasting peace in the region.
The serious socioeconomic and humanitarian situation of the Palestinian
people in the Gaza Strip necessitates an urgent political solution to facilitate lifting
the 13-year Israeli blockade. It is important to note that the delivery of the essential
services of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) contributes significantly to the overall well-being of
Palestinian refugees, especially the most vulnerable. Consequently, we reiterate our
call for the international community to provide UNRWA with the necessary funding
so that it can continue providing vital life-saving services, health care and education
for Palestine refugees.
Although Israel did not proceed with its annexation plans on 1 July, we are
mindful that the threat of annexation has not disappeared. We take this opportunity
to stress, yet again, that annexation of any part of the occupied Palestinian territory
will constitute a grave violation of international law and undermine prospects for
accelerating the Middle East peace process. It is imperative that we collectively
work to discourage any possible initiative towards annexation, and to promote the
internationally agreed two-State solution. We therefore support the call of President
Abbas for an international conference.

28/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 14
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Kais Kabtani
At the outset, I would like to commend the State Secretary of the Federal
Foreign Office of Germany, Mr. Miguel Berger, for his able leadership of this
meeting. I also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for his briefing and tireless efforts.
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Security Council reaffirmed — in its resolutions 242 (1967), 476
(1980) and 478 (1980) — the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by
force. That prior determination is further reiterated in the Council’s more recent
resolution 2334 (2016).
Through that seminal resolution, the Security Council made it clear that
Israel’s establishment of settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967,
including East Jerusalem, has no legal validity and constitutes a flagrant violation
under international law and a major obstacle to the achievement of a two-State
solution and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. The Security Council and the
international community underlined that no changes to the 4 June 1967 lines will
be recognized, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the
parties through negotiations.
It is regrettable and scandalous that Israel, the occupying Power, persists
in blatantly disregarding all such legal obligations and all repeated calls by the
international community to end its illegal occupation of the Palestinian territory and
its aggressive policies and practices against the Palestinian people.
Despite its serious violations of international law, the decades-long impunity
enjoyed by Israel, the occupying Power, constitutes one of the major reasons
behind Israel’s challenge to the universal legal system, translated by its continuing
occupation, settlement policies, aggressive and racist practices and, recently, by its
imminent threats and declarations on the implementation of its long-planned illegal
de facto annexation of Palestinian land.
The international community should stand firm in upholding international
law, including the relevant Security Council resolutions, and in strongly rejecting and
preventing any such unilateral illegal move, which would constitute an existential
threat to international peace and security and to fundamental Palestinian rights.
Given the looming threat of annexation, Tunisia strongly calls upon the
Security Council and the entire international community to remain steadfast and
engaged in stopping further grave violations of international law, thus preserving the
credibility of the entire multilateral system and the prospects for peace.
We continue to believe that the Middle East Quartet, with the support of the
Security Council and other international actors, can meet the challenge of preserving
the two-State solution and relaunching the peace process based on the internationally
endorsed terms of reference and parameters, thus preventing a new cycle of violence
and instability in the region.
According to the World Health Organization, the number of people testing
positive for coronavirus disease continues to surge in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem. Tunisia highly values the humanitarian community’s efforts to help
the Palestinian Authority respond to the pandemic. However, we remain concerned
about the likely further increase in cases over the coming weeks. We therefore call

20-1016329/95

S/2020/736

upon the international community to increase its assistance to the State of Palestine,
including in support of economic recovery efforts.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East is also facing increased demand for services due to the current global
crisis. Additional funds are urgently needed to ensure the continuity of the Agency’s
essential services. To that end, Tunisia recently announced a symbolic contribution
to the Agency’s budget in solidarity with Palestine refugees.
In the same vein, Tunisia remains seriously concerned about the dire
humanitarian and economic situation in Gaza, exacerbated by the continuing cruel and
inhuman blockade by Israel. In his latest report (S/2020/555) on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016), the Secretary-General urged Israel to ease the restrictions
on the movement of goods and people to and from Gaza, reaffirming that only by
fully lifting the debilitating closures, in line with resolution 1860 (2009), could we
hope to sustainably resolve the humanitarian crisis.
In conclusion, we urge the international community to intensify collective
endeavours to re-engage the parties in negotiations based on the internationally
endorsed terms of reference and parameters in order to put an end to the occupation
of Palestinian territory as of 4 June 1967, including East Jerusalem, ensure the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, put an end to its long suffering and
guarantee security, peace and prosperity for all the peoples of the region. The
international peace conference proposed by President Mahmoud Abbas should
be fully promoted since it could constitute a new start towards a more stable and
peaceful Middle East.

30/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 15
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations, Jonathan Allen
I would like to welcome you, Sir, to the Security Council today. I also thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing and, of course, for the continued efforts he and his
team are making on the ground. I also wish to thank our two civil-society briefers,
whose statements were very interesting and passionate, for their work. Finally, it is
always nice to hear from my good colleagues, the Deputy Permanent Representatives
of Israel and the Observer State of Palestine.
As we have heard, this is a fragile and worrisome period. I want to say, first, that
we remain deeply concerned about the prospect of annexation. Not only would that
be damaging to efforts to restart peace negotiations and run counter to international
law, it would also compound the already fragile health and humanitarian situation.
Preventing annexation and finding alternative ways for the parties to engage must be
the top priority. I reiterate that the United Kingdom will not recognize any changes
to the 1967 lines, except those agreed between both parties.
Ultimately, we want to see both sides make meaningful steps towards a just,
fair and agreed settlement. As my Prime Minister said to both Prime Minister
Netanyahu and President Abbas earlier this month, we want to see Israelis and
Palestinians return to the negotiating table. The United Kingdom offers its full
support in fostering such dialogue.
Now is the time for Israel to make clear that it will not take any unilateral
steps towards annexation. Now is the time for both parties to resume cooperation,
particularly in regard to security. And now is the time for the Palestinians to
reach out to the United States and to Israel so that we can begin the journey back
to negotiations.
In creating the environment of trust needed for dialogue, we call on both
parties to avoid further provocative rhetoric or actions. We call for accountability
against incitement on both sides and for Israel to freeze all settlement activity, stop
demolitions and actively prevent settler violence. The advancement of settlement
plans, including in Givat Hamatos, Har Homa and Area E-1, is of particular concern.
All settlements are illegal under international law. Settlement construction in
those highly sensitive areas threatens to further undermine the viability of a future
Palestinian State, with its capital in East Jerusalem.
In instances where there have been accusations of excessive use of force by
the Israeli authorities, as appears to be the case in the killing of the Eyad Falak in
May, we expect full, transparent investigations. There must be serious reflection on
what causes such use of force to be deemed necessary. Meanwhile, we saw a steady
increase in indirect-fire attacks from Gaza into Israel from late May until early
July. This shows the very real and unacceptable intent of militant Palestinian groups
towards Israeli civilians. Every Israeli and Palestinian has the right to live in peace
and security.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) remains a serious and significant threat
in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territories. The cooperation among United
Nations agencies, the Palestinian Authority and the Government of Israel during the
first wave was welcomed, ensuring that essential medical supplies and staff were
able to access Gaza and the West Bank. Faced with rising numbers of COVID-19
cases, we call on the parties to resume cooperation, while making joint efforts to
protect equally both Israelis and Palestinians.

20-1016331/95

S/2020/736

I would like to finish by reiterating once again the United Kingdom’s longstanding position on the Middle East peace process. We support a negotiated
settlement leading to a safe and secure Israel living alongside a viable and sovereign
Palestinian State based on 1967 lines with agreed land swaps, Jerusalem as the shared
capital of both States and a just, fair, agreed and realistic settlement for refugees.
And the United Kingdom stands ready to support that objective in any way that
we can.

32/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 16
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I thank Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing. As always, we appreciate the hard
work performed by him and his team in finding solutions to this conflict. I also thank
the other two briefers for their remarks today. While they are certainly entitled to
their opinions, I would remind my Security Council colleagues, and those listening
today, that that is precisely what much of their remarks were: their opinions.
As Nickolay discussed, we, too, remain deeply concerned about the resurgence
of the coronavirus disease in Israel, the West Bank and Gaza.
I want to share a tragic statistic with the Council that illustrates the negative
impact of perpetual conflict between Israelis and Palestinians and the hopelessness
caused by the neglectful and abusive Government in Gaza. In the past six months in
Gaza, there have been more than 15 suicides and hundreds of attempts, the majority
of the victims under the age of 30. Fifty per cent of close to 2 million people in Gaza
are under the age of 18. They deserve a real future, not the path to misery that lies
ahead with the current, inept leaders.
Hamas killed and injured hundreds when they seized power from Fatah and
the Palestinian Authority 13 years ago. They have instigated violence ever since and,
to this day, silence voices of moderation and prospects for peace and prosperity for
the Palestinian people.
A number of factors contribute to the desperate situation in Gaza. However,
the oppressive rule of a terrorist organization, Hamas, is at the centre. Today Hamas
pretends to function as a Government, employing violent intimidation tactics against
any chance of a free press, civil society or freedom of expression. Hamas’s charter
states “there is no solution for the Palestinian question except through Jihad”. They
are willing to subject the Palestinian people to despair and perpetual conflict to
fulfil their violent vision and appease the hegemonic aspirations of sponsors, such as
the regime in Iran, than to forge a future of peace and prosperity. Trapped in such a
cycle of madness, it is not surprising that the youth in Gaza have lost hope.
What is worse is the prospect that the regime in Tehran is poised to unleash
even more misery and bloodshed, not just in Gaza, but in Lebanon, Syria, Iraq and
Yemen, should the Security Council allow the lifting of the arms embargo on Iran.
Arguably, this meeting and the meetings on the Middle East in the months to come
should be focused on this great threat to peace and security.
We can debate semantics and resolutions, but we must focus on how to instil
hope in the young people in Gaza, the West Bank and Israel. The status quo is
a failure. We should be discussing how to get responsible Israeli and Palestinian
leadership to sit down at the negotiating table.
President Trump introduced his vision for peace to do exactly this, and to give
the young people on both sides the opportunity for a prosperous and peaceful future.
Some have rejected the elements of our plan, but no one has offered an alternative
that is both realistic and credible. In fact, we have seen more discussion of the
potential punitive responses against Israel, rather than discussion of productive ways
to engage in peace and encourage the Palestinians to come to the negotiating table.
Unless we can get the parties to engage directly, young people in Gaza, the West
Bank and Israel will continue to suffer.
So, I ask all members, what other options remain at this stage? Should the
Council keep meeting, month after month, saying the same things, or are we actually
20-1016333/95

S/2020/736

prepared to contain Iran’s sponsorship of Islamic Jihad and Hamas, the creators of
chaos and death? Are we ready to create a climate in which Palestinians and Israelis
can settle their conflict? There can be no substitutes for direct negotiations between
the two parties.
The Security Council must prioritize the pursuit of peace for a better future
for Palestinians and Israelis, and that means speaking to the root causes of this
conflict and its agitators. That way, we will help the Israelis and Palestinians and
people across the Middle East.

34/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
At the outset, I would like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
briefing. My thanks also go to Mr. Levy and Mr. Shikaki for sharing their views.
We remain deeply concerned about the humanitarian challenges facing
Palestinians. It is deeply worrisome that the number of daily new cases of coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) has been growing substantially since late June. The pandemic
is having a severe impact on Palestinian socioeconomic development. Businesses,
factories and shops, previously only enough to maintain basic subsistence, have
been closed. Hundreds of thousands of Palestinians are threatened by risks of
unemployment and food insecurity. The budget and daily functioning of the
Palestinian Authority are on the verge of severe disruption.
We commend the steps taken by the State of Palestine to fight the COVID-19
pandemic and alleviate its impacts. The efforts of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), working closely
with the World Health Organization, in the last few months have also been critical
in providing medical, hygiene, sanitation and other general support services for the
Palestinian people.
Given the mounting challenges, as the risks facing Palestinian communities
could be compounded further still by the second wave of infections in the region,
we call on the authorities in Israel and the State of Palestine to continue their
cooperation with a view to getting the pandemic under control and lessening its
devastating impact.
Although tremendous in terms of impact, the pandemic is just one among
several deep-rooted concerns of the international community regarding the prospects
of Palestinian people. The most serious concern continues to centre on plans by
Israel to annex large swaths of the occupied Palestinian territory.
If realized, the plans would exact severe and irreversible impacts on the
viability of the two-State solution, as well as on peace and stability in the Middle
East region. Such annexation would be a serious violation of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations and would also run counter to the long-term
interests of the Israelis themselves. The announcement of such plans in the last few
months has caused much anxiety, rising tension and rhetoric. It is detrimental to the
search for a long-lasting solution for the Middle East peace process and exacerbates
the dire humanitarian situation that Palestinians have been enduring.
Against that backdrop, it is high time to redouble efforts to defuse tension
and resume dialogue. We therefore call on Israel to stop all unilateral actions and
abandon all annexation plans. We also call on all other parties concerned to refrain
from any unilateral action, use of force or incitement to violence that may complicate
the situation or escalate ongoing tensions.
We welcome the recent statement by President Mahmoud Abbas that the
Palestinian Authority is ready to resume the long-stalled peace talks with Israel.
We express our appreciation for the determination of the Secretary-General and
the Special Coordinator in engaging with all related parties to restart dialogue
and alleviate Palestinians’ hardship. We commend the multiple efforts by various
interested parties, including the Quartet, to resume negotiations in a creative and
sustainable manner. We call on the international community to step up assistance to
the Palestinian people in this time of challenges, including to strengthen budgetary
20-1016335/95

S/2020/736

support for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East in order to provide adequate and timely humanitarian assistance.
Let me conclude by reiterating once again our full support for efforts
aimed at reaching a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict through dialogue and negotiation. It is critical to strive to
ensure the legitimate interests of the parties concerned, as well as promote peace,
stability and development in the Middle East. The only option towards that end is
two-State solution.

36/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Israel to the
United Nations, Noa Furman
In recent months, the world has come together to fight the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19). While these times have presented the international community
with challenges, the upcoming months present it with opportunities to reaffirm its
commitment to international peace and security, not only in words but in actions
as well.
Some have used the pandemic to try to distract from their malicious behaviour.
The Iranian regime has continued to be the leading source of instability in the
Middle East and proven to be a threat in the region and beyond. Despite a worldwide
pandemic that hit the Iranian people especially hard, the regime surged ahead with
its aggression.
The Iranian regime has continued to proliferate advanced weaponry. It arms
itself and its proxies, in a systematic violation of the arms embargo imposed on it
under resolution 2231 (2015) and puts those weapons to use in an effort to destabilize
the region. Iran did not waste a moment after signing the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA) and began violating the embargo right away.
The Iranian regime has also threatened to withdraw from the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to stop adhering to the few elements of the
JCPOA by which they do still abide. These threats should not be taken lightly, as the
regime has proven time and again that it should not be trusted to uphold agreements.
For example, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) investigations
clearly indicate that Iran has carried out banned nuclear activities at undeclared sites
and has never reported their existence or activities. Furthermore, the regime refuses
IAEA inspectors access to nuclear facilities.
The Iranian regime cannot be trusted, and it cannot be allowed to obtain nuclear
weapons. Preventing this dangerous regime from possessing nuclear weapons must
be a priority for the Security Council and the entire international community.
The threat that Iran poses to the region is not limited to the actions it carries
out on its own. The Iranian regime is dedicated to forcing a radical and dangerous
revolution throughout the region. Central to this strategy are its proxies, which it
trains and arms, in violation of the Security Council-imposed embargo. Wherever
the Iranian regime’s proxies have spread, terror and violence against innocent
civilians have followed.
The situation in Lebanon is dire. The COVID-19 pandemic has only amplified
the economic crisis and the social unrest in the country. And yet, Hizbullah, true to
its title of Iranian proxy, serves the interests of the Iranian regime instead of those
of the people of Lebanon. It diverts funds from helping Lebanese people to building
an arsenal of weapons. Hizbullah has more than 150,000 missiles and rockets, the
majority of which have been transferred from Iran. They are aimed at Israeli civilians
and constitute a grave security threat to Israel and the entire region.
One cannot fight COVID-19 and an economic crisis with precisionguided missiles. The Iranian regime and Hizbullah have increased their efforts
of converting existing rockets into precision-guided missiles on Lebanese soil.
Iran transfers advanced technologies and the components necessary to enable the
terrorist organization to manufacture and convert missiles and rockets, so that they
have increased range, accuracy and sophistication. The local population is used as a
human shield for these illicit activities, once again putting Iranian unlawful interests
20-1016337/95

S/2020/736

before the people of Lebanon. This worrisome development constitutes another
blatant violation of resolutions 2231 (2015), 1701 (2006) and 1559 (2004), and should
be unacceptable to anyone whose goal is to avoid another conflict in our region.
Hizbullah has also increased its activity is southern Lebanon, where it
deprives the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) of its ability to
fulfil its mandate. Hizbullah denies UNIFIL access to significant parts of southern
Lebanon, arguing that they are private properties, attacks UNIFIL personnel in order
to intimidate them and carries out acts of aggression against Israel from UNIFIL’s
area of operation.
Earlier this month, Ambassadors to Israel of many of the Council members
and the troop-contributing countries participated in a briefing on the Israel-Lebanon
border. They toured a Hizbullah attack tunnel and saw with their own eyes how
Hizbullah has built offensive infrastructure in UNIFIL’s area of operation and into
Israeli territory, in violation of Israel’s sovereignty and of Security Council resolutions.
In Syria, the Iranian Quds Force has been deployed alongside Hizbullah to
keep Bashar Al-Assad in power. Over 400,000 Syrian civilians have lost their lives
in the civil war, many at the hands of people trained by the Iranian regime and using
weapons the regime provided in violation of the embargo.
Yemen is the largest humanitarian crisis in the world. Some 80 per cent of the
population is in need of humanitarian assistance, including more than 12 million
children. Instead of helping solve the crisis, the Iranian regime exacerbates it.
The regime illicitly provides the Houthis with weapons, in violation of
resolutions 2216 (2015) and 2231 (2015). Those weapons were used in the attacks
against Saudi targets, as confirmed in the Secretary-General’s ninth report on
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2020/531). The illegally transferred arms also help the
Houthis put weapons in the hands of their more than 18,000 child soldiers.
In Iraq, Iranian Shiite militias, armed with ballistic missiles obtained in
violation of the embargo, violently quash any opposition. As has been made evident
by recent events in the country, when Iran increases its presence and its transfer
of arms, instability and violence increase, putting civilians at risk. That advanced
weaponry I mentioned, freely transported throughout the Middle East and used by
armed militias and terrorist groups, poses a strategic threat to the entire region. The
Iranian regime spreads its weapons in order to promote instability, and it has not
allowed an international pandemic to slow it down, on the contrary.
The coming months present the international community as a whole, and
the Security Council in particular, with three tangible ways to promote peace and
stability in the region.
The first is to extend the arms embargo on the Iranian regime, which will
otherwise expire in October. Thirteen years ago, in response to the regime’s reckless
and dangerous behaviour, the Security Council adopted resolutions 1747 (2007),
1929 (2010) and, later, resolution 2231 (2015), which placed the essential weapons
embargo on the regime. As Iran’s actions show, the embargo is more crucial than
ever. The Iranian regime is spreading arms across the region, and indeed around
the world, causing instability and encouraging violence. Without the embargo, Iran
will scale up its military arsenal and acquire a large variety of weapon systems,
which it will then transfer to its rogue State and terrorist organization proxies. This
will multiply the existing threat that Iran poses and will be disastrous for peace
and security in the region and beyond. It is therefore vital that the Security Council
renew the embargo and reaffirm its commitment to prevent this destabilizing and
dangerous regime from obtaining nuclear weapons.
38/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

The second way to promote peace and security in the region is to grant
UNIFIL the power and tools necessary to effectively implement its mandate in the
upcoming mandate renewal. Hizbullah’s actions in southern Lebanon have rendered
UNIFIL unable to discharge its mandate. The renewed mandate must reflect
the challenges posed by Hizbullah and substantially improve UNIFIL’s modus
operandi. All the necessary steps must be taken by the Council to ensure freedom of
movement for UNIFIL forces and more comprehensive and accurate reporting on the
implementation of the arms embargo and of incidents in the area. Steps to ensure that
thorough investigations of such incidents must also be taken. Only if these concerns
are addressed can the deployment of such a sizable force to the region be justified.
The third way the international community and the Council can promote peace
and security in the Middle East in the coming months is by adopting the realistic
and pragmatic approach of President Trump’s peace initiative. Israel has always and
will always work towards building a just and lasting peace with our neighbours. Just
as we have done with Jordan and Egypt, we hope to do with our other neighbours.
Israel is committed to advancing President Trump’s plan responsibly,
while maintaining all of its peace agreements and strategic interests, and in full
coordination with the United States. We call on the Palestinians to stop rejecting
opportunities for peace and come to the negotiating table.
President Trump’s peace initiative is a real opportunity to bring peace and
security to the Middle East. It represents a realistic outlook and a pragmatic approach
to ending conflict. The international community should urge the Palestinians not to
miss another opportunity.
The spirit of the plan should not only be adopted because it is the most realistic
path to peace in decades, but because it sends a strong message that needs to be
heard throughout the Middle East: rigid positions that do not reflect reality will not
lead to peace.
Peace and security cannot be achieved by threatening the other side with
resolutions in the General Assembly or the Security Council. It can be achieved
only through negotiations and dialogue. By embracing the plan and encouraging the
Palestinians to join Israel at the negotiating table, the international community will
send a clear message to the entire region: we are committed to ending violence and
finding just, lasting and realistic peace.
As the entire world navigates the COVID-19 pandemic, the Middle East must
also deal with increasing threats to stability in the region. The coming months present
the international community with three opportunities to prove that it is committed to
promoting peace and security in the region. The arms embargo against Iran must be
renewed, UNIFIL must be granted the tools to discharge its mandate and the spirit of
President Trump’s peace initiative must be embraced so that realistic and just peace
can be reached.

20-1016339/95

S/2020/736

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Argentina to the
United Nations
We thank the Federal Republic of Germany for the invitation to participate in
this debate.
Talking today about the Middle East necessarily leads to considering the
announcements regarding Israel’s plans to annex occupied Palestinian territories in
the West Bank. We urge the authorities of that brotherly country to be guided by the
general commitment of all Member States to act in accordance with Article 2 of the
Charter of the United Nations.
We recall that the expansion of settlements has been condemned by the
Security Council, since it constitutes a violation of international humanitarian law
and is a flagrant violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
For Argentina, the Israeli settlements, as well as any pretense of annexing
Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, have no legal validity and constitute a
flagrant violation of international law and a major obstacle to the achievement of a
general, just and lasting peace based on two democratic States, Israel and Palestine,
living side by side in peace and within secure and recognized borders.
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law, human rights law and international humanitarian law as
fundamental pillars of a rules-based international order, Argentina questions any
decision that deviates from fundamental principles, such as the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force, as recalled in advisory opinions of the International
Court of Justice.
For this reason, Argentina reaffirms its determination to support a definitive
peace agreement in the region based on international law and the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and reiterates that it will not recognize any changes to the
lines of 4 June of 1967, including regarding Jerusalem, other than those agreed by
the parties through negotiations. In this regard, Argentina remains convinced that
the only solution is for the parties to sit down to negotiate within the framework
of a process that leads to a solution resulting in the emergence of an independent,
democratic, viable and territorially contiguous Palestinian State, which lives in
peace and security with Israel and its other neighbours.

40/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Azerbaijan to the
United Nations on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the 120 member States of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the Permanent Mission of Germany
for its successful presidency of the Security Council this month, and thank it for
providing an opportunity for the Non-Aligned Movement to present its position on
the question of Palestine, which has historically constituted an issue of concern and
vital importance to the Movement.
Having considered the critical developments and deteriorating situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, the Coordinating Bureau
of the Non-Aligned Movement, in its communiqué on illegal Israeli annexation
plans in the occupied Palestinian territory adopted on 15 May, condemned the plans
announced by Israel, the occupying Power, to annex large parts of the occupied
West Bank, including the Jordan Valley and the land on which it has established its
settlements and the wall.
Israel’s ongoing settlement colonization of the Palestinian land, including East
Jerusalem, and all measures of annexation constitute grave breaches of international
law, including the Charter of the United Nations, the Fourth Geneva Convention
and numerous relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. The
Non-Aligned Movement cautions that, if not averted, such plans will have farreaching and devastating repercussions on the prospects for realizing the rights of
the Palestinian people, including to self-determination and independence, the twoState solution based on the pre-1967 borders and just and lasting peace and security.
NAM calls on the international community to enact serious measures of
accountability in the light of Israel’s continued non-compliance. This should include
the halting of business with the illegal Israeli settlements and the banning of entry to
markets of settlement products, among other measures of accountability, in line with
international norms and rules, including relevant United Nations resolutions and the
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights.
The Non-Aligned Movement continues to believe that resolution 2334
(2016) provides the most viable path to peace and calls for its full and effective
implementation. This resolution sets forth the essential requirements and parameters
for the achievement of the two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders, in
respect of the long-standing terms of reference of peace endorsed by the international
community, in accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions and the Madrid
principles, including the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and
the Quartet road map.
NAM calls for the cessation of all violations, provocations and aggressions
in this regard and for respect for the sanctity of holy sites, rejecting any attempts
to alter the historical and legal status quo. NAM also expresses support for Jordan
in preserving and administrating the Islamic and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem,
including the Al-Aqsa Mosque/Haram Al-Sharif and the Hashemite historical
custodianship of the holy sites as exercised by His Majesty King Highness Abdullah
II ibn Al-Hussein of Jordan. NAM stresses that the Department of Jerusalem’s
Awqaf and Al-Aqsa Mosque Affairs of Jordan is the sole and exclusive authority to
administer Al-Aqsa Mosque/Haram Al-Sharif.
The Non-Aligned Movement demands once again that Israel abide by resolution
497 (1981) and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June
20-1016341/95

S/2020/736

1967, in the implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). The members
of the Non-Aligned Movement condemn the statement made by the President of the
United States of America on 21 March 2019 regarding the occupied Syrian Golan,
as well as the subsequent unilateral and arbitrary proclamation on recognizing the
Golan Heights as part of Israel, and call upon the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibility by clearly condemning this provocative statement and proclamation.
We reiterate the call on the Security Council to uphold its duties, implement its
resolutions vis-à-vis the question of Palestine and act urgently to address Israel’s
annexation plans, which threaten regional and international peace and security.
The Non-Aligned Movement commends the efforts of His Majesty King
Mohammed VI as Chair of Al-Quds Committee of the Organization of the Islamic
Cooperation. NAM welcomes the call for Al-Quds/Jerusalem, signed in Rabat on
30 March 2019 by His Majesty King Mohammed VI of Morocco and His Holiness
Pope Francis, to stress the important role that Al-Quds/Jerusalem plays as a city of
tolerance and mutual respect among the people of the three monotheistic religions
and stresses the need to preserve its specificities and its features as a city of
peaceful coexistence.
In the light of the continuously deteriorating humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation of the Palestinian people, including the Palestine refugees, challenged even
further by the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), the members of the
Movement express deep appreciation for the invaluable work done by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, including
its essential emergency assistance provided to help Palestine refugees to confront the
COVID-19 pandemic. We urge once again sufficient and predictable funding of the
Agency to enable the continuity of its operations, in line with its General Assembly
mandate, and encourage support for the Agency’s core programme budget, as well
as for the United Nations COVID-19 response plan for the occupied Palestinian
territory and the COVID-19 flash appeal for Palestine Refugees.
In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its abiding solidarity
with the Palestinian people, as well as its unwavering support for their just cause,
and renews its commitment to further supporting, strengthening and coordinating
the international efforts to achieve a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful
solution to the question of Palestine in all its aspects, including for the plight of the
Palestine refugees based on resolution 194 (III). We express our sincere hopes that,
this year, we will witness tangible progress in the heroic quest of the Palestinian
people to attain justice and fulfil their inalienable rights and legitimate national
aspirations, including their right to self-determination, freedom and independence
in their sovereign and independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. This will most certainly open a new chapter for regional as well as global
peace and stability, a goal strongly supported by our Movement and one that requires
urgent international action to avert the looming dangers and salvage the prospects
for a just and lasting peace.

42/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bahrain to the
United Nations, Jamal Fares Alrowaiei
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to thank the delegation of Germany for holding
this important meeting to discuss issues related to the Middle East. I also wish to
commend your delegation, Mr. President, on its skilful steering of the work of the
Security Council during the month of July.
I also thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his valuable briefing.
Bahrain reaffirms its long-standing position on the Palestinian question and
its support for all efforts aimed at reaching a just, comprehensive and lasting solution
that will enable the Palestinian people to exercise its legitimate rights like any other
people and to establish an independent State of Palestine within the borders of 4 June
1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with the principle of a two-State
solution and on the basis of the Arab Peace Initiative and the relevant internationally
recognized resolutions.
I would like to make it clear that Israeli plans to annex Palestinian territory in
the West Bank and impose Israeli sovereignty over it and over the illegal settlements
established on the territory of the State of Palestine occupied since 1967, in particular
the annexation of the Palestinian valley and Area C in the West Bank, pose a serious
threat to international peace and security. Such a flagrant violation of international
resolutions undermines the prospects of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
As the Palestinian question is one of the oldest issues on the agenda of the
Security Council, today the international community must build on decades of
United Nations efforts to find a peaceful, comprehensive, just and lasting solution.
Bahrain supports the Secretary-General’s call for an immediate global ceasefire
to reinforce diplomatic action in conflict zones in order to facilitate the delivery of
medical and humanitarian assistance to the places that are most vulnerable to the
coronavirus disease pandemic. The fight against the pandemic has become a shared
battle. Implementing the ceasefire has proven considerably difficult, amid conflicts
that have been escalating for years and a prevailing climate of mistrust between the
parties. Nevertheless, there remains an urgent need to reinforce diplomatic attempts
to address these challenges and find ways to promote measures to consolidate
international peace and security.
Bahrain welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015), concerning Iran (S/2020/531). In the report, it was stated
that that country was directly responsible for the terrorist attacks carried out last
year against two Aramco facilities in Abqaiq governorate and Khurays in the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and for launching cruise missiles and drones at Abha
International Airport.
Bahrain also strongly condemns the Iranian-backed Houthi militias for
recently preparing two remotely operated booby-trapped vessels to carry out attacks
and terrorist operations in the Bab Al-Mandab Strait and the southern Red Sea. Those
actions show that the Houthis clearly persist in threatening the safety of maritime
traffic and are seriously undermining the security and stability of the region.
Given the serious threat posed by Iranian large-scale arms transfers in the
region, it has become necessary for the Security Council to extend the arms embargo
20-1016343/95

S/2020/736

on Iran. The embargo is an important tool to counter the proliferation of weapons by
Iran, promote regional stability and hold Iran responsible for its actions.
In conclusion, the common threat faced by the world today makes it all the
more pressing to consolidate peace and stability and confront threats thereto. We
must therefore prevail in putting an end to practices that exacerbate the suffering of
civilians around the world in order to achieve international peace and security and
guarantee a more prosperous future for all the world’s peoples.

44/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
I would like to begin by congratulating the presidency of Germany on its
successful steering of the work of the Security Council for the month of July amid
this unprecedented challenging time of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We
also thank the German presidency for organizing this important debate. I take this
opportunity to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for his comprehensive briefing this morning (annex 1).
My delegation aligns itself with the statement submitted by the United Arab
Emirates on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (annex 47).
The overall situation in the occupied Palestinian territory unfortunately
continues to be characterized by tensions and conflicts, violating the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, including their right to self-determination. The
situation has worsened due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Amid this dual jeopardy,
Israel’s illegal and unilateral plan to annex large parts of the occupied West Bank,
including the Jordan Valley and the land on which it established its settlements and
the wall, could not be more worrisome. The annexation threat of Israel is a clear and
grave violation of international humanitarian law and international human rights
law, including the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the Fourth
Geneva Convention, and contrary to the relevant resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly and Security Council.
The annexation plan, if implemented, will have acutely adverse economic,
political, humanitarian and human rights ramifications in the occupied Palestinian
territory. It will have grave consequences for peace in the Middle East. Above all, it
will pose a serious impediment to the efforts of the international community and the
United Nations to advance the international peace and security agenda.
We therefore join the international community’s show of global solidarity in
urging Israel, the occupying Power, to stop the implementation of its illegal and
unilateral annexation plan. Furthermore, these efforts have to be sustained and
followed up in the long run. We call upon Israel to bring an end to all violations,
provocations and aggressions against the Palestinians, in response to the SecretaryGeneral’s global ceasefire appeal. The unabated construction of settlements, the land
confiscation, the demolition of Palestinian homes and properties and the blockade of
the Gaza Strip by Israel also need to be halted. The sanctity of Islamic and Christian
holy places, particularly the Al-Aqsa Mosque, must be maintained at all costs.
We remain deeply concerned by the continued socioeconomic downturn and
deteriorating humanitarian condition of the Palestinian people, which has been
further aggravated by the COVID-19 pandemic. The international community must
ensure that Israel allows unfettered access for humanitarian and medical assistance
for the Palestinians to confront the pandemic.
The pandemic has put a greater demand on the perennially outstretched
capacity of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA). Therefore, the United Nations COVID-19 revised response
plan for the occupied Palestinian territory, the UNRWA COVID-19 response flash
appeal and the Agency’s core programme budget require immediate support. We call
upon the international community to come up with generous and predictable funding
and technical assistance to enable UNRWA to continue its work, which is a lifeline
for Palestinians.

20-1016345/95

S/2020/736

A multilateral effort is the only way to bring about lasting peace in the
Middle East and resolve the Palestinian crisis. Bangladesh believes that the timely
implementation of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Quartet road map
and the Arab Peace Initiative is of singular importance in that regard. The threat
of annexation has made the international community’s greater resolve and renewed
action to carry forward the political process more imperative than ever before.
We expect the Security Council to redouble its efforts to stop Israel’s illegal and
unilateral annexation plan of the Palestinian territory, in fulfilment of its Charter
obligations, through the implementation of its relevant resolutions, particularly
resolution 2334 (2016).
As for us, we will continue to firmly stand by the cause of the Palestinian
struggle for self-determination until the establishment of the State of Palestine on
the basis of the two-State solution and the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

46/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Brazil to the United Nations
Brazil would like to thank the briefers, and the presidency for convening this
quarterly debate on the situation in the Middle East.
We take this opportunity to reaffirm our solidarity with all those affected by
the pandemic, which has posed unexpected challenges to a region already beset by
mass displacement and economic uncertainty. Brazil has heeded the call for increased
contributions to the humanitarian effort, having recently announced donations to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
to the Syrian humanitarian response plan.
Regarding the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, Brazil wishes to reiterate its
support for a two-State solution, with Israelis and Palestinians living side by side
in peace and security. We encourage the parties to seek a constructive political
environment conducive to a return to meaningful negotiations and to engage in new
and creative diplomatic efforts with an open mind in order to achieve a just and
comprehensive settlement.
On Syria, we reiterate the importance of fully complying with the ceasefire
in Idlib, while ensuring that humanitarian aid can reach those in need in an agile
and unhindered manner. Brazil also underscores its support for the work of Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen and hopes to see further progress on the Geneva track,
especially through the convening of the Constitutional Committee, potentially this
coming August.
On Yemen, we commend the Special Envoy´s efforts to negotiate a joint
declaration between the Government of Yemen and Ansar Allah, which could
pave the way for a ceasefire across the country and the urgent resumption of the
political process.
As for Libya, Brazil urges all parties to resume dialogue under the auspices of
acting Special Representative Stephanie Williams, with a view to undertaking joint
efforts against the pandemic. The arms embargo is indispensable to de-escalate the
conflict, and its systematic violation remains a cause for great concern.
As the crises in the Middle East and North Africa unfold, we should bear
in mind that long-term political stability and economic prosperity are mutually
reinforcing. At the same time, regional socioeconomic development can be achieved
only through the peaceful resolution of conflicts. Safeguarding religious freedom
should also remain a high priority, for minority communities often withstand
violence and persecution the most.
While the current situation poses immense risks and challenges to the
Middle East and North Africa, it also presents unique opportunities for dialogue
and cooperation towards peace and prosperity. Brazil stands ready to contribute to
efforts in that regard.

20-1016347/95

S/2020/736

Annex 24
Statement by the Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, Cheikh Niang
First, I would like to congratulate Germany on its professional handling of
this month’s presidency of the Council in this new virtual setting. We thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov and the other briefers, Mr. Khalil Shikaki and Mr. Daniel
Levy, for their timely and important presentations.
While the entire world is still fighting the relentless spread of the coronavirus
disease pandemic, the Palestinian people under occupation face not only the challenge
of the virus but also an even bigger crisis — the plans and measures of the Israeli
Government to proceed with the de jure annexation of more parts of the West Bank.
Let there be no mistake: the creeping annexation of the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, has been ongoing for more than five decades and
has become increasingly entrenched over the years. The illegal Israeli settlement
enterprise, with its network of separate roads as well as social and economic
activities, the permit regime, demolitions of homes and structures, evictions of entire
Palestinian families, settler violence and raids by the Israeli security forces have
marked the lives of entire generations of Palestinians. The Gaza Strip has remained
severed from the rest of the Palestinian territory for 13 years under an illegal Israeli
blockade affecting the lives and livelihood of the 2 million Palestinians in the coastal
enclave, which must be lifted.
The goal of seeing Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and security
along the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital of the Palestinian
State, has never been at greater risk. As the Secretary-General stated at the Security
Council meeting on 24 June (see S/2020/596, annex 1), we are at a “watershed
moment”. The prohibition on the acquisition of territory by force is absolute in the
Charter of the United Nations, and any annexation, regardless of its scope, would
constitute a grave breach of international law. As the Committee stated on 5 May
(see GA/PAL/1432), annexation represents a serious threat to the two-State solution
and threatens global peace and security.
If it were to go ahead, de jure annexation would not only inflict a deadly
blow to the realization of the two-State solution and the possibility of reaching a
negotiated solution but also jeopardize the essence of the principles of international
law and the whole legal framework that the international community has built over
decades. Respect for the Geneva Conventions and for United Nations resolutions and
ensuring accountability for breaches of international law, such as annexation, must
be the utmost concern for the community of nations.
Opposition to annexation plans by Israel was clearly expressed by most
Security Council members at the meeting of the Council on 24 June, as well as
by our Committee’s partners among the African Union, the European Union, the
League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, United Nations
Special Rapporteurs, renowned jurists, eminent persons, including The Elders, civil
society and people from all walks of life. King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein of Jordan,
among others, has warned that any unilateral Israeli measure to annex land in the
West Bank would threaten regional stability. The Committee joins all those who have
affirmed that the annexation of occupied Palestinian territory will not be recognized
as legitimate by the international community and will also result in consequences
and irreparable damage to Israel’s diplomatic standing.

48/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

While no open expression of repudiation for such plans has been heard from
Israel since the passing of the annexation deadline of 1 July, it is our hope and appeal
that the Israeli Government immediately abandon this unlawful plan.
The Palestinian leadership’s announcement that it is no longer bound by
agreements and understandings with Israel and the United States, including the
security cooperation, points to the fact that the situation might become untenable
if annexation were to be implemented. The halting of all bilateral contacts will
increasingly have a dramatic adverse impact on all aspects of Palestinian life, with
destabilizing results.
We call on the Quartet to assume its responsibilities, as mandated by the
Security Council, to engage with the parties to revive the much-needed peace process
in the context of an international framework within the well-known internationally
endorsed parameters, including the Arab Peace Initiative.
We reiterate our call for the implementation of all relevant United Nations
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016), particularly paragraph 5, which calls
on Member States to distinguish, in their dealings, between Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and with regard to Israeli settlement
activities, which are illegal under international law. We urge the Palestinians to
continue with their efforts for intra-Palestinian reconciliation, and we take note
of the encouraging signs exemplified by the recent call for unity between Fatah
and Hamas.
We welcome the pledges of $130 million for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) expressed by
donors at the conference on 23 June. This is critical support for the Palestinian people,
but it still falls short of actual needs, thus compelling our renewed appeal for support
to UNRWA. The international community must continue to make every effort to
guarantee strong and predictable financing for the Agency at a time of instability,
volatility and great vulnerability for Palestine refugees and for the Middle East.
The ongoing occupation and threat of further annexation are now compounded
by the spread of the coronavirus pandemic, which has reached thousands of cases
not only in the State of Palestine, posing serious challenges for the delivery of basic
health and social services to the population, including women and girls, but is also
threatening the health and well-being of Israelis. The negative shock will have
profound implications for the Palestinian economy, public welfare, employment,
social cohesion and financial and institutional stability. We stress that strong
international donor support and targeted technical assistance will be crucial on the
path to recovery.
Halting annexation, however, cannot be the goal, only to go back to what
is rapidly transforming into a one-State reality of occupation. Being satisfied to
remain on the brink while staring at the abyss cannot be enough. Let us be mindful
of the eyes of the lost generations of Palestinians and Israelis and let us take decisive
action for their sake, end the occupation and achieve the two-State solution as the
cornerstone for just and lasting peace and security in the region.

20-1016349/95

S/2020/736

Annex 25
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative and
Chargé d´affaires a.i. of Cuba to the United Nations, Ana Silvia
Rodríguez Abascal
[Original: English and Spanish]
We support the statement submitted by Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries (annex 20).
The effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) demand from us a
dynamic, concerted and efficient response, based on complementarity, cooperation
and solidarity. This pandemic is a challenge facing all of us, creating a crisis of
several devastating effects not only on health but also on the economy, trade and
our societies in general. COVID-19 does not respect borders or ideologies. Political
differences must be put aside in this dramatic moment for humankind as the only
alternative for the search for joint solutions. We reiterate our deep concern about the
pandemic’s impact on Middle East countries, and we call upon them to refrain from
taking any action that might lead to a greater deterioration of stability and peace in
the region.
While Governments around the world tirelessly work to tackle the pandemic,
Israel continues to occupy Palestinian territory, implement annexation policies,
increase its illegal and colonizing practices and measures, including the construction
and expansion of settlements on occupied Palestinian territory, and undertake
punitive demolitions, the seizure of resources from Palestinian institutions, the forced
displacement of hundreds of Palestinian civilians and the blockade of the Gaza Strip,
thereby exacerbating the emergency situation that the public health system is facing
as well as the socioeconomic and humanitarian situation of Palestine, particularly in
East Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip, and hindering the possibility for countering the
spread of COVID-19.
We regret the precarious situation of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East that has resulted from the withdrawal
of United States financial support.
We reject the annexation plans for the occupied West Bank, which, after long
years of negotiation, is a threat to the future of the Palestinian State, in clear violation
of international law and human rights.
It is worrisome that no measures were taken during the most recent reporting
period to end the Israeli military aggression and occupation of Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, in accordance with resolution 2334 (2016). The Council
has remained silent while Israel consolidates with impunity its policy of expanding
illegal settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory and now threatens to annex
Palestinian territories in the Jordan Valley and other areas of the West Bank and
East Jerusalem.
In the light of recent events, we once again call on the Security Council
to abide by the responsibility vested in it by the Charter of the United Nations to
maintain international peace and security. The Council must demand that Israel
immediately and completely end all its colonizing policies and practices and abstain
from taking any unilateral action contrary to resolutions on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine, adopted by this organ, in particular
resolution 2334 (2016).
The systemic use of the United States veto to guarantee Israel’s impunity
for its actions must cease. The aggressive, unilateral and unjustified actions of the
50/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

United States in the Middle East severely undermine the legitimate interests of the
Arab and Islamic nations and are leading to a dangerous escalation in the region.
We reiterate our rejection of the so-called deal of the century, drawn up by
the current United States Government, which ignores the two-State solution that has
been historically supported by the United Nations, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and
other international actors. The unilateral action of the United States Government in
recognizing Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and establishing its diplomatic mission
there shows disrespect for the city’s historical status; that action and its decision to
recognize Israel’s sovereignty over the Syrian Golan constitute flagrant violations of
the United Nations Charter, international law and the relevant resolutions adopted by
the Security Council. We demand once again that Israel totally and unconditionally
withdraw from the Syrian Golan and from all occupied Arab territories.
We reaffirm our unrestricted support for a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that will enable the Palestinian people to
exercise their right to self-determination and establish an independent and sovereign
State based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and which will
guarantee the right of return for the refugees. We express our unwavering solidarity
with the Government and the people of Palestine and our support for Palestine’s
entry into the United Nations as a full Member State.
With respect to Iran, we ratify our full support for the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action and we reject, with respect to Iran, the withdrawal of the United
States from that agreement, its attempts to disregard the validity of resolution 2231
(2015), endorsing the Plan of Action, the reimposition of unilateral sanctions and the
military threat made against the Islamic Republic of Iran.
We reiterate our strongest condemnation of the United States sanctions
imposed against Syria and the implementation of the Caesar Act, which are affecting
the country’s reconstruction after nine years of war and in the midst of the COVID-19
pandemic, in gross and flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter, international
law and the human rights of the Syrian people.
It is unacceptable that some countries have to suffer the imposition of arbitrary
unilateral coercive measures, contrary to international law and the United Nations
Charter. We demand the immediate end, without political conditions, of the illegal
unilateral measures imposed on sovereign States that, in addition to their permanent
impacts on the countries affected, hinder the fight again the pandemic.
Against this complex backdrop, the United States has unveiled a foreign policy
aimed at stirring up and promoting conflict, division, chauvinism and supremacist
and racist positions. It is attacking multilateralism and unjustly undermining the role
played by international organizations, in particular the World Health Organization.
The behaviour of the United States threatens international peace and security,
and its constant aggression against certain countries aggravates the situation. We
support the urgent call of the Secretary-General to end the sickness of war and fight
the disease that is ravaging our world, namely, the coronavirus pandemic. All forms
of war, including unconventional warfare, must cease.
In the light of the challenges I have just outlined, the defence of the right to
peace remains a fundamental priority. It is the duty of all States, and particularly
of members of the Security Council, to defend multilateralism and the purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter, including respect for the sovereign equality
of States and their political independence, territorial unity and integrity, and the
peaceful resolution of conflicts and abstention from the use or threat of use of force
in international relations.
20-1016351/95

S/2020/736

Annex 26
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ecuador to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
First of all, I would like to congratulate Germany on its successful presidency
of the Security Council in July 2020. We recognize the additional efforts that the
Council presidencies have had to make in the past months, which have been marked
by the challenges facing humankind owing to the effects of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
It is an honour for Ecuador to address the Security Council to present its
position on the question of Palestine, which has historically been an issue of concern
and vital importance. In this regard, we reaffirm our solidarity with Palestine and
reiterate our commitment to alleviating the difficult situation faced by the Palestinian
people. Relief will be achieved only through a political, peaceful, definitive and just
solution agreed by the parties themselves and based on the existence of two States,
Palestine and Israel, within the recognized 1967 borders.
Ecuador rejects any kind of incitement to violence that would make a solution
for the parties even more remote. We reiterate the call made in resolution 2334 (2016)
for both parties to observe calm and restraint and act in accordance with international
law, including international humanitarian law.
I would like to express my delegation’s concern about the humanitarian
situation, including the human rights violations and the non-compliance with
international humanitarian law, which is in place in the occupied Palestinian territory.
Ecuador calls on the international community to prevent the implementation of any
kind of illegal settlement policy, in particular the demolition and confiscation of
Palestinian-owned infrastructure, including water and sanitation infrastructure,
throughout the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, as well as any effort
to impede humanitarian assistance,
We express our deep concern over annexation measures, which constitute
grave breaches of international law and seriously affect the possibility of finding
a two-State solution and threaten prospects for renewed negotiations. We reject
any unilateral action that undermines hopes for resolving the conflict through
negotiations and causes further deterioration of the humanitarian situation of
thousands of Palestinians. We call on all parties to make collective efforts to launch
credible negotiations and intensify regional and international diplomatic efforts
aimed at achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East
without delay.
Finally, I would like to reiterate Ecuador’s full support for the call of SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for a ceasefire and for silencing arms around the world,
in accordance with the joint statement co-initiated by Ecuador, in conjunction with
172 other countries, with a view to working together to fight COVID-19, which is our
common enemy. The implementation of that appeal would also serve as a first step
towards achieving a definitive and sustainable peace.

52/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 27
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Germany on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of July. I value its efforts to
steer the Council’s work in the light of the regional and international challenges on
its agenda.
I also wish to convey my appreciation for the briefing given by Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process (annex 1).
Egypt associates itself with the statements on this issue submitted on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (annex 20) and of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (annex 47).
Although the international community, as represented by the United Nations,
has taken up the question of Palestine since the General Assembly adopted resolution
181 (II), in 1947, providing for the establishment of a Palestinian State, the Palestinian
people, deprived of its right to self-determination, continues to languish under Israeli
occupation. Over several decades, the Palestinian question has gone through several
phases, the most recent of which has been the endorsement by Arab States and the
Palestinian leadership of peace as a strategic choice in the hope of stabilizing the
conflict-riddled Middle East.
In that context, the Palestine Liberation Organization, as the sole legitimate
representative of the Palestinian people, undertook to negotiate with the Israeli side.
Negotiations managed to spread the hope among the Palestinian and Israeli peoples,
as well as others in the region, that a real peace could be achieved, ending one of
the region’s oldest crises, one that remains the defining issue in the Arab world.
Nevertheless, after all these years, progress on the Palestinian question has stagnated,
and the situation in the occupied territories has deteriorated. Israeli actions on the
ground continue to accelerate and intensify, with the aim of imposing a fait accompli
and undermining the two-State solution so as to render impossible the establishment
of a Palestinian State.
Israel’s settlement activities have continued. The occupying Power has
persisted in confiscating land, expelling Palestinian citizens, destroying their
homes and announcing plans to build additional settlement units. At the same time,
Israeli settlers have violated the rights of the Palestinian people in the West Bank.
Holy sites, particularly Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa Mosque, have not been
spared violent acts, despite the city’s centrality to the followers of the world’s three
monotheistic religions.
Israel has not only adopted such practices, but it has also declared its intention
to annex more Palestinian territory, as the agreement to form the current Israeli
Government provides for the annexation of parts of the West Bank, in contravention
of international law, United Nations resolutions, the Fourth Geneva Convention
and all terms of reference of the peace process. This annexation is something that
would effectively eliminate the two-State solution and undermine the prospect of
resuming negotiations.
Any unilateral steps taken by Israel to annex Palestinian territories would
amount to the imposition of a fait accompli and new facts on the ground that cannot
be overcome or ignored. Such actions would cause the situation in the occupied
territories to deteriorate further, adversely affecting the security and stability of

20-1016353/95

S/2020/736

the entire region. They would also give militant and extremist voices a platform to
spread their ideas, which are inimical to peace and coexistence among peoples.
Egypt has always asserted its long-standing position concerning the Palestinian
people and its legitimate right to establish an independent State within the borders of
4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital. In the light of current developments,
Egypt believes that the only way to uphold the rights of the Palestinian people is to
put an end to unilateral actions, in particular plans to annex Palestinian territories,
halt Israeli practices in the West Bank and lift the blockade on the Gaza Strip.
Those steps would create a climate conducive to the resumption of negotiations on
the basis of a two-State solution, the Arab Peace Initiative, international law and
internationally recognized resolutions.
The other crises in the Middle East are not faring much better than the question
of Palestine. Our region is increasingly affected by a dogmatic terrorist project
that uses religion as a smokescreen to seize and monopolize power, destroying
the principles of the nation-State and citizenship, without regard to the cost to the
peoples of the region. It is regrettable that the United Nations and its organs continue
to turn a blind eye to the crude and destructive actions of the Governments of a
limited number of States in the region in support of these warped designs, while
those States continue to spread terrorism, chaos and sectarian divisions, flouting the
most important principles of international law.
Those malicious schemes are doomed to fail. In the end, the solutions that
will prevail are those that serve the interests of the peoples of the region and meet
their aspirations for security and development through sovereign democratic States
that respect the principles of citizenship and do not use religion as a smokescreen for
political ambitions or expansionist fantasies.
Egypt endorses the call for a global ceasefire that would enable the peoples of
the region to address pandemic-related developments and lay the groundwork for a
comprehensive political process based on the terms of reference set out in the relevant
Security Council resolutions on resolving protracted regional conflicts. The United
Nations must ensure that efforts aimed at peacefully resolving the crises in Syria and
Yemen are guided by the peoples of those countries, free from foreign interference
or dictates. Such efforts must also fully preserve the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of those countries and the unity of their peoples.
In that context, Egypt expresses deep concern at the alarming findings set
out in the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) (S/2020/531), published in June. Those findings relate to the origin of
smuggled weapons seized en route to Yemen, as well as to the missiles and uncrewed
aerial vehicles used in attacks on vital facilities in Saudi Arabia last year, attacks
that Egypt condemned in the strongest terms.
In a statement delivered by Minister for Foreign Affairs Sameh Hassan
Shokry Selim at the Security Council meeting on Libya held on 8 July 2020,
Egypt reiterated the call by President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi for an immediate and
unconditional ceasefire (see S/2020/686, annex 18). Egypt supports the political
settlement of the Libyan crisis enshrined in the Cairo declaration of 6 June 2020,
which is entirely consistent with the outcomes of the Berlin Conference and Security
Council resolutions on Libya. The aims set forth in those declarations are to stabilize
the country by restructuring the Presidential Council of Libya, form an independent
Libyan Government that enjoys consensus among all Libyan parties concerned and
the confidence of the Libyan House of Representatives, dissolve armed militias,
combat terrorism and ensure that Libyan wealth is distributed equitably.

54/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Egypt once again condemns the destructive foreign interventions in Libya
by a specific regional party that is working to recruit terrorist fighters from Syria
and which supports armed militias and militant groups in the country. Owing to
those interventions, there is a widening gap between, on the one hand, the legitimate
aspirations of the Libyan people to live in peace, security and dignity in a unified,
independent State and, on the other hand, the very real project of chaos and extremism
that this regional actor seeks to sow in the country.
The international community has tarried too long. The time has come to heed
the voice of reason and wisdom, realize the hopes and aspirations of the peoples of
the region to live in security and peace and safeguard the region’s resources and lives
instead of squandering them on conflicts that bleed them dry. Egypt will continue to
work for peace and security in the Middle East in order to forge a better tomorrow
for the peoples of the region.

20-1016355/95

S/2020/736

Annex 28
Statement by the Head of Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, Olof Skoog
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the European
Union (EU).
The EU remains united in its commitment to achieving a two-State solution
that meets Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian aspirations for
statehood and sovereignty, ends the occupation that began in 1967 and resolves all
final-status issues in order to end the conflict.
The EU recalls that a lasting solution to the conflict must be achieved on
the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles —
including land for peace, the road map and the agreements previously reached
by the parties — and of the Arab Peace Initiative, with the State of Israel and an
independent, democratic, contiguous, sovereign and viable State of Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security and mutual recognition. The EU reiterates its
fundamental commitment to the security of Israel, including with regard to current
and emerging threats in the region.
The EU strongly opposes all actions that undermine the viability of the twoState solution and urges both sides to demonstrate, through policies and actions, a
genuine commitment to a two-State solution in order to rebuild trust and create a
path back to meaningful negotiations.
To that end, the EU will continue to closely monitor developments on the
ground and their broader implications and will consider further action in order to
protect the viability of the two-State solution, which is constantly eroded by new
facts on the ground.
As the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of the
European Union, Josep Borrell Fontelles, wrote in his letter to the current members
of the Security Council on 23 June:
“In recent days, I have had open, friendly and constructive conversations
with a number of senior Israeli interlocutors, including Alternate Prime
Minister Benny Gantz and Foreign Minister Gabi Ashkenazi. In addition, I
am in close contact with the Palestinian leadership and with other key Arab
representatives and, together with EU Foreign Ministers, I also held a useful
discussion on the Middle East peace process with United States Secretary of
State Mike Pompeo.
“In these discussions, I emphasized the EU’s opposition to any unilateral
steps by the parties, in particular the possible annexation by Israel of any
parts of the West Bank. I am firmly convinced that such steps would endanger
the continuous efforts of the Security Council and the wider international
community to achieve the vision of a region where two States — Israel and
Palestine — live side by side within secure and recognized borders.
“In March this year, at the Human Rights Council in Geneva, the EU
delivered a statement to that effect, noting clearly that ‘any annexation
would constitute a serious violation of international law’. Indeed, a core legal
provision of international law, including the Charter of the United Nations, is
that the acquisition of territory by force is prohibited.
“Importantly, unilateral annexation would cause real damage to the
prospects for a viable two-State solution.” (see S/2020/596, annex 23)
56/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Recalling that settlements are illegal under international law, constitute an
obstacle to peace and threaten to make a two-State Solution impossible, the EU
reiterates its strong opposition to Israel’s settlement policy and actions taken in that
context, such as building the separation barrier beyond the 1967 line; demolitions
and confiscation, including of EU-funded projects; evictions; forced transfers,
including of Bedouins; illegal outposts and restrictions of movement and access.
The EU calls on Israel to halt continued settlement expansion, including in East
Jerusalem, especially in sensitive areas such as Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and Area
E-1, which severely threatens the two-State solution.
The EU calls for all parties to take swift steps to produce a fundamental change
to the political, security and economic situation in the Gaza Strip, including the end
of the closure and a full opening of the crossing points, while addressing Israel’s
legitimate security concerns. Recent rocket fire by militant groups is unacceptable
and underlines again the danger of escalation. All stakeholders must commit to
non-violence and peace.
The EU reaffirms its readiness to work towards the resumption of meaningful
negotiations to resolve all final-status issues and to achieve a just and lasting
peace. It urges both sides to demonstrate, through policies and actions, a genuine
commitment to the two-State solution as the only realistic way to end the conflict.
Allow me to turn now to the situation in Syria. In Idlib, the offensive by
the Syrian regime and its backers, including Russia, has created untold human
suffering and has provoked the worst humanitarian crisis since the beginning of the
Syrian conflict.
The EU reiterates, in the strongest possible terms, its call on all parties to
maintain a sustainable ceasefire so as to guarantee the protection of civilians on
the ground and from the air and to enable the unhindered delivery of humanitarian
assistance by the international community.
While the European Union recognizes the presence of United Nationsdesignated terrorist groups in the region, indiscriminate attacks and the destruction
of civilian infrastructure — including health facilities, schools and settlements for
displaced persons — by the Syrian regime and its allies cannot be justified under any
circumstances and must stop. We reiterate the EU position that all the perpetrators of
war crimes and crimes against humanity should be held accountable.
The EU has condemned Turkey’s unilateral military action in north-eastern
Syria, which causes unacceptable human suffering, undermines the fight against
Daʼesh and seriously threatens European security. Turkey is a key partner of
the European Union and a critically important actor in the Syrian crisis and the
region. Turkey’s security concerns in north-eastern Syria should be addressed
through political and diplomatic means, not military action, and in accordance with
international humanitarian law.
In response to the findings of the 8 April report of the Investigation and
Identification Team of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
the Executive Council recently took a crucially important decision on addressing
the possession and use of chemical weapons by the Syrian regime. That decision has
been carefully drafted in accordance with the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction. It sets clear and verifiable parameters for action that the Syrian regime
needs to take in order to return to full compliance with the Chemical Weapons
Convention. The European Union strongly supports the decision and urges the Syrian
regime to take all the measures required to redress the situation in the specified time
frame. As set out in the decision, it will now be the duty of the Conference of the
20-1016357/95

S/2020/736

States Parties to decide any further course of action, in accordance with article XII
of the Convention. We call on all States parties to fulfil their responsibility and
bolster the credibility of the Convention.
The EU urges the Syrian regime to return to the negotiating table and repeats
that any sustainable solution to the conflict requires a genuine political transition
in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) negotiated by the Syrian parties within the United Nations-led Geneva
process, and remains committed to the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Syrian State.
The EU is addressing the humanitarian situation as a matter of priority. It
is delivering humanitarian assistance to address the emergency needs for shelter,
medical and food support of some 1 million displaced persons and all other Syrians
in need in the Idlib region. We must continue to ensure safe, sustained and immediate
access to populations in need, in full compliance with international humanitarian
law. As stated by High Representative Josep Borrell and Commissioner for Crisis
Management Janez Lenarčič on 12 July:
“On Saturday, 11 July, the Security Council adopted a much-needed
resolution on cross border assistance that is crucial for helping people
suffering from the conflict in Syria.
“However, it is a matter of deep concern that the resolution adopted after
repeated vetoes by Russia and China authorizes only one crossing point out
of the two previously available to the United Nations. The unconstructive
approach of certain members of the Security Council is all the more
regrettable at a time when needs have never been greater and in the context of
the coronavirus pandemic.
“Only the Bab Al-Hawa crossing point is now left for the United Nations
to provide essential humanitarian assistance. The authorization of only
one crossing will hamper the delivery of life-saving emergency supplies to
hundreds of thousands of people in need in north-west Syria.”
The EU will be ready to assist in the reconstruction of Syria when a
comprehensive, genuine and inclusive political transition, in the framework of
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva process, is firmly under way.

58/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 29
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Iran to the
United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
Today the decades-long suffering of the Palestinian people has become
manifold as a result of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, as well as
the intensification of oppressive measures by the Israeli regime. What has made this
horrific humanitarian situation in Palestine more bitter and intolerable is the regime’s
continued brazen determination to further advance its unlawful expansionist policies.
Under the current unprecedented circumstances, where the situation in
Palestine and the region as a whole has become further entangled and complicated,
the international community has a serious responsibility to do everything in its
power to address the crisis and prevent the further deterioration of regional and
international peace and security.
That must start with the Security Council, which, according to the Charter of
the United Nations, has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The situation of Palestine is, first and foremost, a result of the
Council’s decades-long inaction in the face of the expansionist policies and unlawful
practices of the Israeli regime. In order to prevent the persistent erosion of trust and
confidence in the Council, and in the United Nations in general, the Council must act
in accordance with its responsibility under the Charter.
Parallel to the consideration of this situation in the Security Council, the
international community must also put collective coordinated pressure on the
United States to compel it to put an end to its irresponsible policy of unreservedly
supporting the unlawful acts of the Israeli regime, as well as its complete and
systematic shielding of Israel from the Council’s measures, thus emboldening the
regime to continue committing crimes with total impunity.
Unfortunately, the support of the United States has continued unabated over
the past seven decades, in flagrant violation of the basic principles of international
law, in contempt of all standards of international conduct and counter to all principles
of humanity and morality.
While the occupation of Palestine is the main cause of the Middle East crisis,
the Israeli regime, by revealing its plan to annex significant parts of the occupied
Palestinian territory, has opened a new chapter in its expansionist policy, which, if
unchecked, would further exacerbate the already tense situation in the Middle East.
As a peremptory norm of international law, the occupation and acquisition of
territory by force is prohibited and inadmissible. Therefore, the annexation of even
the smallest part of the occupied Palestinian territory would be a gross violation of
the basic principles of international law and the Charter. In fulfilment of their legal
obligations under international law, all States must therefore refuse to recognize
such annexation.
Additionally, the Israeli regime must also be compelled to put an end to
its continued construction and expansion of settlements, as well as the sustained
inhumane blockade of the Gaza Strip. The latter is more urgent given the outbreak
of the COVID-19 pandemic and the Palestinians’ dire need for food, medicine and
medical equipment to treat the sick and prevent the further spread of the coronavirus.
Given the current reports about the pitiable condition of the Palestinians in
Israeli prisons, the regime must also be forced to release the Palestinian prisoners —
a need that is now urgent due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

20-1016359/95

S/2020/736

Furthermore, ending the Israeli regime’s occupation of other Arab territories
must be the focus of all measures taken by the international community, including the
Security Council. Accordingly, the regime must be compelled to end its occupation
of all Palestinian territories, as well as the occupied Syrian Golan and parts of
Lebanon. In addition, it must put an end to all its destabilizing activities in the
region, including the systematic violation of the sovereignty of Syria and Lebanon.
As I once again stress the need to end the decades of occupation, aggression,
crime, death and destruction in Palestine, I would like to reiterate that the Islamic
Republic of Iran continues supporting the just cause of the Palestinian people and the
full realization of all their inalienable rights, including their inherent right to selfdetermination and to establish an independent Palestinian State in all of Palestine,
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

60/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 30
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ireland to the United Nations
I thank you, Sir, for convening today’s debate on this important topic, and I
also thank today’s briefers.
Ireland fully aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the
European Union (annex 28).
At the outset, I would like to express Ireland’s support for efforts to contain the
spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territory. The rapid increase in cases over recent weeks is deeply worrisome, and we
urge full cooperation in efforts to control the virus and ensure access to health care
for all those in need.
The sharp rise in cases in densely populated refugee camps is of particular
concern, and we applaud the exceptional work of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in providing vital
health-care services to Palestine refugees. At the 23 June pledging conference, Irish
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defense Simon Coveney announced an additional
€1 million in Irish funding to UNRWA, on top of our €6 million allocation for
2020. UNRWA continues to face an extremely difficult financial situation, and we
encourage all donors to consider extending additional support to the Agency.
I must once again express Ireland’s deep concern regarding the threatened
annexation of parts of the occupied Palestinian territory. We share the assessment
of Secretary-General Guterres, who told the Council on 24 June (see S/2020/596,
annex I) that annexation, if implemented, would constitute a most serious violation
of international law, grievously harm the prospect of a two-State solution and
undercut the possibilities of a renewal of negotiations. We must also recognize that
annexation would compound existing violations of the human rights of Palestinians
in the affected areas of the West Bank, which is already negatively impacted by
illegal settlements.
The annexation of any part of the occupied Palestinian territory would also
threaten regional stability and would have inevitable and negative consequences for
Israel’s relations with the international community, including the European Union.
We urge Israel, as an important partner, to refrain from taking such a damaging step.
Ireland remains committed to a negotiated two-State solution that ends the
occupation that began in 1967, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States, on the
basis of international law, the internationally agreed parameters and relevant Security
Council resolutions. This accords with the European Union’s firm position and with
General Assembly resolution 73/89, of 6 December 2018, which Ireland introduced
(see A/73/PV.47), on a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East. We
stand ready to support all efforts towards the achievement of this goal.
I turn now to the situation in Syria. The conflict in Syria continues to cause
unimaginable suffering, particularly in the north-west and north-east. Although a
ceasefire in Idlib holds, the potential for escalation remains all too real. Economic
destabilization, the spread of COVID-19 and new restrictions on the cross-border
delivery of aid further threaten deeply vulnerable Syrians. We welcome the recent
renewal of the cross-border mandate for the delivery of humanitarian aid, but deeply
regret that just a single crossing remains to serve the millions of people in the northwest who rely on aid, many of them children.
Ireland strongly condemns all violations of international law in Syria and
welcomes every effort in pursuit of accountability and justice. We thank the
20-1016361/95

S/2020/736

Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic for
its important work, including its report of 2 July (A/HRC/44/61). We reiterate our
support for the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism, and call again
for the situation in Syria to be referred to the International Criminal Court.
Ireland joins the call for a nationwide ceasefire in Syria, and it supports
the Special Envoy for Syria in his efforts to bring about a genuine, inclusive and
comprehensive political solution, based on resolution 2254 (2015).

62/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 31
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues to pose a serious threat to
human security around the world, including in the Middle East. Japan fully supports
the ongoing efforts by all parts of the United Nations system to tackle the pandemic.
As a co-initiator of the statement signed by over 170 Member States and observers in
support of the Secretary-General`s appeal for a global ceasefire amid the COVID-19
pandemic, Japan strongly hopes that the recently adopted resolution 2532 (2020) will
be respected in full by all relevant parties.
Thanks to the efforts of both the Palestinian Authority and the Israeli
Government, the number of COVID-19 infections, as well as the death toll in Palestine,
remained relatively low during the initial stage. However, the numbers are growing,
and we need to do more to contain the virus under the internationally concerted
effort. Since the onset of this crisis, Japan has contributed around $10.8 million
to international organizations, including UNICEF and the International Federation
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, to support Palestine’s effort to counter
the pandemic.
Japan highly values the role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in preventing the spread of
COVID-19 in densely populated refugee camps. The Agency has again demonstrated
its capacity to provide quality services. Japan commends all the front-line workers of
UNRWA for their dedication in daily operations under such difficult circumstances.
The Agency plays a vital role not only in meeting humanitarian needs, but also in
regional stability. So far in 2020, Japan has contributed over $25 million to UNRWA,
including about $1.5 million in response to the flash appeal for the COVID-19
response. We expect UNRWA to diversify its donors to realize a more stable financial
base. To this end, in mid-June, Japan organized a virtual working-level meeting
of the Conference on Cooperation among East Asian Countries for Palestinian
Development and encouraged our Asian partners to continue supporting UNRWA.
Japan remains committed to supporting a two-State solution. The conflict
between the Israeli and the Palestinian sides should be resolved only through
negotiations, based on relevant Security Council resolutions and known parameters.
We are very concerned about the continued settlement activities by Israel, including
the demolition of Palestinian-owned structures, which undermines efforts towards
a peaceful resolution.
If the application of sovereignty to the West Bank were to be unilaterally put
into effect by Israel, irrespective of the territorial scope of such measures, it would
severely undermine mutual confidence between the parties towards achieving a twoState solution and might lead to the destabilization of the region. We have conveyed
this firm message to the Israeli side, including during the foreign ministers’ telephone
conversation on 14 July. We reiterate our strong expectation that Israel will act in a
sensible manner.
The resumption of dialogue between the parties must be the priority. Japan
is ready to play a positive role through its engagement with relevant international
frameworks, including the Quartet. In the face of the unprecedented human security
crisis caused by COVID-19, international cooperation that places people at the centre
must be the way forward for peace in the Middle East.

20-1016363/95

S/2020/736

Annex 32
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the United Nations
Let me first start by congratulating you, Mr. President, and Germany on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. Germany is an
active force for global peace, stability and multilateralism, and we look forward to
continuing to work with you, Sir, on addressing regional challenges. We would also
like to express our gratitude to the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing.
The looming threat of Israeli annexation of parts of the occupied Palestinian
territory puts our collective and joint efforts to achieve a just and lasting peace
for Palestinians on the basis of the two-State solution in jeopardy. Preventing the
annexation of the occupied Palestinian lands and creating horizons for re-engagement
through direct negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians towards achieving two
States living side by side in peace and security is an urgent priority.
On 7 July 2020, the Foreign Ministers of Jordan, Egypt, France and Germany
issued a joint declaration on the current state of the Middle East peace process. They
stressed that any annexation of Palestinian territories occupied in 1967 would be a
violation of international law and imperil the foundations of the peace process. They
also concurred that such a step would have serious consequences for the security
and stability of the region and would constitute a major obstacle to efforts aimed at
achieving a comprehensive and just peace. The ministers also emphasized that such
a step could have consequences for the relationship with Israel.
Moreover, the Ministers of Jordan, the United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia,
Egypt, Morocco and Palestine, who are members of the Arab ministerial delegation
emanating from the Arab Peace Initiative, along with the ministers of Tunisia, the
Arab member of the Security Council; Oman, the current Chairman of the Council of
the League of Arab States, and Kuwait, the former Arab Security Council member,
as well as Arab League Secretary-General, held a virtual meeting on 7 July, in which
they underlined their full solidarity with the Palestinians, who are striving to fulfil
their legitimate rights, including the right to freedom and establish a viable state
with East Jerusalem as its capital on the lines of 4 June 1967 and on the basis of
the two-State solution, in accordance with international law and the Arab Peace
Initiative. The ministers called on the international community to take a clear and
influential stand and act to deter the implementation of the annexation in order to
uphold international law and protect peace, while calling for reviving serious and
effective discussions on resolving the conflict on the basis of the two-State solution
in accordance with relevant resolutions of international legitimacy.
It is important that the international community continue to support the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) and ensure it continues to operate in fulfilment of its United Nations
mandate pending a durable and just solution to the refugee issue, in accordance
with international law and relevant United Nations resolutions, including General
Assembly resolution 194 (III), and within the context of a comprehensive solution to
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict on the basis of the two-State solution.
During the extraordinary ministerial pledging conference on UNRWA,
co-organized on 23 June by Jordan and Sweden, 75 Governments and nongovernmental organizations committed $130 million to sustaining the operations
and services of the Agency. We thank all States that have shown their support for
UNRWA politically and financially. However, we must exert every possible effort
to make UNRWA funding sustainable, predictable and sufficient. This means
64/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

addressing the chronic funding shortfalls and persistent cash-flow crises through
multi-year commitments.
We also take this opportunity to express appreciation for UNRWA’s staff as
front-line responders to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and for the
Agency’s ability to ensure the delivery of its mandate in an increasingly challenging
political and financial environment. As the largest host of Palestinian refugees,
Jordan will continue to provide, along with its partners, all possible political and
financial support to UNRWA to ensure that the agency continues to provide its vital
services to Palestinian refugees.
In implementation of the directives of His Majesty King Abdullah II,
Custodian of Muslim and Christians holy sites in Jerusalem, Jordan will continue to
dedicate all its efforts to protect Jerusalem and its holy sites, preserve the historical
and legal status quo and protect their Muslim and Christian identity.
In conclusion, those who believe in peace must speak against annexation. All
those who want an end to the conflict must act to prevent annexation. The achievement
of a just and lasting peace that meets all legitimate rights of the Palestinian people
is a strategic Jordanian, Palestinian and Arab choice. Any other scenario is a threat
to peace and to all of us in the region. We stand at a defining crossroads: we either
fall deeper into the abyss of conflict and hopelessness, or we save the peace that is
a regional and an international necessity. Jordan will continue to work with Arab
countries and the international community towards realizing peace that is lasting
and just.

20-1016365/95

S/2020/736

Annex 33
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Kuwait to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
We would like to congratulate the Permanent Mission of Germany on its
successful steering of the work of the Security Council this month. We also wish to
thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, and to reaffirm our support for his efforts to calm the situation
and restore stability, in particular given the spread of the novel coronavirus pandemic.
Today the Security Council is holding its quarterly open debate on the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. Meanwhile, the international community
continues to meet and work to confront the plans by Israel, the occupying Power, to
annex land in the West Bank and impose Israeli sovereignty over areas of the Jordan
Valley and the northern Dead Sea.
Over the past few months, Kuwait and the Arab States have intensified their
efforts to confront attempts by Israel to exploit the world’s preoccupation with
tackling the novel coronavirus pandemic. Such attempts ignore the global push to
halt hostilities, war and siege in this difficult humanitarian situation. At its meeting
at the ministerial level last April, the Council of the League of Arab States stated
that the Israeli Government’s execution of those plans constituted a new war crime
to add to its lengthy record of heinous crimes against the Palestinian people and a
flagrant violations of the Charter of the United Nations, United Nations resolutions
and international law. We have also watched as the international community has
condemned these Israeli plans, which undermine the international bid to achieve
a just and comprehensive peace. Perhaps the most significant expression of the
international community’s stand against Israeli annexation is the fact that, at the
Security Council open debate on 24 June (see S/2020/596), a majority of Council
members warned Israel against going through with its annexation plans and recalled
its violations of international law.
The fact that Israel, the occupying Power, did not carry out its annexation
plans on 1 July in no way means that it will change course. Israel seeks to perpetuate
the occupation by continuing to perpetrate its illegal activities and policies,
expanding and building thousands of settlement units and annexing the territories,
in clear violation of resolution 2334 (2016), and preventing the establishment of an
independent, contiguous, viable and sovereign Palestinian State. Given that Israel
will not hesitate to exploit any circumstance or global crisis to flagrantly attack the
Palestinian people, we need to revitalize international political and legal mechanisms
to ensure that Israel is held accountable for its continued violations of the Palestinian
people’s rights under international law.
Those violations include arbitrary arrest campaigns; the demolition of
Palestinian buildings; the destruction and seizure of property; the forced displacement
of civilians, some of whom have fallen victim to settler crimes; the tightening of the
siege imposed on Gaza for some 13 years; repeated attacks on Islamic and Christian
holy sites; the attempt to undermine the work of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East; and the continued adoption of
unilateral and illegal decisions, such as freezing part of Palestinian tax revenue and
endeavouring to alter the character, historical status and demographic composition
of Jerusalem.
In the face of these Israeli abuses, we reiterate that the Security Council
must take a firm stand in order to stop such crimes and attacks. The Council has
no alternative but to shoulder its responsibility immediately, before it is too late,
66/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

because the occupation and the violation of the Palestinian people’s rights will not
lead to peace, especially with an epidemic ravaging humankind.
In conclusion, Kuwait remains committed to the Arab, Islamic and international
position that peace is a strategic choice and that a lasting, comprehensive and just
settlement must be based on the two-State solution, in accordance with the agreed
terms of reference, namely, the relevant Security Council resolutions, the principle
of land for peace, the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative. Such a settlement
would enable the Palestinian people to exercise its legitimate political rights and
establish an independent State within its own territory, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as
its capital.

20-1016367/95

S/2020/736

Annex 34
Statement by the Permanent Observer for the League of Arab States
to the United Nations, Maged Abdelfattah Abdelaziz
[Original: Arabic]
Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the assumption by Germany
of the Security Council presidency for this month, as well as to commend your efforts
and those of your delegation in steering the work of the Council in an efficient and
effective manner. I also wish to thank Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, and his team for the outstanding briefing and for their
efforts on the ground, in extremely difficult conditions, especially with regard to the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), on illegal Israeli settlement activity in the
occupied Palestinian territory.
Today’s meeting of the Security Council naturally follows the Council’s
ministerial meeting held on 24 June (see S/2020/596), in which the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States
and a large number of foreign ministers of States members of the Security Council
participated actively. Highly significant interventions were made by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the State of Palestine (see S/2020/596, annex 19) and other
ministers in attendance, who submitted their statements for inclusion in the record of
the meeting. In those statements, they all clearly expressed their staunch opposition
to Israeli plans to annex the occupied Palestinian territory. They also condemned
those plans and the detrimental effects that they would have not only on the peace
process and the principle of land for peace on which it was established, but also on
the two-State solution — one of the pillars of international legitimacy, alongside the
Arab Peace Initiative, the Oslo Accords, the Madrid principles and the numerous
resolutions of the Security Council on the Palestinian question — and on the security
and stability of the entire Middle East region. That meeting confirmed, beyond a
shadow of a doubt, that the international community stands united against annexation
and that it is intent on opposing it.
The Secretary-General of the Arab League clearly highlighted at the
previous meeting that the only way to resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict was by
safely implementing the two-State solution, because all parties were convinced that
Israeli annexation plans would both harm the current peace process and destroy
any prospect of peace in future. The Palestinians would lose faith in the prospect
of a fair, negotiated settlement, and the Arabs would lose interest in regional and
international peace. Annexation would lead to dark days for the conflict and for the
region as a whole (see S/2020/596, annex 3).
The League of Arab States reaffirms the centrality of the two-State solution
that the international community has adopted as the basis for resolving the Palestinian
question, premised on the establishment of an independent State of Palestine within
the borders of 4 June 1967, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. It reiterates its
opposition to any peace plans that may be announced or implemented without direct
negotiations between the Palestinian and Israeli parties, or that include any proposals
to change any of the main terms of reference of the peace process or to modify the
status of the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967. The League of Arab States
opposes any attempts to recognize Israeli sovereignty over any of these territories,
including Al-Quds Al-Sharif. It insists that an agreement must be reached on the
five final-status issues through direct negotiations, under the neutral auspices of the
international Quartet, whose role should be strengthened and expanded to include
influential stakeholders in the peace process.
68/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

The League of Arab States looks forward to continuing to work closely
and in earnest with the Security Council to confront the dangers facing the entire
Middle East, on the one hand, and the Palestinian question, on the other hand, in
particular by cooperating effectively to address Israeli plans to annex the Palestinian
territories. It encourages the Security Council to make earnest efforts, first, to put
in place practical mechanisms, inter alia, to provide protection to the Palestinian
people, and work to put forward alternative initiatives to improve the prospects of the
two-State solution on the basis of internationally recognized principles, with a view
to ending the occupation and all illegal Israeli practices targeting the defenceless
Palestinian people.
Secondly, the Security Council should reaffirm that the so-called annexation
of any part of the occupied West Bank or the Jordan Valley would be null and void
and would not be recognized, and work to put an immediate stop to the construction
and expansion of illegal Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory.
Thirdly, the Council should work to implement and revitalize regional
initiatives, chief among them the Arab Peace Initiative, in support of the peaceful
resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict, and eschew any course of action inconsistent
with the terms of reference of the peace process, whose purpose is to realize a twoState solution based on direct negotiations addressing the five parameters for a
comprehensive and just final settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Fourthly, the Council should strive to revitalize and expand the Quartet in
order to restore its role in the peace process between the Israeli and Palestinian sides,
leading to the establishment of an independent, contiguous and sovereign Palestinian
State, existing in security and peace within the borders of 4 June 1967.
Fifthly, the Council should make earnest efforts to ensure that Israel abides
by the same international rules of accountability that are applied to all other States.
There can be no preferential treatment, discrimination or double standards. The
Council must send a clear message in that regard and unequivocally warn Israel
against persisting in its violations of international law, international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, particularly as regards partial or total
annexation of the occupied Palestinian territory.

20-1016369/95

S/2020/736

Annex 35
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations, Amal Mudallali
The Middle East is truly at a “watershed moment”, as Secretary-General
António Guterres told the Council recently (see S/2020/596, annex 1). For the
Palestinians and the Arabs, this is a moment that will define whether we are
condemned to a future of continuous conflict or a hopeful future of possible peace.
The threat of annexation of parts of the West Bank is hanging like a sword over the
heads of the Palestinians, and it constitutes an “existential threat to their future”, as
Prime Minister Mohammad Shtayeh rightly said.
Israel is threatening to take unilateral action that will upend decades of
peacemaking and of hope for a negotiated settlement to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. Such an act will end the two-State solution and bury any prospects for
peace. How much longer can the Security Council accept Israel’s unilateral and
illegal actions, which have defied and undermined the maintenance of peace and
security in the region for so many decades? How much longer do the Palestinians
have to see their basic rights violated and their legitimate aspirations to live in peace
and security in an independent State denied?
Two years ago, during this same quarterly debate (see S/PV.8316), an
overwhelming number of countries strongly condemned the adoption of a basic law
by Israel enshrining de jure discrimination against the Arabs. Today, on the eve
of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, Israel has decided to again
manifest its utter disregard for international legality and multilateralism by stating
its intention to annex parts of the West Bank.
There is no need to remind the Council of the multitude of condemnations
that this decision has drawn from Governments, but also Parliaments, academia and
civil society. In a letter, 1,080 Members of Parliament from 25 European countries
rejected the annexation plans by Israel, underscoring the fact that it would be “fatal”
to the prospects for peace, and called on their respective countries and the European
Union to adopt international sanctions as a response. The annexation plan has also
prompted more than 400 scholars of Jewish studies in North and South America,
Europe and Israel to write a letter rejecting such plan and explaining that it would
“formally (de jure) creat[e] apartheid conditions in Israel and Palestine”.
Unfortunately, this threat of annexation is just the culmination of decades of
occupation, confiscation of land, settlement expansion, demolition of Palestinian
homes, killings, imprisonment and deportations of Palestinians from their own land
and country. No genuine peace process within the internationally agreed parameters
can take place while Israel keeps imposing a fait accompli that goes unanswered by
the Security Council, and for how much longer? We call on the Security Council to
assume its responsibility, move beyond condemnations and put an end to Israeli’s
illegal and illegitimate measures, which contravene all the relevant United Nations
resolutions adopted by this very Council.
Lebanon is facing multiple challenges because of the absence of a peaceful
horizon in the region, the financial and economic crisis and a pandemic that will put
its population at grave risk should it overwhelm its medical facilities and supplies.
Amid all these serious threats, the Government is trying to find a solution to the
current economic impasse. It is working with international financial institutions to
put the country back on a recovery trajectory.
The Lebanese authorities have reaffirmed that they remain committed to
implementing essential and necessary reforms, and they continue to seek the support
70/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

of the international community, especially friendly countries of the region and
the world.
In that dire context, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
has proved to be an important bastion of stability in southern Lebanon and the
region. The recent visit by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Emigrants of
Lebanon, Mr. Nassif Hitti, to the UNIFIL headquarters is a testament to Lebanon’s
appreciation of UNIFIL’s role and our country’s long-standing commitment to the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) in its entirety. In that regard, Lebanon
once again calls for the renewal of UNIFIL’s mission without any changes to its
mandate in order to further preserve the relative calm that has been prevailing in its
area of operations and to safeguard the stability in the south.
The stability of the south and in all of Lebanon is undermined daily by the
continued Israeli violations of Lebanese sovereignty by land, air and sea in grave
violation of resolution 1701 (2006). Just to give an example, from 19 February to
16 June of this year, and during a cruel pandemic, UNIFIL recorded a daily average
of 3.7 airspace violations, with 11 daily overflight hours. These repeated violations
by Israel further destabilize the situation.
Once again, we call on the Council to take measures to compel Israel to cease
its violations of the country’s sovereignty and stop increasing the tension in the
region. As many members have said in the Council, UNIFIL is a regional public
good. Let us empower it by stopping any violations of the resolution that granted
UNIFIL its mandate, in accordance with resolution 1701 (2006), to allow this United
Nations mission to effectively implement this mandate.

20-1016371/95

S/2020/736

Annex 36
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Liechtenstein to the
United Nations, Christian Wenaweser
Not for the first time this year, Liechtenstein approaches the quarterly open
debate on the Middle East in an atmosphere of grave concern. Foremost among today’s
issues is the continued spectre of the annexation of parts of the West Bank by Israel.
Liechtenstein reiterates its long-held position that the annexation of territory, or any
decision to change or amend the border between Israel and Palestine without the
explicit consent of both parties, is in violation of international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions. Such actions are illegal regardless of the scale or speed
of annexation. Far from making Israel more secure, annexation undermines the
prospect of a two-State solution based on applicable international law, in particular
international humanitarian law, and the relevant Security Council resolutions, which
remain the only viable pathway to a sustainable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. In all situations Liechtenstein will implement its policy, in accordance with
international law, not to recognize as lawful any annexation of territory.
Liechtenstein notes the ongoing proceedings in Pre-Trial Chamber I of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) with regard to the situation in Palestine and
looks forward to its decision in due course. Such proceedings by a standing and
authoritative international court are the expression of an effective international
rules-based order, as consistently advocated by a large part of the United Nations
membership. Political attacks against the ICC can only intend to weaken the rule
of law, undermine multilateralism and strengthen the rule of might — a trend that
we are determined to oppose, along with many others. We will therefore continue
our support for the ICC in providing justice undeterred and with confidence of its
broadly supported mandate.
Liechtenstein regrets the withdrawal of the Islamic Republic of Iran and the
United States from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) — decisions
that undoubtedly make the world a less safe place. The JCPOA was a milestone
achievement of multilateral diplomacy that strengthened the international rulesbased order and achieved concrete results in terms of nuclear non-proliferation.
Full compliance with its terms needs to be restored. Liechtenstein also recalls that
resolution 2231 (2015) remains in force and therefore continues to be binding on all
States, with a special responsibility for all members of the Security Council.
We closely followed the process leading to the adoption of resolution 2533
(2020), which will allow millions in north-western Syria, particularly in and around
Idlib, to continue to receive aid. However, the process of arriving at the resolution
demonstrated once again that the Council was unable to muster the political will to
prioritize the protection of the Syrian people, even if the humanitarian necessities are
perfectly clear, and to agree on measures that are commensurate with the challenge
at hand. Based on the information available, we must conclude that the agreement
found within the Council is likely to exacerbate the humanitarian suffering in the
country, falling short of bringing more permanent relief.
We thank those members of the Security Council who put their collective
weight behind achieving this minimal solution for the continued cross-border
delivery of aid, in particular the co-penholders. In contrast, the use of the veto by
two permanent members of the Council to block two previous draft resolutions put
forward by the co-penholders, and subsequently ensure an end to aid deliveries
through the Bab Al-Salam and Al-Yarubiyah border crossings, is deplorable. We are
concerned that people in northern Aleppo and north-eastern Syria will suffer due to
these actions, just as they have done as a result of the 14 previous vetoes regarding
72/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

the situation in Syria over the past seven years. It is long past time that such flagrant
use of the veto be met with a response from the wider membership, including through
action in the General Assembly.
Despite the fact that the membership has predominantly and clearly expressed
itself on the need to ensure accountability for the worst crimes committed in
Syria, the Security Council continues to ignore the call for a referral to the ICC.
In that context, the decision to create the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011 in late 2016 is increasingly relevant in the quest to bring
about a measure of justice for the atrocities that have been committed in Syria. The
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism’s diligent work is a constant
reminder of the central role of criminal accountability in any political process aimed
at sustainable peace and genuine reconciliation in Syria. Liechtenstein welcomes the
clear commitment to that effect by the participants of the fourth Brussels Conference
on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region and remains fully aligned with it.

20-1016373/95

S/2020/736

Annex 37
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the
United Nations, Syed Mohamad Hasrin Aidid
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important open debate.
Malaysia aligns itself with the statements submitted on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries (annex 20) and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(annex 47).
Allow me at the outset to commend the Security Council for the adoption of
resolution 2532 (2020), on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and a global ceasefire,
on 1 July. As one of the co-initiators of the joint statement on a global ceasefire
that garnered 172 signatories of United Nations Member States and non-member
observer States, Malaysia hopes that all provisions of the resolution will be fully
implemented by all parties.
The occupying Power, Israel, has continued to openly declare its intention
to annex significant parts of the occupied Palestinian territory in the West Bank.
Malaysia’s position on this matter is crystal clear. Annexation is unlawful. It
violates the Charter of the United Nations, the Geneva Conventions and the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, by which the
acquisition of territory by war or force is inadmissible.
The annexation will only exacerbate Israel’s mass human rights and
international humanitarian law violations against the Palestinians. Israel’s inhumane
and discriminatory policies and practices in favour of illegal settlers would continue
to harm our Palestinian brothers and sisters. More Palestinians will face, in addition
to the illegal property demolition and confiscation as a result of illegal settlements,
greater restrictions on their natural resources, water and agricultural land. In short,
annexation would do untold damage to Palestinian livelihoods and development.
The international community cannot remain indifferent and silent over the
latest aggression by Israel against the occupied Palestinians. Malaysia calls on
the international community, in particular the Security Council, to fulfil without
delay its Charter responsibility towards the Palestinians. The Security Council must
condemn and reject the Israeli annexation plan and ensure that the plan will never
be implemented.
There is no military solution to the Palestinian question. The provocative
actions taken by Israel will only aggravate the situation. Malaysia therefore strongly
urges the Israeli Government to desist from pursuing a military solution. A just,
comprehensive and lasting solution is possible only through a negotiated political
settlement — a process that the international community, and this body, must actively
pursue. That must include the complete withdrawal of Israel from Palestinian land
occupied since 1967, including the city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif. We also reaffirm
our support for establishing an independent State of Palestine, with Al-Quds AlSharif as its capital. Only the implementation of all international resolutions on the
Palestinian issue can guarantee lasting peace between Israel and Palestine. We call
once again on Israel, the occupying Power, to comply with resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 2334 (2016) and all other relevant resolutions of the Security Council and
the General Assembly.
Malaysia will also continue to stand in solidarity with the Government and
the people of Palestine, including in their efforts to fight the COVID-19 pandemic.
To assist Palestinians in its efforts to prepare for and respond to the COVID-19
pandemic, we contributed a million face masks, 500 face shields and 500,000 rubber
hand gloves to the Palestinian Government. We also pledged a financial contribution
74/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East last month, in support of the Agency’s work and operations, and we call on the
international community to strengthen the support to the Agency.
Resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains key to sustainable peace
in the Middle East. But one thing is certain: a sustained peace between Palestine
and Israel cannot be realized if further annexation is allowed to take place. Thus,
accountability and an end to impunity must become an immediate priority for the
international community. As Members of the United Nations, we have a solemn
political and moral responsibility to defend the rules-based international order and
immediately address such threats to international peace and security.
The international community must continue to uphold the legitimate right
to self-determination, which has constituted one of the very core principles of the
United Nations since its creation 75 years ago. Malaysia stresses the need for the
Council to act urgently in the light of the deteriorating situation on the ground to
address the root cause of the conflict and finally put an end to the longest occupation
in modern history.

20-1016375/95

S/2020/736

Annex 38
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Morocco to the
United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
Let me first congratulate the delegation of Germany on its successful
presidency of the Security Council during the month of July. I also wish to thank
the delegation of France for presiding over the Council during the month of June.
We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, for his briefing.
The world today is experiencing an exceptional situation shaped by the
outbreak of the novel coronavirus. That situation is compounding the suffering of
the Palestinian people, who live under Israeli occupation, have poor health facilities
and rely largely on humanitarian assistance, including food and medical supplies.
In spite of those constraints and its limited means, the Palestinian Authority is
taking practical steps and doing everything in its power to combat the pandemic, in
particular by introducing a lockdown, carrying out testing and quarantining infected
persons and their contacts.
Faced with such a state of affairs, all sides have an obligation to respond to the
Secretary-General’s call for a comprehensive ceasefire, which Morocco supports.
My delegation welcomes the joint appeal made by the Secretary-General’s envoys to
the Middle East addressed to all parties to the region’s conflicts.
The Palestinian people continue to live under Israeli occupation, and their
legitimate rights are violated on a daily basis. Practices that contravene internationally
recognized resolutions and international humanitarian law persist in the Palestinian
territories. The decision by the Israeli Government to annex parts of the West Bank
is a case in point.
Morocco considers that such steps would compromise the internationally
agreed principle of a two-State solution and undermine all efforts to achieve the just
and comprehensive peace to which the international community aspires.
Under the judicious leadership of His Majesty King Mohammed VI, Chair
of the Al-Quds Committee, Morocco will always be a key supporter of the just
cause and legitimate rights of the Palestinian people as they endeavour to fulfil their
aspiration to live in freedom and dignity.
Morocco emphasizes that it is fully committed to peace as a strategic choice
for resolving the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. It is firmly convinced that negotiations
between the Palestinian and Israeli sides remain the only viable way to reach a just
and lasting solution to the conflict, one that would enable the Palestinian people to
exercise their legitimate right to establish an independent viable and sovereign State
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Morocco also renews its urgent call to intensify efforts, in conjunction with
international actors and peace-loving forces in the world, to safeguard the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people, confront Israeli practices contrary to international
law and work to relaunch a constructive dynamic of peace that would enable all the
peoples of the region to live in security, stability and harmony.
Morocco firmly believes that East Jerusalem is part of the Palestinian
territories occupied in 1967 and is the capital of the State of Palestine. East Jerusalem
is therefore one of the final-status issues that must be addressed through negotiations
76/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

between Palestinians and Israelis. It lies at the heart of the conflict in the Middle East
and is central to achieving any political solution between Palestinians and Israelis.
Accordingly, Morocco rejects any unilateral actions that undermine the legal
and historical status of Jerusalem as holy city and cradle of the three monotheistic
religions. Such actions are contrary to resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980). Morocco
also reaffirms the importance of halting settlement activity and implementing
resolution 2334 (2016).
With regard to Palestine refugees, Morocco reiterates its support for the
mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East and its efforts to alleviate the suffering of refugees throughout the
region and facilitate their access to basic services, in particular children’s education
and medical care, especially in these exceptionally difficult circumstances with the
spread of the coronavirus.
For its part, the Bayt Mal Al-Quds Al-Sharif Agency, the executive branch
in the field of the Al-Quds Committee, continues to support the city’s people
through a range of key projects, concerning in particular cultural and urban
heritage conservation, social assistance and the preservation of the Palestinian
national archives.
Morocco continues to believe that there is a solution to the Palestinian
question. The stalling of talks between the Palestinians and Israelis has nonetheless
stymied any chance of breaking the cycle of violence, tension and mutual mistrust. It
is therefore up to the international community to effectively and creatively summon
the will to revive negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis so as to achieve
a two-State solution within the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as
the capital of the State of Palestine. Those negotiations must be based on proper
foundations, in accordance with a specified time frame that restores trust between
the parties, paving the way for the establishment of a viable Palestinian State living
side by side with Israel in peace and security, in line with internationally recognized
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. Morocco also appreciates the efforts of
various States to establish lasting peace and security in the Middle East.

20-1016377/95

S/2020/736

Annex 39
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Namibia to the
United Nations, Neville Melvin Gertze
I congratulate Germany on its assumption the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July 2020, and I thank you, Sir, for organizing this quarterly
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
I would also like to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his
comprehensive and detailed briefing.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements submitted by the delegation
of Azerbaijan, on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and by the
Permanent Representative of Senegal, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People (annexes 20 and 24,
respectively).
As the world battles the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, Israel
continues with its settlement-expansion policy as well as the destruction of
Palestinian structures, displacing men, women and children. I take this opportunity
to remind Israel that settlements are illegal under international law and represent an
obstacle to peace and the two-State solution.
I also take this opportunity to welcome the 9 June decision of the Israeli High
Court of Justice to strike down a 2017 law that enabled widespread expropriation
of private Palestinian land and the retroactive legalization, under Israeli law, of
thousands of housing units in Israeli settlements.
While settlement expansion and the destruction of Palestinian-owned
properties represent an obstacle to peace, the greatest threat to the two-State solution
is that of annexation of parts of the West Bank. Namibia is extremely concerned
at the proposal put forward by Prime Minister Netanyahu to begin annexation of
parts of the West Bank. Any annexation would have serious implications in terms
of international law, the two-State solution and the prospects for a negotiated,
sustainable peace, as reiterated by the Secretary-General.
Taking unilateral steps in any conflict will not bring about peace and stability.
It will only create further division and tensions. As the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process warned in his briefing to the Security Council
on 24 June:
“Annexation could irrevocably alter the nature of Israeli-Palestinian relations.
It risks upending more than a quarter of a century of international efforts
in support of a future viable Palestinian State living in peace, security and
mutual recognition with the State of Israel.” (S/2020/596, annex 2)
It also represents a threat to regional and international peace and security. We
therefore call on and urge the Israeli Government to refrain from taking such
steps. We also call on the international community to remain committed to the
rule of international law and all United Nations resolutions, particularly resolution
2334 (2016), and to the international compromise on a just solution for the
Palestine question.
COVID-19 represents a dire challenge for the Palestinian people. Namibia is
particularly concerned about the situation of Palestinians in the Gaza Strip, where
the health system continues to face immense challenges. As of April 2020, 44 per
cent of essential medicines and 30 per cent of essential medical supplies in the Strip
had less than a month’s stock remaining. The COVID-19 pandemic has also damaged
Gaza’s economy across all sectors. While the Palestinian people experience the same
78/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

effects and consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic as the rest of the world, it
should be recalled that their Government’s ability to respond to its effects in the
same way as an independent, sovereign State is far more challenged.
I would like to express my deep appreciation for the work of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. Its provision of
vital services represents a stabilizing element in a region that continues to be the
victim of violence. The importance of the Agency has only been reinforced through
the essential emergency assistance it has provided to help Palestinian refugees
confront the COVID-19 pandemic.
I call on the Security Council to remain dedicated to its Charter obligations by
upholding its responsibilities and duties. If any form of annexation of the West Bank
were to take place, Namibia would urge the Council to act urgently in response to
any such action that would not only violate international law, including the Charter
of the United Nations, the Fourth Geneva Convention and Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions, but would also represent a threat to regional and
international peace and security.
I conclude by reiterating Namibia’s long-standing and fervent support for, and
solidarity with, the Palestinian people. The people of Palestine have fundamental
rights to self-determination and independence. We must achieve a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace between Israelis and Palestinians, with the establishment of
the two-State solution, with East Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Palestine,
based on the pre-1967 borders.

20-1016379/95

S/2020/736

Annex 40
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of Nigeria to the United Nations,
Samson Sunday Itegboje
Let me, at the outset, thank Germany for convening this important debate.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement submitted by the delegation of
the Republic of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
(annex 20), but nonetheless wishes to make the following additional remarks in its
national capacity.
It has become a periodic ritual for Member States to meet to discuss the
situation in the Middle East, including the question of Palestine, without any
concrete forward movement. Despite the fact that there has not been any traction in
negotiations and that tensions between the Israelis and Palestinians continue to be
sustained, we must not give in to despair. For our part, Nigeria will continue to join
others in giving voice to the need for a just, lasting and comprehensive solution to
this protracted crisis.
Nigeria’s position on this issue remains constant. We call for a two-State
solution heralding a viable, contiguous Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its
capital, based on 1967 borders, in accordance with numerous United Nations and
Security Council resolutions. We wish once again to appeal to States with influence
over the parties concerned to muster enough political will and encourage the two
parties’ re-engagement in dialogue based on relevant United Nations resolutions,
the Madrid principles, the Quartet road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and other
existing agreements. We once again wish to renew this appeal for influential States
to muster enough political will and bring the parties to the negotiating table.
We must begin to think out of the box in order to find innovative ways to
address the prevailing challenges and gaps for the implementation of all relevant
United Nations and Security Council resolutions on this subject matter. To this
end, we once again call on Israel to take concrete steps to freeze all settlementrelated activities in the West Bank and occupied East Jerusalem as a confidencebuilding measure, while the State of Palestine, for its part, should embark upon
confidence-building measures by signalling, first of all, their readiness to return to
the negotiating table. They should also deal with acts of militancy to allow for efforts
to forge unity and peace.
We note that the prolonged absence of a political horizon to resolve the
broader conflict has coincided with a steady deterioration of the living conditions
of the Palestinians. The situation is further exacerbated by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, with the Palestinian Authorities reporting 862 confirmed
cases of virus infections, with 174 recoveries and three fatalities as of 13 July 2020.
We express deep appreciation for the invaluable work of the Non-Aligned Movement
through the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, including its essential emergency assistance that enables refugees to
confront the COVID-19 pandemic.
Once again, my delegation reiterates its call on the international community to
continue to support and encourage Israel and Palestine to embrace the peace process
as a means of resolving the lingering conflicts.
In conclusion, we wish to re-echo our firm belief that achieving lasting peace
in the Middle East will depend not on bullets or blockades but on determination and
the commitment to making painful sacrifices in support of peace. This would bring
about much desired peace and justice, reduce threats to regional and international
peace and security and create more development vistas for both States.
80/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 41
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
Let me first make two comments — on the conflicts in Syria and Yemen —
before focusing on the Middle East peace process.
On Syria, we are relieved by the adoption of resolution 2533 (2020) but regret
that the Council decided to further limit the scope of the existing mechanism. We are
gravely concerned about the potential impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, a dire economy and the reported looming famine. All parties, in particular
the Syrian regime and its backers, must cease all hostilities and ensure the protection
of civilians and humanitarian access. There is no military solution to the conflict.
We reiterate our full support for Special Envoy Pedersen and a political settlement in
line with resolution 2254 (2015).
Norway is deeply concerned about the military escalation in Yemen, as well
as the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic and the condition of the FSO SAFER
oil tanker. We support the efforts of the United Nations Special Envoy and urge
the parties to commit to a ceasefire, engage in political consultations and agree
on urgent humanitarian and economic measures. A lasting peace in Yemen is
urgently needed, and only an inclusive political solution can end the conflict and the
humanitarian crisis.
On 2 June, Norway and the European Union co-chaired a virtual ministerial
meeting of the international donor group for Palestine, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC), with
the participation of the two parties and the donors. The meeting was held in the
context of political developments that have negatively affected the cooperation
between the parties amidst the COVID-19 pandemic and a fiscal crisis that threatens
the existence of the Palestinian Authority.
Palestinian economic and institutional development continue to be constrained
by a combination of factors. In addition, the COVID-19 crisis has caused serious
negative repercussions for the Palestinian economy. There is an urgent need for
improved fiscal arrangements that will ensure regular and predictable monthly
transfers to the Palestinian Authority and for continued financial support from
donors. The safety and health of the Palestinian population must be ensured, and
their property protected from attacks.
There is a need to ensure prompt delivery of humanitarian supplies to the
Palestinian population, and in particular to protect all efforts aimed at preventing
further aggravation of the COVID-19 crisis. In addition, the Palestinian Authority
should ensure, to the greatest extent possible, that salary payments to public
employees in Gaza and the West Bank be made. The United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East remains indispensable. It is
vital that donors continue their support to the Agency.
For decades, donors have remained committed to improving the institutional
and economic conditions so as to favour a negotiated two-State solution. In the
AHLC meeting, donors confirmed their continued support for a negotiated twoState solution and Palestinian economic development. However, their support alone
cannot bring about a solution or stand as a substitute for a political process. The
current threats and impediments to both economic and political progress must
be reversed.
Norway has on several occasions warned against Israeli annexation of parts
of the West Bank. Annexation violates international law and would undermine the
20-1016381/95

S/2020/736

possibility of establishing a contiguous Palestinian State and damage the prospects
of achieving a lasting peace.
We echo the call by Secretary-General Guterres to the Security Council
on 24 June (S/2020/596, annex 1), in which he urged the parties to commit to a
meaningful dialogue and all the supporters of the two-State solution to help bring
the parties back to a path towards a lasting settlement. Existing agreements and
relevant United Nations resolutions should form the basis for the resumption of talks.
Under the Oslo Accords, the parties undertook to resolve all outstanding issues,
including borders, security, refugees and Jerusalem, in the final-status negotiations.
There is a strong international consensus that only a negotiated two-State solution
can lead to a durable peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians.

82/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 42
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Peru to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We welcome the holding of today’s quarterly open debate on the situation in
the Middle East, and especially the presence of the State Secretary. We also thank
the briefers for their thoughtful briefings.
We have been following with deep concern the developments surrounding
the question of Palestine, in particular the announcements of unilateral actions
that could lead to serious consequences for the stability of the Middle East and, by
extension, for the world. Peru joins the majority of States, regional organizations and
civil society organizations in calling on Israel to rescind its plans for annexation. If
implemented, these plans would be a flagrant violation of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations and seriously undermine the prospects for a viable
Palestinian State, a situation that the international community cannot and must
not tolerate.
In these delicate circumstances, we wish to reaffirm our commitment to the
only solution that we consider consistent with international law: that of two States
with internationally recognized and secure borders, negotiated directly between
Israel and Palestine on the basis of the borders in force until 1967, which must,
moreover, lead to the determination of the final status of Jerusalem. This requires,
inter alia, that respectful actions be taken in the political, religious and social
spheres, with a view to building mutual trust so that a constructive dialogue may be
resumed. The leaders of both parties are responsible for showing concrete signs of
moderation and commitment to peace.
It is also necessary that the Israeli Government put an end to the practices
of settlement, demolition of buildings and evictions in the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967, which undermine the two-State solution and contravene the
provisions of the Council adopted in resolution 2334 (2016). We are concerned in
particular about plans to expand settlements in Har Homa, East Jerusalem, which
would further affect the connectivity of the occupied Palestinian territory.
Peru reaffirms its recognition of Israel’s right to preserve its own existence
and security by exercising self-defence. We strongly condemn the continued
firing of rockets, mortars and incendiary devices, which endanger the lives of
Israeli civilians and cause material damage. Palestinian militants must cease such
practices immediately.
In this context, we underline the urgency of the parties agreeing to the global
ceasefire called for by Secretary-General António Guterres as an essential measure
to prevent and mitigate the devastating effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
and to strengthen diplomatic action, in line with the important resolution 2532
(2020), recently adopted by the Council. With regard to the pandemic, we wish to
commend the outstanding work of the United Nations and its agencies in support
of the Palestinian Government. We also look forward to more fluid cooperation
between Israel and Palestine in providing an effective response to this scourge.
We draw particular attention to the grave humanitarian crisis in Gaza, which
has been exacerbated by COVID-19 and which serves as a breeding ground for
radicalization and extremism. We believe that the provision of basic goods and
services, the development of infrastructure projects that generate employment
and efforts to overcome the confinement of millions of Palestinians must remain
priorities for the international community. To this end, we stress the critical state of
20-1016383/95

S/2020/736

the finances of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East and the need to provide it with a stable and predictable flow of
resources. In this regard, we commend the leadership of Jordan and Sweden in
mobilizing the solidarity of the international community last June, with pledges that
will alleviate the financial shortfalls of that crucial body.
We consider it equally indispensable to advance the process of intra-Palestinian
reconciliation. We stress the efforts made by Egypt in this regard and the importance
of the Security Council following them closely and providing the necessary support.
In order to resolve the question of Palestine and promote sustainable peace
in the Middle East, it is necessary to act in accordance with international law and
the United Nations Charter. The trust and credibility required for any good-faith
negotiations necessarily include respect for the rule of law and minimum standards of
coexistence. We welcome the willingness expressed by various countries to use their
good offices, particularly those that have historically participated in this process.
We emphasize the need to revitalize the Middle East Quartet and the validity and
relevance of the Arab Peace Initiative.

84/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Annex 43
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations, Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I wish to congratulate the German State Secretary on his
country’s assumption of the presidency of the Security Council this month. We
appreciate his efforts and those of his predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
France. We also thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process for
his comprehensive briefing and valuable efforts.
Qatar has consistently stressed the importance of this quarterly debate and
has been an eager participant in it, as we are convinced that the United Nations, and
particularly the Security Council, has a vital role to play in peacekeeping, security
and the resolution of the many crises afflicting the Middle East region — of which
Qatar is a part — as they strive to promote security, stability and prosperity.
Since the previous debate (see S/2020/341), the world’s attention has remained
focused on the enormous common challenge of the crisis caused by the novel
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which should serve as an additional
incentive to resolve crises in the Middle East peacefully, given the pandemic’s healthrelated, political, economic and social repercussions. Today, three months after the
previous meeting, we again underscore the importance of the Organization’s calls
for a ceasefire in all conflicts in order to focus on the response to the pandemic and
the threats that it poses, which do not distinguish among belligerents.
The risk of destabilization increases with every day that the fundamental
issue in the Middle East, namely, the Palestinian question, goes unresolved.
Qatar has always stressed its principled support for efforts aimed at achieving a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace and at resolving the Palestinian question. The
only way to settle all aspects of the issue is through direct negotiations between the
parties, with international support, on the basis of international law, internationally
recognized resolutions, the agreed terms of reference, the principle of land for peace
and the Arab Peace Initiative, leading to the realization of a two-State solution and
the establishment of an independent and viable State of Palestine within the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel in peace
and security.
The occupation of all Arab territories, including the occupied Syrian Golan
and the occupied Lebanese territories, must come to an end, as must all settlement
activity. Illegal settlements must be dismantled, and measures that alter the character,
legal status and demographic composition of Jerusalem must be rescinded. The
refugee question must be resolved in a just manner, and the Palestinian people’s
other inalienable rights must also be upheld. The unilateral annexation by Israel of
Palestinian territories occupied illegally in 1967 would deal a blow to the two-State
solution and to the prospects of a peaceful settlement, not to mention constituting a
violation of international law and Security Council resolutions.
Qatar reiterates its principled position in support of the Palestinian people’s
quest to exercise their legitimate rights. Qatar supports all efforts to create conditions
conducive to peace, including the provision of humanitarian assistance to improve
the difficult living conditions and economic circumstances faced by Palestinians
in the West Bank and Gaza. Over the past eight years, Qatar has provided more
than $1.2 billion in humanitarian and development assistance in the areas of
education, electricity supply, infrastructure enhancement, housing and funding for
employment opportunities. This year, it has pledged a grant of $150 million over
20-1016385/95

S/2020/736

six months, including support for the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic. With
its contribution — the largest of any Arab State — to the core budget of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, Qatar
also continues to play a leading role in supporting the Agency’s delivery on its
indispensable mandate.
In addition to the Palestinian question, other regional crises have caused great
destruction and suffering. The time has come to bring them to an end. In Syria, the
Syrian people have endured enough. They and their country have suffered untold
damage, and it is time for them to live in security and dignity. It has been shown
that attempts to impose a military solution will not end the crisis. Instead, they will
further endanger peace, security and stability, leading to more grave violations of
international humanitarian law and international human rights law, and to persistent
humanitarian need. Qatar renews its call for a solution leading to a political transition
that fulfils the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people, in accordance with the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), and for the implementation of resolution
2254 (2015) in its entirety. It also stresses the importance of accountability for war
crimes and crimes against humanity, in order to ensure that justice is done, that the
rights of victims are upheld and that the solution reached is sustainable.
In Libya, the cause of and the solution to the crisis are clear. The illegal militias
have carried out an attack on innocent civilian members of the Libyan population
and on the legitimate, internationally recognized Government. They have had no
compunction about perpetrating grave violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, bombarding health-care facilities, laying
landmines and systematically carrying out extrajudicial killings. They have
undermined progress towards achieving national unity and resolving the conflict in
accordance with the Skhirat Agreement, although the latter has been endorsed by the
Security Council, which has recognized the Government formed pursuant thereto as
the sole legitimate executive authority in Libya. Alarmingly, the militias have acted
with external support, yet, despite the documented violations of Security Council
resolutions, the international community has remained silent.
While such dangers persist in Libya, with serious repercussions for the unity
of its people, its territorial integrity and international peace and security, the only
way to resolve the crisis is to support the Government of National Accord and
commit to implementing the Skhirat Agreement, Security Council resolutions and
the outcomes of the Berlin Conference. A political solution will succeed only if
there is a clear and effective international mechanism in place to ensure that all
agreements are implemented.
Accordingly, Qatar calls for a solution to the crisis in Libya that preserves
the country’s sovereignty and unity and meets the aspirations and interests of all of
the country’s people, not merely those of certain parties with special interests and
personal ambitions. That outcome is to be achieved through a return to negotiations
and national dialogue devoid of tendentious external agendas and illegal foreign
interference. We also support the efforts of the United Nations and the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya.
Qatar looks forward to the day when the Yemeni people will turn the page on this
painful chapter and overcome the current tragedy. There is an urgent need to address
the humanitarian and economic needs of the Yemeni people, whose humanitarian
crisis has reached catastrophic proportions, is causing further instability and poses a
threat to peace and security in the region. The time has come to reach a settlement, to
achieve a political solution to the crisis and to attain national reconciliation through
comprehensive dialogue, in line with resolution 2216 (2015), while preserving the
unity of Yemen and bringing security and stability to the country. In that connection,
86/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

we reiterate our support for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen in
his efforts to implement his mandate.
Against the backdrop of the multiple grave crises that endanger peace, security
and stability in the Middle East, Qatar has for the past three years faced an arbitrary
blockade and illegal unilateral measures that contravene the Charter of the United
Nations, the principles of international law, international instruments and human
rights, in addition to harming the public interest.
On the third anniversary of the cyberpiracy crime that initially sparked the
crisis on 23 May 2017, the start of illegal proceedings and the imposition of the
unjust blockade on 5 June 2017, everyone has realized that the blockading States’
justification and cover for those violations was flimsy and false. Nobody is fooled.
While the blockading countries have continued to blatantly disregard the
principles and the Charter of the United Nations and international law, those very
principles have formed the basis of the Qatari approach to the crisis. Qatar has invoked
international law to protect the rights of Qatari citizens and residents who have been
adversely affected by the illegal actions taken against the country. It has appealed to
international forums and judicial bodies, chief among them the International Court
of Justice as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations. Last week, the court
rejected appeals by Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and Egypt
over the jurisdiction of the International Civil Aviation Organization to consider the
complaint by Qatar that the blockading States had closed their airspace to Qatari
aircraft, in flagrant violation of international law and the relevant international
conventions. The ruling is one of a series in the country’s favour, including a court
order issued in 2018 and 2019 on the violation by the United Arab Emirates of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.
In June, the World Trade Organization (WTO) ruled that Saudi Arabia had violated
its obligations under the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights by refusing to take action against, and even encouraging, the
complex piracy of beoutQ. These judicial rulings attest to the integrity of the legal
position of Qatar and the nullity of the actions taken against the country.
Those illegal and unjustified actions and the ongoing malicious campaign
notwithstanding, Qatar is committed to seeking to resolve the crisis peacefully and
diplomatically, through mediation and constructive and unconditional dialogue, with
all States respecting international law and the principle of equal sovereignty. In that
connection, we once again express our appreciation for the efforts made by Sheikh
Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Amir of the State of Kuwait.
In conclusion, given the dire need for peace and stability in the Middle East,
all parties must make a serious effort to resolve the crises ravaging the region, which
is so vital to the world. Qatar will continue to do everything in its power, in word
and in deed, to help to resolve these crises peacefully, serve the interests of the States
and the peoples of the region and curb all threats to peace, security and stability in
the region and beyond.

20-1016387/95

S/2020/736

Annex 44
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of Saudi Arabia to the
United Nations, Khaled Mohammed H. Almanzlawiy
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the successful
German presidency of the Security Council this month. I wish you all the best.
We share the international community’s concern that issues related to the
Middle East are of the utmost importance to the Council, and we recognize that the
situation in the region is serious and that effective and decisive measures are needed.
Existing crises worsen and new ones emerge, generating tensions that endanger
peace and security. This requires action on the part of the international community
to calm tensions, maintain security and stability and find prompt political solutions
to and address the causes of long-standing crises in the region.
In that connection, we wish to underscore the principles of conflict resolution
adopted by my country in its foreign policy. Chief among those principles are a
constant focus on the peaceful settlement of conflicts, preventing escalation and
resorting to mediation with high-minded ambition and integrity of purpose. We
support the Organization’s important role in promoting mediation and preventive
diplomacy for the peaceful settlement of regional disputes.
The Security Council has a historic and legal responsibility to implement
its resolutions related to the settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict. At the heart
of those resolutions is the establishment of a Palestinian State, in accordance with
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and internationally recognized
resolutions. We urge the international community to stand firm against the Israeli
occupation authorities’ provocative policies in the occupied Palestinian territory and
their disregard for Security Council resolutions. Any settlement of the conflict must
be based on the two-State solution, in accordance with the international terms of
reference and the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative, which provides for the establishment
of the Palestinian State within the borders of 4 June 1967, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital, the return of refugees and an end to the Israeli occupation of all Arab
territories, including the Syrian Arab Golan and the Lebanese territories.
My country welcomes the Security Council’s condemnation of the heinous
terrorist attacks recently perpetrated by Houthi coup militias against civilians and
civilian sites in Saudi Arabia. It opposes the continued threat posed by Houthi
militias to civilian lives. We welcome the convening of a special Security Council
meeting on the FSO SAFER tanker crisis (see S/2020/721), and we call on the Council
to monitor the arrival of United Nations experts at the tanker and to find a lasting
solution to the crisis, which the Houthi militias have exploited to achieve political
aims, indifferent to the environmental and humanitarian disasters that will befall the
southern Red Sea region and my country if no lasting solution is found.
We support United Nations efforts to reach a political solution to the Yemeni
crisis in accordance with the three terms of reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative, the outcomes of the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially resolution 2216 (2015).
My country supports United Nations efforts to find a political solution to the
conflict in Libya, focusing on security, territorial integrity and an end to foreign
interference in Libyan internal affairs. We welcome the Egyptian initiative aimed at
finding a political solution, establishing a ceasefire and ending the bloodshed. We

88/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

call on all Libyan parties to cooperate to find an acceptable solution and a political
settlement that restores security and stability in Libya.
My country believes that, in order to achieve peace and stability in the region,
Iran must be deterred from its expansionist and subversive policies, which violate
and defy international instruments and Security Council resolutions. Examples
of those policies, from Syria, Iraq and Lebanon to Yemen, are too numerous to
recount in this statement. Most recently, the evidence set out in the ninth report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council resolution
2231 (2015) (S/2020/531) has left the international community in no doubt as to the
hostile intentions of Iran in the region. The Security Council and the international
community must take the necessary measures to stop the crimes and hostility of the
Iranian regime, for which there is solid evidence.

20-1016389/95

S/2020/736

Annex 45
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Syria to the
United Nations, Bashar Ja’afari
[Original: Arabic]
Yesterday the Israeli occupation forces once again launched a series of attacks,
firing guided missiles at the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic over the occupied
Syrian Golan. This act of aggression, which gives a morale boost to the remaining
pockets of terrorist proxies of Israel, is in flagrant violation of the 1974 Agreement
on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces, international law, the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
These attacks would not have taken place had the Security Council not, for
several decades, failed to enforce its resolutions related to the Arab-Israeli conflict,
and had certain permanent members of the Council not extended unstinting support
to the rogue entity, encouraging it to intensify its crimes, violations and acts of State
terrorism with impunity.
For 53 years the Israeli occupation entity has continued to occupy Arab
territories, including the Syrian Golan, in flagrant disregard for the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations, the rules of international law and hundreds of
United Nations resolutions. It continues to commit grave and systematic violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights, amounting to war crimes, such as
the forcible transfer of population, the destruction of homes, the confiscation of land
and property, the theft of natural resources, the siege of cities and the destruction of
crops. In doing so it has benefited from the protection of certain permanent members
of the Security Council, chief among them the United States of America.
Under the current Administration, United States support for Israeli
expansionist settlement plans has reached an unprecedented level, as evidenced
by the United States Administration’s provocative occupation deals, its declaration
of occupied Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, its recognition of so-called Israeli
sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan and the occupation authorities’ attempt
to annex territories of the West Bank.
The Syrian Arab Republic, along with the overwhelming majority of Member
States, strongly condemns those decisions and considers them as a merely unilateral
act undertaken by a party that has neither the status nor the political, legal or moral
capacity to decide the fate of the peoples of the world or to dispose of lands that are
an integral part of the territories of the Syrian Arab Republic and occupied Palestine.
Syria supports the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination and
the establishment of an independent State encompassing all of its national territory
and its capital, Jerusalem, and the right of refugees to return to their homes in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III). That resolution was adopted
after Count Folke Bernadotte was assassinated in Jerusalem by the Zionist Stern
Gang for stating, in his report (see S/863) to the Security Council in 1948, that
Palestine refugees had the right to return to the cities, villages and homes from
which they had been expelled. My country reiterates its demand that Palestine be
allowed to become a full-fledged Member of the United Nations.
The citizens of my country living under occupation in the occupied Golan
have the right to question whether the United Nations can credibly and effectively
uphold their just cause. How could it be otherwise? They can see Israel flouting
internationally recognized resolutions demanding that it withdraw from the entire
Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June 1967. Has the time not yet come to enforce United
90/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Nations resolutions on the Arab-Israeli conflict? Is it not time for certain members
of the Security Council to break free from their contempt for the principles of
international law and the provisions of the Charter, all of which repudiate occupation
and aggression?
How could it be otherwise? The citizens of the occupied Golan are not seeing
any genuine international effort to stop the Israeli settlement campaigns in their
territory. Those campaigns include, but are not limited to, confiscating 4,500
dunums of Syrian land to set up a project to build wind turbines to generate power;
concluding contracts with and granting permits to the United States Genie Energy
Company, whose Executive Board is headed by former United States Vice President
Dick Cheney, to drill for oil and plunder natural resources; and coercing our people
in the Golan to register land they inherited from their parents and grandparents
with the Israel Land Authority under penalty of confiscation. Furthermore, Israel
continues its settlement activities and has announced the establishment of a new
settlement in the occupied Syrian Golan called Trump Heights. This new settlement
was a present from the Prime Minister of the Israeli occupation to American President
Trump for his flagrant violation of United Nations resolutions and international law
in unilaterally recognizing what he termed Israeli sovereignty over the occupied
Syrian Golan.
How could it be otherwise? They cannot see any international effort being
made to put an end to systematic Israeli violations and repressive and racist policies,
including, but not limited to, seeking to organize illegal local elections in the
occupied Syrian Golan; refusing to open the Quneitra border to our people in the
occupied Syrian Golan who wish to visit their homeland and relatives in Syria;
and failing to provide adequate medical care to the people of the Golan amid the
coronavirus disease pandemic, which places their lives at further risk. Moreover,
the Israeli occupation authorities continue to treat our people in the occupied Syrian
Golan in a discriminatory manner because they refuse to carry Israeli identity cards.
How could it be otherwise? They can see no international attempt to put an
end to the Israeli occupation’s policy of arbitrary detention and mock trials. The
most recent instance of this policy was the unjust and arbitrary ruling handed down
by the Israeli occupying forces on 10 June, imposing a three-year sentence on the
activist Nihal Suleiman Al-Maqt, sister of the released prisoner Sidqi Al-Maqt, the
Syrian Mandela, and a resident of Majdal Shams in the occupied Syrian Golan. The
ruling is illegal and void because it was issued by an illegal occupation force as part
of a series of arbitrary repressive measures against the population of the occupied
Golan, in an act of reprisal against their patriotic stand and their commitment to
their nation and their Syrian identity. It amounts to an act of retaliation against
the valiant Al-Maqt family, a patriotic Syrian family that is resisting occupation
and aggression.
My Government emphasizes that the occupied Syrian Golan is an integral
part of the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic and that its restoration to the line of
4 June 1967 by all means guaranteed by international law will remain a priority for
Syrian policy and a fixed point from which it will not deviate.
Lastly, the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic reaffirms that, in order
to ensure stability in the Middle East and preserve the credibility of the United
Nations, measures must be taken to implement all international resolutions aimed at
ending the Israeli occupation of Arab territories, including the Syrian Arab Golan,
and compelling Israel to withdraw to the line of 4 June 1967, in accordance with
the relevant United Nations resolutions, including, in particular, Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 497 (1981) and 2334 (2016).

20-1016391/95

S/2020/736

Annex 46
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative and Chargé
d’affaires a.i of Turkey to the United Nations, Raziye Bilge Koçyiğit
Grba
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict continues to imperil prospects of peace and
stability in the Middle East. At a time when we need a spirit of reconciliation and
political determination, Israel’s practices in the occupied Palestinian territory
undermine the two-State solution and the established parameters for a just and
durable peace.
The use of excessive and disproportionate force against civilians, arbitrary
arrests, attempts to erode the status of Jerusalem, the inhumane blockade in Gaza and
the illegal settlements have all been part of a recurring pattern that severely curtails
the fundamental rights and freedoms of Palestinians. During the past few years,
Israel has intensified its expansion of illegal settlements throughout the occupied
Palestinian territories. We all agree that the settlements undermine the perspective
of a two-State solution and lay the foundation for the annexation of these areas.
Today the most immediate and pressing challenge is the Israeli Government’s
illegal plans for the annexation of the West Bank. The annexation would be a grave
violation of international law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. It would
increase the grievances and suffering of Palestinians at the hands of the occupying
Power. Palestinian land and the people of Palestine should not be sacrificed for the
sake of Israel’s brazen policies of violence and occupation.
An overwhelming majority of the international community objected to Israel’s
plans. The Organization of Islamic Cooperation Executive Committee meeting held
on 10 June delivered a strong message against Israel’s initiatives for annexation
and provided its full support to the Palestinian people in their quest for justice.
This message should be supported by all members of the international community
to prevent Israel from taking this dangerous step. We once again urge the Israeli
Government to immediately cease its illegal settlement activities and not to proceed
with its illegal annexation plans.
The situation in the Gaza Strip is also deeply worrisome. Gazans, who are
under blockade, continue to live in tremendous despair and insecurity. This tragedy
is compounded by the coronavirus disease pandemic and the worst financial crisis
in the history of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
(UNRWA). The Palestinian Government has implemented effective public health
measures against the spread of the virus. We welcome and support these measures.
Yet decades of Israeli occupation and blockade have severely damaged the
Palestinian economy, infrastructure and health system. As in the rest of the world,
the public health restrictions have had serious effects on the economy of Palestine.
We therefore call on the Government of Israel to fulfil its responsibilities.
We also call upon the international community to support UNRWA. Until
a just and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestine conflict is reached, the work of
UNRWA remains vital. It is our collective and moral duty to support the Agency.
Inaction in the face of persistent non-compliance with international law and
Security Council resolutions emboldens Israel’s recklessness. The international
community, in particular the Security Council, cannot turn a blind eye to the
situation. There is an urgent need to revitalize the peace process.
The only viable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the two-State
solution based on the 1967 lines, with Palestine and Israel living side by side.
92/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

The rights of the Palestinian people, including to self-determination, are not up
for negotiation.
For decades, the basis for peace negotiations have been the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Quartet road map. This was explicitly reaffirmed in resolution 2334 (2016). These
terms of reference should be upheld. Any initiative for peace should be based on
these established parameters.
It is high time that the international community uphold the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people, ensuring that they live in a free Palestine in peace and
dignity. Turkey’s firm commitment to stand with its Palestinian brothers and sisters
remains as strong as ever.

20-1016393/95

S/2020/736

Annex 47
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Arab
Emirates to the United Nations on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation
I have the honour to submit this statement on behalf of the member States
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in my capacity as Chair of the
OIC Group.
At the outset, I thank Germany for its successful presidency of the Security
Council this month. I would also like to thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Nickolay Mladenov, for his comprehensive briefing.
When we had our last open debate on this topic in April 2020 (see
S/2020/341), we were optimistic regarding the positive responses around the world
to the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire to confront the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We hoped the international community would take
this moment to focus on this unprecedented global challenge. However, countries in
the Middle East continue to face security issues that hinder our efforts to respond
effectively to the pandemic.
An acute example is the occupied Palestinian territories. At a time when
there is a worrisome rise in COVID-19 cases, Israel’s plan to unilaterally annex vast
swathes of the occupied Palestinian territories remain a looming threat. OIC member
States are deeply concerned about these developments, which pose health, economic,
social and security challenges in the territories. On 24 June 2020, Mr. Mladenov
informed the Security Council that “... there is still time to avert chaos. It will require
a concerted effort by all stakeholders and the will to take political risks to achieve
peace.” (S/2020/596, annex 2) We are determined to support the Palestinian people
and protect the two-State solution, with a Palestinian State living side by side with
Israel in peace, security and mutual recognition.
To achieve these goals, the OIC calls on the Security Council and Member
States to pursue the following priorities.
First, we must salvage the prospects for peace. As a priority, the international
community must continue to exert pressure on Israel to prevent annexation plans,
which violate international law, the Charter of the United Nations and relevant United
Nations resolutions. OIC member States have repeatedly stated their rejection of
annexation. We reiterate that such unilateral actions undermine the peace process
and would have grave consequences for the stability and security of the region and
beyond. In this vein, OIC member States demand that Israel stop all its illegal actions,
including wall and settlement construction, land confiscation and the demolition of
homes and properties. Israel must also end its illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip,
which imposes severe humanitarian consequences for the Palestinian people.
In addition, we reiterate our concerns about Israeli restrictions on access to
Islamic and Christian holy sites in the city of Jerusalem. In this regard, OIC member
States commend the efforts of His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein, Custodian
of Islamic and Christian holy sites in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, in defending, protecting
and preserving the city and its Islamic and Christian identity. We also commend
the continued efforts exerted by His Majesty King Mohammed VI, Chairman of
the Al-Quds Committee, and welcome the appeal signed by His Majesty King
Mohammed VI and Pope Francis in Rabat on 30 March 2019, as it calls for Al-Quds
to be a city of peace, fraternity and tolerance, considering the city a symbol of
coexistence of the followers of the three monotheistic religions.

94/95

20-10163

S/2020/736

Secondly, we need to break the deadlock in the political process. OIC member
States encourage the Quartet and other key international actors to work towards
launching a credible, time-bound and multilaterally sponsored political process,
in accordance with the established terms of reference. In addition, the Security
Council has a crucial role to play in supporting a just and comprehensive solution to
the conflict.
Thirdly, we should assist the occupied Palestinian territories in responding
effectively to the pandemic. Support should focus on enhancing the capacity
of the health system, particularly in the Gaza Strip, in addition to mitigating the
socioeconomic impact of the pandemic. We strongly encourage funding the
COVID-19 response plan in the occupied Palestinian territory and the flash appeal
for the COVID-19 response of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East. Equally important is ensuring access to essential
medical supplies and humanitarian aid for those in need.
Finally, we must address the deterioration of the humanitarian and economic
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories. OIC member States are concerned
about the fragile economic situation in the territories, which is further exacerbated
by COVID-19 and the occupation. Around a quarter of Palestinians already live
below the poverty line. This percentage could increase given that the World Bank
predicts the economy will decline: “... at least 7.6 per cent, based on a gradual
return to normality from the containment, and up to 11 per cent in the case of a
slower recovery or further restrictions due to another outbreak.” The international
community should not ignore such alarming trends, which severely impact the
livelihood of Palestinians and the peace effort.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call to support the Palestinian people in exercising
their legitimate rights, including their right to self-determination and sovereignty
over the territory of the State of Palestine, based on the 4 June 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. In addition, we call for Israel’s full withdrawal from
the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, in accordance with Security
Council resolutions. We further affirm the need to preserve the unity, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and social harmony of Syria, and reiterate our support for a
political solution to the Syrian crisis, consistent with resolution 2254 (2015).

20-1016395/95
