S/2011/589

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 September 2011
Original: English

Letter dated 20 September 2011 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I would like to bring to your attention a matter of great concern regarding the
acute shortage of military helicopters in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
MONUSCO currently has only 14 military helicopters, comprising 10 utility
helicopters and 4 observation helicopters. The Mission is facing a shortfall of six
military utility helicopters. The Mission has no attack helicopters at this time.
MONUSCO military helicopter assets are deployed exclusively in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, namely in the Kivus and Province Orientale. Of
the Mission’s 10 military utility helicopters, 6 are deployed in Province Orientale in
support of military operations to address the presence of the Lord’s Resistance
Army, whose murderous attacks against civilians in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo have once again been on the rise, as well as remnant Ituri militia. The
remaining four military utility helicopters are deployed in the Kivus; two of these
are light helicopters with reduced capacity.
The impact of the shortage of military helicopters on the implementation of the
MONUSCO mandate has become critical. Joint operations with the Congolese
Armed Forces have had to be postponed, investigations of allegations of mass
human rights violations have had to be delayed, and some deployments to protection
hot-spots have had to be deferred. Getting essential supplies to United Nations
troops in far-flung, volatile areas has also been extremely difficult. This is made all
the more critical in the run-up to presidential and parliamentary elections scheduled
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 28 November 2011.
The Secretariat has vigorously pursued contacts with troop-contributing
countries over the past year regarding the provision of military helicopters. As a
result, South Africa has pledged to provide MONUSCO with an additional military
utility helicopter.
The Secretariat is also closely involved with the Security Council members
and other Member States to address the root causes of this critical capability gap
across United Nations peacekeeping operations, thinking “outside the box” for new
and innovative solutions. I have personally led several of these initiatives, and we
have been actively supported in these efforts by a number of Member States.

11-50658 (E) 220911

*1150658*

S/2011/589

However, we do not foresee a deployment of additional military helicopter
assets to MONUSCO, beyond the pledge by South Africa, before the end of this
year.
Critical capability gaps within United Nations peacekeeping operations are
unfortunately not confined to MONUSCO. However, the current lack of military
helicopters in MONUSCO has become acute, and it is my duty to inform you that
the Mission is no longer able to carry out critical parts of its priority mandated
tasks, including in relation to the protection of civilians, providing support to the
elections and putting an end to the presence of armed groups, particularly in the
Kivus.
I am concerned that if this situation is not addressed by the Security Council,
the largest United Nations peacekeeping operation will be at risk of failure, with
serious consequences for lives and livelihoods for the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The credibility of the Council and of the United Nations is
also at risk.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2

11-50658
