UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1905’“,

MEETING:

,.,

31 MARCY \&??j \“uq b ?!v

,..

NEW YORK

DEC 2 0 ‘!334

CONTENTS
Page

. . . . . . . :. . . . \. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . ; . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Kenya, on behalf of the African Group of States at the United
Nations, concerning the act of aggression committed by South Africa against
the People’s Republic of Angola:
Letter dated 10 March 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Kenya
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12007) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (SIAgendal1905)

S/PV. 1905

,

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
1 Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Of$cial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1905th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 31 March 1976, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. Thomas

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/l905)

of the agenda.

Complaint
by Kenya, on behalf of the African
Group of States at the United Nations, concerning
the act of aggression committed by South Africa
against the People’s Republic of Angola:
Letter dated 10 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Kenya to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/12007).
_
The meeting

United Nations Council for Namibia and the members
of his delegation to take the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber.

S. BOYA (Benin).

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Luvualu
(Angola) took a place at the Council table and
Mr. Mondjo (Congo), Mr. Alarcbn (Cuba), Mr. Abdel
Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Neugebauer
(German Democratic Republic), Mrs. Jeanne Martin Cisse’ (Guinea),
Mr. Jaipal (India), Mr. Maina (Kenya), Mr. Rabetafika (Madagascar),
Mr. Kant& (Mali), Mr. Harriman
(Nigeria), Mr. Jaroszek (Poland), Mr. Baroody (Saudi
Arabia), Mr. Blyden (Sierra Leone), Mr. Hussen
(Somalia),
Mr. Botha (South Africa), Mr. Allaf
(Syrian
Arab Republic),
Mr.
Mwangaguhunga
. (Uganda), Mr. Oyono (United Republic of Cameroon),
Mr. Petri& (Yugoslavia) and Mr. ‘Kamana (Zambia),
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia,
together with the members of his delegation,
took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
1

was called to order at 11.40 a.m.
Adoption

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I should also like to inform the Council that I have
just received letters from the representatives of Bulgaria, Guinea-Bissau
and Portugal in which they
request to be invited, under Article 31 of the Charter,
to participate without the right to vote in the Council’s
debate. If I hear no objection, I propose, in accordance
with the usual practice of the Council and with rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure, to invite those
representatives
to participate
without the right to
vote in the debate.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Kenya, on behalf of the African Group
of States at the United Nations, concerning the act of
aggression committed by South Africa against the
People’s Republic of Angola:
Letter dated 10 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Kenya to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Ghelev
(Bulgaria),
Mr. Fernandes
(Guinea-Bissau)
and
Mr. Galva’o Teles (Portugal) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

(S/12007)

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decisions- adopted earlier
[1900th to 1904th meetings], I shall invite the representative of Angola to take a place at the Council
table and the representatives of Congo, Cuba, Egypt,
the German Democratic
Republic,
Guinea, India,
Kenya, Madagascar, Mali, Nigeria, Poland, Saudi
Arabia, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda, the United Republic
of Cameroon, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
The first speaker is the representative
whom I now call.

from French):
of Angola, on

5. Mr. LUVUALU
(Angola) (interpretation
from
French): My delegation has asked to speak in order to
clarify what was said yesterday by the representative
of South Africa [f 904th meeting]. We should have liked
the representative of South Africa to be here in this
chamber so that he could rebut what we are about to
say.

2. In accordance with the decision taken at the
1902nd meeting, I shall also invite the President of the
1

6. The South African representative,
in his hypocritical, fallacious and demagogic statement spoke
about the “limited
participation”
of his country in
what he called the “civil war” in Angola. He said that
the aggressive forces of his country were in the region
of Calueque and Ruacani only to protect the hydroelectric project of the Cunene River and the workers
who are working there. But in fact the regular South
African army entered Angola in force on 23 October
1975 and occupied almost half of Angola. These are
the battalions which invaded Angola: Natal, Zulu,
Orange and two specialized tactical combat units.
Those forces, supported by armoured vehicles, tanks
and aircraft, successively occupied Pereira de Eta
(province of Cunene), S&ada Bandeira (province of
Huila), Mochmedes (province of MocBmedes), Lobito
and Benguela (province of Benguela) and Novo
Redondo (province of Cuanza-Sui). Please note that
Novo Redondo is situated about 800 kilometres from
the frontier with Namibia. We have a map here for
those who want to confirm this, on which can be seen
the frontier with Namibia and the town of Novo
Redondo .

9. Now where is the truth .about what was said by
the representative of South Africa, namely, that these
aggressive South African forces never fought our
troops, that they withdrew from Angola themselves and
that their presence in Angola was limited to Calueque
and Ruacanis in the region of the Cunene dam? As
all here are aware, aggressive or occupation forces
never willingly withdraw from a country. What is true
is that the myth of white invincibility
and supremacy
of the Vorster regime was shattered by FAPLA
[Popular Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola].
The dtblcle, which the representative of South Africa
described yesterday
as “voluntary
withdrawal”,
began once the South African troops had received
severe blows in CelaI and Novo Redondo, leaving on
the field a large amount of military equipment of the
most sophisticated kind.
10. If the South African troops withdrew from
Angola of their own free will, why do they not withdraw from Namibia in the same way? In retreating into
this Territory, they should be aware that the people of
Namibia has understood that the apartheid regime is
in a situation in which its days are numbered. The
time has come when the Namibian people will throw
out of its Territory
the forces of aggression and
apartheid.

7. From Novo Redondo to CelaI and Luso, the South
Africans had occupied all these territories. However,
the dam at Calueque and Ruacana; which they claimed
to be protecting, is located about 15 kilometres from
the Namibian border. The South African forces were
stopped by our forces on the Keve River in the centre
of the country without having reached their target,that
is, without having seized Luanda, the capital of
Angola, in order to prevent the proclamation of independence and to suppress the vanguard of the Angolan
people, the MPLA [Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angofn]. They turned towards the eastern
central area where they occupied the towns of Nova
Lisboa (province of Huambo) and Silva Port0 (province of BiC), where their lackey, Jonas Savimbi, was
located. The objective of the South African forces in
the east was to gain control of the railways in order
to get them running, but they failed.

11. In his futile statement the South African representative sought to give the impression that the South
African racists were providing humanitarian
services
to the Angolans. There is a proverb that says charity
begins at home. How could South African troops be
rendering humanitarian
services to our people when
they do not even render them in their own country,
where Africans languish in misery? .What he called
“refugees”
are Angolans who were forced by his
regime to leave their country. But we know dearly
that the essential purpose of this operation was military
and political.
12. As to what he called the guarantees which
the People’s Republic of Angola was alleged to have
given to the racist Government of Pretoria, all we need
do to refute this claim is repeat the statement of the
Political Bureau of our Party, dated 20 March. We
stress once again that the People’s Republic of Angola
has no common frontier with South Africa and does
not recognize South Africa’s right of sovereignty over
Namibia.

8. Then the South Africans occupied the town of
Luso (province of Mexico), near Katanga and the
frontier with Zaire. The occupation
lasted three
months, in the course of which South African soldiers
engaged in the massacre of the civilian population’and
pillage, destruction and theft, as we have already
declared in our previous statement [190&h meeting].
Violent fighting took place on the Keve River in the
town of Celai, in the centre of the country, between
our troops and the South African troops. In the course
of this fighting South African soldiers were taken
prisoner. Some of these prisoners were presented to
1 the international
press in Angola and outside. We
have here photographs of the soldiers taken prisoner
in the centre of the country; we have here evidence
of the destruction of bridges by the South African
army when it was retreating. Anyone who wants to
conlirrn this can look at these photographs.

13. The. Cabora Bassa project and the construction
of the dam on the Cunene, the objective of which was
political and military, were resisted and condemned by
the international
community
because South African
racism, in collusion with Portuguese fascism, wanted
to establish in the Cunene area a state with 1 mihion
whites, a buffer state providing a kind of cordon for
the Pretoria regime which would enable it to perpetuate
its illegal occupation of Namibia.
The idea of this
plan was also to create an economic infrastructure in
Angola and Namibia which would enable the colonizers
2

20. It is undeniable that several months ago the
armed forces of South Africa entered Angolan territory and occupied a large part of that country, including
the area near the Calueque dam. That has been recognized by even the South African authorities in the
statement of the Prime Minister of the Pretoria regime
appearing in document S/12019 which constitutes a
veritable admission of guilt.

of these two countries to entrench themselves and
strengthen their colonial system. In spite ofour protests
and those of international public opinion, the dam was
built against our will.
14. But the struggle of the peoples of the Portuguese
colonies, and that of the Angolan people in particular,
changed the course of history. Portuguese colonialism
was swept out of Africa. The project of creating a
white buffer State was killed in its cradle, but the
aftermath persists, that is, the South African aggression
against the People’s Republic of Angola.

21. My country has resolutely pronounced itself in
favour of the withdrawal from Angola of the armed
forces of South Africa and the cessation of all forms
of imperialist intervention in Angola.

15. The Cunene dam and all other property left by
colonialism is the property of the Angolan people.
Inasmuch as the Cunene and the dam are situated in
the territory of Angola, a sovereign, independent
State, we do not see why we should allow the South
Africans to protect this dam in violation of our
sovereignty. We are a sovereign and. indepe-ndent
State, and it is our right to protect our people and its
interests, and not the right of any other country.
Similarly, with regard to our foreign policy we are a
non-aligned country. We have incorporated nonalignment in our constitution. We will never agree
to bargain away our right to sovereignty.

22. The invasion of a part of the territory of Angola
by the South African troops is an act of aggression
against an independent State that is inconsistent with
the Charter of the United Nations and the rules of
international law. We consider that the use of armed
force by South Africa against the People’s Republic
of Angola falls within the provisions of article 3,
paragraph (a) of the Definition of Aggression adopted
by consensus by the General Assembly in resolution 3314 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974. These provisions are the following:
“Any of the following acts, regardless of a declaration of war, shall, subject to and in accordance with
the provisions of article 2, qualify as an act of
aggression:

16. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (inferpreetarion from
French): The delegation of Romania would like to
take this opportunity warmly to welcome the delegation of the People’s Republic of Angola under the
leadership of Ambassador Pascal Luvualu.

“(a) The invasion or attack by the armed forces
of a State of the territory of another State, or any
military occupation, however temporary, resulting
from such invasion or attack”.

17. The Socialist Republic of Romania has consistently upheld the right of all peoples to existence,
freedom and independence. My country has always
stressed the need to respect the right of every people
to choose freely and independently the path of its
economic and social development in conformity with
its fundamental aspirations.

23. We believe that the arguments invoked by the
regime in Pretoria to justify its acts of aggression
against Angola are unacceptable. Article 5, paragraph 1, of the Definition of Aggression states: “No
consideration of whatever nature, whether political,
economic, military or otherwise-, may serve as a
justification for aggression”.

18. For more than a decade the Romanian people
have been following with feelings of brotherhood,
friendship and sympathy the heroic struggle of the
Angolan people to recover its freedom and national
independence. The Romanian people has demonstrated
its militant solidarity with the just cause of the Angolan
people by giving material, political and diplomatic
assistance. The attainment of independence by the
Angolan people once again confirms the invincibility of
the struggle of the peoples of the world to exercise
their right to be masters of their own destinies,.their
right to eliminate colonial domination and oppression.

24. Furthermore, the fact that South Africa has withdrawn its armed forces from Angola cannot relieve it
of political, legal and material responsibility for its act
of aggression. We consider that the cessation of an
unlawful act cannot have the effect of rendering nonexistent an act that has already been committed. The
principle of the international responsibility of a State
that has committed an act of aggression is well established in international law, and I do not believe that
it needs to be proved that, in addition to political
and legal responsibility, the act of aggression entails
material responsibility on the part of the guilty State.

.19. Romania welcomed the declaration of independence of the People’s Republic of Angola and established relations of co-operation with the Government
created by the MPLA, the legitimate representative
of the Angolan people. Relations between Romania
and Angola are based on reciprocal respect for independence and national sovereignty, equal rights and the
principle of mutual advantage.

25. The representative of Angola, in his statement last
Friday and in his statement just a few minutes ago,
has presented us with some very enlightening facts
and data regarding the scope of the injury caused the
Angolan people and its economy by South Africa.
3

26. Romania considers that the Security Council has
a duty to condemn the acts of aggression committed
by South Africa against the People’s Republic of
Angola. The Council must call upon South Africa to
refrain from committing such acts in future. It must
take measures to ensure that South Africa unconditionally and strictly respects the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola. South
Africa does not have the right to impose any conditions
on the Government of Angola for the withdrawal of
South African armed forces from Angolan territory.
Angola’s sovereignty covers its entire territory and
cannot be made subject to conditions imposed by
force from abroad.
27. Furthermore, we consider that the South African
armed forces that have been withdrawn from Angola
should not be stationed on Namibian territory, since
any South African presence. in Namibia is illegal.
Hence, South African armed forces must leave
Namibia; they must be transferred to South Africa.
28. We also support the legitimate request by the
People’s Republic of Angola regarding the return by
South Africa of the goods that its armed forces took
away with them. Similarly, we regard as completely
justified the request that South Africa compensate
the People’s Republic of Angola for the damage
caused on Angolan territory.
!
29. My country believes that it is the duty of the
Grganization and of all the countries of the world to
support Angola’s independence and territorial integrity
and to give assistance to the Angolan people and its
legally constituted Government in order that they can
devote their entire energy to the peaceful reconstruction of their country and to its economic and social
progress.
30. Furthermore, we sympathize with the very
natural desire of the People’s Republic of Angola to
be admitted as soon as possible to membership of the
United Nations.
31. In conclusion. I wish to reaffirm the Romanian
people’s solidarity with the Angolan people’s struggle
to strengthen its national independence, as well as our
firm support for the other peoples of southern Africa
that are waging a courageous struggle against colonial
and racial oppression, a struggle to free themselves
from foreign domination and to assume their rightful
place in the community of independent nations.
32. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Bulgaria.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
33. Mr. GHELEV (Bulgaria) (interpretation
from
Mr. President, I should like first to express
my gratitude to you and, through you, to the members
of the. Council for giving me this opportunity to

French):

explain the views of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria
on the aggression committed by South Africa against
the People’s Republic of Angola.
‘1
34. The fact that these deliberations of the Council
are being held under the distinguished presidency of a
representative of Africa-the Permanent Representative of Benin-at a time when the Council’s agenda
contains an item of undeniable importance.and urgency
for the destiny of Africa is a guarantee that the,results
of these deliberations will be in .keeping with the
principles of the. Charter of the United Nations and
the principles contained in the historic Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, and also with the sacred right of peoples
to seif-determlnation and independence.
_
35. The history of the struggle of the peoples. of the
world for liberation from the colonial yoke has been
long and filled with suffering. Wherever it has
appeared, colonialism has been ,equally cruef and
inhuman. However, the path of the Africin peoples
towards freedom and independence has been particularly difficult and tragic. For decades, indeed
centuries, the whole African continent appeared,
practically speaking, on the maps of the world in the
colours of their metropolitan coloniai masters, carved
up by geometrical lines. The colonial night that fell
over Africa seemed impenetrable. However, farreaching political and social changes in the world
began after the great October socialist revolution and
the historic victory over the forces of fascism and
reaction in the Second World War. The path to the
national and social liberation of the peoples and the
path towards the rapid and final elimination of the
colonial system, including the liberation of Africa; were
opened up.
36. After many years of heroic struggle, the peoples
of the last colonial empire, following.so many others,
have won their great struggle for independence. The
alliance of thesouthem African racists and the Portuguese colonialists has been broken. The 1,people of
Angola, following the peoples of Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique, Cape Verde and Sao Tome and Principe, has also won its independence. That courageous
people, which so fully merited the right to, embark
upon the path of its economic and social development
in conditions of.peace and security, became the target
of a vast conspiracy by international imperialism, and
reactionary forces. Indeed, this conspiracy was
launched evenbefore the independence of-the People’s
Republic of Angola was proclaimed, and its object was
the :MPLA, the vanguard of the Angolan people. ,Its
purpose was to suppress the tried and true leader of
the Angolan people, MPLA, and to prevent the proclamation of the independence of the new State.
Furthermore, the young Republic became the object
of. naked armed aggression by the fascist regime of
South Aftica, which used as its point of departure
forthat aggression the Territory of Namibia, illegally
occupied by the South African racists. That flagrant

intervention was inspired and generously financed by
international imperialism and the multinational companies, without the support of which the Pretoria
regime would long since have ceased to exist. The
vast propaganda machine of the imperialist forces was
brought into action to cover up this conspiracy, to
divert attention from the aggression committed by
their tool of oppression, South Africa,. and also to
prevent the deep changes which will inevitably come to
the entire southern part of the continent: South Africa,
Namibia and Southern Rhodesia. The aim of this
conspiracy was also to destroy the achievements of the
struggle for national liberation by the patriotic ‘forces
of Angola.

time a hypocritical concern .for the independence of
the Angolan people. In this regard the representative
of the People’s Republic of Angola quite rightly stated
on 26 March to the Council “We should like to make
it abundantly clear here that any concern of this kind
about our country is unquestionably an unjustified
interference in the internal affairs of the People’s
Republic of Angola. We vigorously reject that interference, just as our people have vigorously rejected the
enemies of our country in their courageous struggle for
freedom.” [190&h meeting,. paru. 19.3 In the same
way, it -seems to me that we can say with equal
justification that in the flames of the struggle of the
Angolan people against imperialism and for the defence
of their hard-won liberty many illusions were
destroyed, and the peoples of Africa and of the whole
world can now unerringly distinguish their friends
from their enemies.

37. The events in Angola have in a most tragic fashion
amply confirmed how justified were the many and
repeated warnings issued by the Organization of
African Unity and the United Nations that the racist
regimes in southern Africa constituted a grave and
constant threat to the peace and security of the continent and to the independent development of the
African-States.

40. The threat of aggression from South Africa
against the national independence and sovereignty of
the People’s Republic of Angola persists. The
statement we heard yesterday afternoon in this very
chamber from the representative of the Pretoria regime
is further proof of this. Indeed-and this has been
stressed by many speakers before me-this is a threat
to the peace and security of the whole African continent. Therefore, in the view of my delegation, it is
urgent to eliminate this threat. No one can now
doubt that this threat exists and will continue until
effective measures are taken to guarantee. respect for
the national independence and territorial integrity of
the People’s Republic of Angola and until South
Africa ceasesto use the Territory of Namibia to commit
acts of aggression against the young Republic. The
international community and the United Nations has a
duty to provide decisive support for the People’s
Republic of Angola in its efforts to achieve its programme of national reconstruction.

38. And now the other element in this monstrous
plot has turned out to be the policy of a State which
is a permanent member of the Security Council and
which both before the liberation of Angola and after
the proclamation of its independence rallied to the side
of the enemies of peace and social progress. That,
of course, should come as no surprise to anyone any
more. The behaviour of reactionaries, of the adversaries of peace, has a logic of its own. It is entirely
logical for those who preach the need for a new world
cataclysm and are hoping for a holy alliance against the
countries of the socialist community and against
socialism itself to find themselves side by side with
those who are striving to annihilate the achievements
of the long national liberation struggle of the Angolan
people and to prevent its independent development.
In the difficult days when there was a serious-threat to
the independence and territorial integrity of the young
Angolan Republic, the Maoists, together with all the
world’s reactionaries, gave their support to the puppet
counter-revolutionaries and the agents of neo-colonialism in Angola, and hence to the intervention of
South Africa.

41. We are convinced that the Security Council will
not fail to discharge its responsibilities and that it will
not only vigorously denounce South Africa’s aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola but will
call insistently for the unconditional withdrawal of all
its armed forces from Angolan territory, demand that
South Africa strictly respect the national independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
People’s Republic of Angola and call upon South
Africa to pay full compensation for the enormous
injury caused the Angolan people by its aggression.

39. Today, while the threat to the independence of
Angola from the South African racists continues, we
have been witnessing scandalous manmuvres aimed
at nothing less than justifying the aggression of the
Pretoria regime and, in the final analysis, at preventing
the Angolan people from embarking resolutely on the
course. of social progress. After the failure of this
unsavoury enterprise, and in order to conceal their
activities and ambitions, the united forces of reaction
have been striving to divert attention from the aggression against Angola and are re.sorting to slander and
unscrupulous distortion of the facts, which by now
are well known to the entire ,world. And what is
even more edifying, they are dispIaying at the same

42. The Peonle’s Renublic of Bulgaria-which from
the very beginning, side by side withthe Soviet Union,
Cuba and the other countries of the socialist community
and together with all the progressive forces in the
world, has provided unreserved assistance and fraternal support to the Angolan people and its vanguard,
the MPLA, in their struggle for freedom and independence-will continue to support the People’s
Republic of Angola in its efforts to consolidate its
independence and to provide all necessary assistance
5

to the Angolan people in its struggle for democracy
and social progress.
43. Just two days ago, on 29 March, in Sofia, the
EIeventh Congress of the Bulgarian Communist Party
was opened. From the rostrum of that Congress the
First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Bulgarian Communist Party and Chairman of the State
Council, Todor Zhivkov, declared:
“In spite of the brutal interference of the imperialists, the Angolan people, supported by the countries of the socialist community and by progressive
forces in the world, has inflicted a defeat on the
aggressors and on internal reaction and thus
succeeded in safeguarding the People’s Republic’ of
Angola.”
44. Before concluding, I cannot fail to convey the
warmest greetings of the Bulgarian delegation to the
representative of the People’s Republic of Angola,
a long-standing friend of mine, Ambassador Luvualu,
and to tell him how happy I am to see among us
here the representative of a free ‘and independent
Angola. We are certain that the People’s Republic
of Angola will become a full Member of the United
Nations in the very near future and that it will thus
be able to make its valuable contribution to the
imprementation of the purposes and principles of the
Charter and to the efforts for peace and understanding
among peoples.
45. Mr. AKHUND (Pakistan): The independence of
Angola marks the end of the oldest colonial empire
in Africa. The valiant people of Angola, Mozambique,
Guinea-Bissau, and Sao Tome and Principe fought
an adversary which was stubbornly entrenched and
refused to recognize even their right toindependence.
We pay a tribute to the determination, courage and
valour of all the people of the former Portuguese
colonies. Their struggle has been one of the longest
and the most tenacious waged by any people fighting
for freedom.
46. In Angola-whose representative we welcome
here-the struggle was complicated and prolonged by
factors both internal and extemal. Of these, we are
concerned today with one element, reprehensible in
any light, that is, the incursion of South-African forces
into Angolan territory.
47. The world knows that the racist regime in South
Africa long supported Portuguese colonialism and
viewed it as a bulwark against the rising tide of
African nationalism. The fall of the. Salazar-Caetano
regime in Portugal and the triumph of the freedom
fight in Portuguese colonies in Africa undoubtedly
came as a great blow to the misguided rulers ‘of South
Africa, but evidently it did not bring home to them the
realities of the new situation. That they should have
ventured out from their own misruled country, across
the territory of another country which is under their

illegal occupation, namely, Namibia, and set themselves up as protectors of refugees and dams in the
territory of yet another shows with what little respect
the r&me in Pretoria regards the norms.of intemational behaviour, the provisions of the Charter and the
decisions of the United Nations. The justification
advanced by the Government of South Africa for
entering into Angolan territory, that is, to protect the
Calueque dam on the Cunene River and to look after
the Angolan refugees, is totally unacceptable and
inadmissible under intetnational law and the Charter.
Nothing that was stated’here yesterday by the representative of South Africa justifies his Government’s
action in any manner whatsoever.
48. Furthermore, the fact that the South African
troops may have left Angola by now. is a vindication
of the determined stand takenby the people of Angola
and the result of the adverse international reaction
aroused by their action. It does not in any way
extenuate the seriousness of the original’offence. South
Africa’s action must therefore be rightly and unambiguously condemned by the intemationa1 community.
49. The Council heard the President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia (1903rd meetitzg], a
Council of which Pakistan has the honour to be a
member. In his statement he expressed the views of
the Council for Namibia, views which my delegation
shares and endorses, about South Africa’s continued
and illegal presence in Namibia and the problems that
it poses for that region.
50. Speaking-for the African Group, the representative of Kenya [190&h meering] raised the issue of
South Africa’s use of Namibia for aggressive purposes
against the People’s Republic of Angola. We agree
with his view that Angola would have no grounds for
giving’assurances about its botmdaries to a Govemment that illegally dominates Namiila and that the
Council for Namibia is the proper authority to obtain
such assurances-from,Angola. We endorse his demand
that the ‘Security Council should call once more upon
South Africa to vacate Namibia as soon as possible.
51. Angola has rid itself of the colonial yoke at the
cost of the blood of its martyrs and the determination
and patriotic struggle of all its people. It sets out now
as a fre~e,independent and sovereign country on the
road to progress and the promise of a peaceful “and
prosperous future. Angola is possessed of vast tetritories and endowed with great resources. Its geod
graphical situation gives it special~importance in its
own region and elsewhere. Its people‘have been steeled
in a long and arduous fight for freedom. We welcome
them to the comity of nations and applaud theirdetermination to protect and consolidate the indepemle’nce
of their country and to maintain the independence of
their policies.
52. The representative of Angola was within his
rights in suggesting that, as a sovereign and inde.
6
.

.

.

_

pendent country, Angola may choose to seek help
where it wishes, even to invite and retain within its
borders the military forces of foreign countries which
it considers friendly to its cause and whose assistance
it feels it needs. As the representative of Tanzania
said: .
..

for freedom, justice and dignity. In this context, and
in conclusion, I should like to cite the words of the
Prime Minister of Pakistan, Mr. Zulfiiar Ali Rhutto,
who 10 days ago in this message on the occasion of
the International Day for the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination, said:

“one can have his own views on the merits and
demerits of the request made by Angola; one can
even question whether the Government of Angola
had the right to ask for any assistance.” [1&d.,’

“The independence of Mozambique and Angola
has brought the racist regimes in Pretoria and
Salisbury face to face with the historically unfolding
realities and just and militant aspirations of Africa.
The struggles for self-determination and equality
in Zimbabwe, Namibia and in South Africa have
been intensified. The liberation can be achieved
only through a people’s struggle and sacrifice. We
are confident that the peoples in southern Africa will
ultimately triumph through their own resolute
efforts. While no external power can fight their wars
or win their victories, it remains the duty of all
Members of the United Nations to give all moral
and material help to these peoples in their just
cause.“’

parti. 76.1

Speaking for my delegation, all I would like to say in
this matter is that the consequences and implications
of such actions must be carefully weighe-d-11 the
more so in the case of newly independent countries and
liberation movements-in- the light of the realities of
the present-day world, its cleavage of views and its
conflicts of interest, a reflection of which we have
witnessed in the course of the present. series of
meetings.. In this context we have noted with the
seriousness which it merits the statement of the representative of Angola that:

56. Mr. VINCI (Italy): The complaint against South
Africa submitted to the Council by the delegation of
Kenya on behalf of the African Group of States at the
United Nations has been considered by the Italian
delegation on its objective merit and with all the
seriousness it deserves, My Government and my
delegation are fully aware of the motivations and the
facts which led the Government of Angola to send a
special envoy, the roving ambassador Pascal Luvualu,
to address the Council and to attend its meetings.
I should .like to offer Ambassador Luvualu the sincere
welcome of my delegation and to assure him that we
have listened to what he has said very sympathetically
and with great attention. We fully understand his position and sincerely appreciate the wisd-o:manclrestraint
with which he has spoken; My delegationhasalsa take.n
due note of the interesting,poinfsf&u$cation
he has
made this morning on the extensive. area of Angolan
territory initially occupied by the: South African
forces.

“The People’s Republic of Angola belongs to no
international military bloc, nor does it allow foreign
military bases to- be established on its national
territory.” [Ibid., pat-a. f7. J
53. My country has recognized the People’s Republic
of Angola. We wish it well, and we took forward to
developing our relations with it in this forum in due
time and in others where the countries of the third
world get together.
54. We would be lacking in candour, we wouId be
remiss in ,friendship, if we did not voice our doubts
as to the advisability of’ inducting foreign miliEary
forces into the fiiht for liberation. Liberation- movements have the right to seek moral as well as material
support from their friends ‘and supporters in all parts
of the world. Indeed, it is the duty of their friends to
come to their assistance in the appropriate manner.
When it comes to the fight for freedom-when, as
sometimes happens and as well’might happen- again,
the unity of their struggle is troubled by differences,
of whatever nature these might be, triba1 or ethnic,
ideological or social-the introduction of a foreign
element can prove to be an additionai complicating
factor. That much said, we express the hope, indeed
the conviction, that in its quest for peace and:$jrogress
for all its people the Government of Angola will$take
nationa reconciliation
one of its primary objectives.
_
55. For Africa, the most difficult struggle and the
most stubborn battles still lie ahead. In that struggle
Africa will need the support and sympathy, moral
and material, of all its friends and supporters all over
the world. Indeed, the sympathies of the entire world
are with the peoples of Zimbabwe, of Namibia and
. ..of South Africa. It is they who must fight the battle

57. We have also listened attentively to the statements made on behalf of the African Group by the
representative of Kenya [190&h meeting], by the representative of Zambia (I90lst .meering], also in his
capacity as President .of the United:Nations Council
for Namibia. [1903rd meering], and by the Chairman
of the Special Committee against Apertheid [I9Olsr
meering], as well as the statements made by. other
African colleagues and by the representat.ives of court@liesin other parts of the world. We have studied
these statements with all due care.
58. The Italian Government officially recognized the
accession of the Angolan people to independence on
11November 1975. Qn 18February 1976, a spokesman
for the Italian Government stated:
“The Italian Government, upon recognizing
the People’s Republic of Angola, renews its:heartfeit
7

:
,.

. .

._

I. .I

.

.

hope that it may realize a condition of peace and
national unity through the cessation of all foreign
military intervention and the participation of all
Angolans in the reconstruction and the development
of the country, also in the interest of security and
co-operation in the entire region. The Italian Govemment expresses the conviction that such developments will contribute to strengthening the bonds of
friendship which unite the peoples of Italy and
Angola and to furthering the ties of co-operation
between the two countries.”

fulfilment of the rightful aspirations of the peoples of
its African colonies. The ‘re-e.stablishment of. $emocracy in Portugal came at the same time as freedom for
Angola, Mozambique, Guinea-33issau,Cape Verde and
Sao Tome and Principe. Italy can only rejoice and wish
all these newly born African States fast and fruitful
development on the road of welfare and prosperity.

.That statement was shortly followed by a message to
Luanda expressing the intention of the Italian Govemment to establish diplomatic relations between Angola
and Italy. In his cable to the Foreign Minister of the
People’s Republic of Angola, Mr. Jose Eduardo dos
Santos, the Italian Foreign Minister, Mariano Rumor,
stated, inrer alia:

61. Turning now to the events which have motivated
the convening of the Council, I should Iike first of
all to say that Italy and its eight partners of the
European Community very clearly stated their position
on 23 February. The statement issued on that
occasion was officially welcomed by the Organization
of African Unity as a clear reaffirmation of those rights
of seIf-determination and independence the fulfilment
of which motivated the previous steps undertaken by
the nine countries in Pretoria. in order to speed up the
withdrawal of South African forces from. Angola.

“The establishment of these relations will contribute to reinforcing the links of friendship which
unite the peoples of Angola and Italy and to promoting, on a basis of equality, fruitful contacts
between the two Governments, as well as firm
relations of co-operation.”

62. The five basic principles stated in the European
Community’s declaration of 23 February are, therefore, at the basis of our position onthe matter we are
considering. I am taking the liberty of reading the
entire text, which was circulated as under cover of
a note of the Secretariat dated 5 March:

The prospects for this friendship and co-operation
have recently been enhanced by the visit to Luanda
of the Italian Minister of Transport and the signing,
on that occasion, of an agreement for the development of the Angolan airlines. We believe we have
thus provided a substantial example of the kind of
friendly co-operation we wish to build up with the
People’s Republic of Angola.

“ 1. The Ministers for Foreign Affairs of th.e nine
countries of the Community, meeting in Luxembourg
and recalling the decisions taken by them with regard
to the People’s Republic of Angola%have considered
the questions arising in that part of Africa.
“2. The Ministers have followed carefully and
with considerable concern the course of the conflict
in Angola, which has caused great suffering and
heavy loss of human life and. serious damage to the
economy. They appeal for restoration of the
harmony. necessary fo.r thecount-ry’s reconstruction
and development.

59. If I have quoted extensively from these statements and given these facts, it is for one simple
reason. I just wanted to show the confidence the
Italian Government and people place in the will of
‘the people of Angola to stand on their own as a free
and independent new nation in the international
society and soon, we hope, as a Member of the United
Nations. We do not wish to enter any competition
with other Powers. To begin with, we do not pretend
to be inspired, in our actions, by entirely unsehish
interests and aims-we are, after all, human beingsbut we certainly try our best to serve in the first
instance the interests of the peopIe of AngoIa, of
Africa and of the world community as a whole, at least
as we see them.

“3.. They consider that. it is for’the Angolan
people themselves to decide their own destinies.
They therefore keenly appreciated the efforts made
by the Organization of. African Unity to find an
Afric.an solution to the probIe.ms. involved and
reframed from any action that might jeopardize the
success of those efforts. With that consideration
in mind, they condemned a11outside miIitary intervention and expressed the sincere hope that a
speedy end would be put to such intervention. In
the interests of the prosperity of the region, they
look forward to the. establishment of pe.acefuI and
constructive co-operation, which will call for goodneighbourly relations between the African States of
the region.

60. The Italian Government has from the outset
watched the development of the process leading to the
establishment of AngoIa as a free African country
favourably and sympathetically. Italy did not fail, even
before the felicitous conclusion of that process, to give
its support to the legitimate aspirations for independence of all the populations of the former Portuguese
territories. As I recalled on 17 March [1891st meeting],
ItaIy, acting unilaterally or with its partners and allies,
never ceased in past years to press Portugal for the

“4. The Ministers confirmed-the basic positions
of the nine member States of the Community:
-Readiness of the Nine to develop- ties of cooperation, in so far as they are desired by the
8

African States, and rejection of any action by any
State aimed at establishing a zone of influence in
Africa;

65. From what I have said it should be clear, I believe,
that my delegation would look favourably on any
proposal based on the following points: first, the
interests of the Angolan people; secondly, the lack of
justification
for the violation by South Africa of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s
Republic of Angola and the utilization of the intemationai Territory of Namibia to the same effect; thirdly,
the responsibility
of the Security Council, which
transcends the interests of each of its members; and
fourthly, the ending of any outside interference in
Angola which would increase the present danger of
power politics and negatively affect any prospect for
a peaceful and positive solution of the whole complex
situation in the southern part of Africa. We feel that
there is no better way to help the people of Angola,
after many years of fighting, peacefully to build their
new nation, which deserves the respect of all’of us.

’ -Respect
ibr the independence of all African
States and their sovereign right to .decide their
national policy without foreign interference;
-Support
for the action of the Organization of
African Unity to promote African co-operation;
-The right to self-determination.
and independence of the Rhodesian and Namibian peoples;
-Condemnation
South Africa.”

of the policy of apartheid

of

63. The withdrawal of the South African forces from
Angola three days ago is a positive development.
We
should like to see similar moves follow from other
sides. ‘In this connexion, I should like to read a communique delivered a few days ago at Luxembourg by
the current Chairman of the European Community:

66. In spite of contentious
circumstances
and in
spite of a situation characterized by terrible human
suffering in Angola, as I have already said, we have
faith in the future of the Angolan people. We believe
in more favourable prospects; we pin our hopes on
peace.

“The member States ofthe European Community
welcome the withdrawal by the Government of the
Republic of South Africa of its forces from Angoian
territory. Convinced that the immediate withdrawal
of South African troops from.Angoia will contribute
to the solution of the problems of the area in the
direction advocated, on 16 March 1976 the Nine
made the following representation
to the South
African Government.

67. We take this opportunity to assure the Angolan
people and Government of our support. We extend our
hand in friendship to them. We rejoice in particular
over the news that they intend to join the Organization.
We wish them well and we wish them the cessation
of any act of aggression. For our part, we assure them
of deliveries and expeditions only of the sort that
have already taken place in the field of economic
collaboration.

“ ‘The member States of the European Community, which through their ministerial declaration
of 23 February condemned foreign military interventions and expressed the firm hope that they would
be rapidly brought to an- end, for that purpose
insist that the South African Government
immediately proceed with the withdrawal of its troops
from Angolan territory.’ “*

(interpretation
from French):
68. The PRESIDENT
The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
69. Mr. ALLAF (Syrian Arab Republic): Mr. President, permit me, first of all, to thank you and the other
members of the Council for providing me with the
opportunity
to take part in the Council’s present
consideration of South Africa’s aggression against the
people of Angola. The Arab nation, victim itself of
racist and colonialist aggression, cannot but express
full support for and solidarity with the heroic struggle .’
of the African brother people against one of the few,
yet the ugliest, of the remaining racist regimes in
today’s world.

64. We shall abstain, for our part, from entering into
a detailed examination of the motivations put forward
by different parties on the basis of some disclosed
facts, which it would take too long to verify, as well
as of many unknown facts which we shall not learn
about for a long time to come, if ever. What we have
essentially in mind is the gradual consolidation
in
Angola of those conditions which we feel are indispensable to enable any country to attain unimpeded
development
of its institutions
and social and
economic life. My delegation identifies those conditions in this case in the absence of any use of force
or threat of aggression from South Africa, in freedom
from all outside interference
and in unhampered
efforts for the unity of the country, together with its
full participation in the international common quest for
peace and security.

70. The South African racist regime was not content,
apparently with its criminal policy of apartheid against
the indigenous majority of the South African people,
nor with its continued aggressive and illegal occupation
of Namibia. It is now using the usurped Territory of
Namibia to invade Angoian territory, thus aggravating
even further an already grave act of continued aggression on the African continent.

* Quotetl in. French by the speaker.

9

71. The statement of the Prime Minister of the South
African racist minority regime in Cape Town 10 days
ago [S/12029, annex I], is not only an arrogant
admission of the colonialist nature of that regime,
but also, as is clear from the letter of 23 March from
the representative of Portugal to the Secretary-General
[S/12023], a shameful coilection of lies and deliberately
distorted facts. The letter of the representative of
Portugal affirms clearly that South Africa’s troops
penetrated Angolan territory on 9 August 1975without
the knowledge or the authorization of the Government
of Portugal, which was at the time still claiming for
itself the exercise of sovereignty over Angola.
72. The pretext advanced by the leaders of the racist
regime in Pretoria, in a vain attempt to justify their
premeditated aggression against the People’s Republic
of Angola, is the customary pretext used by all
colonialists and aggressors: “We did this solely for
the purpose of protecting the lives of the workers
and safeguarding the installations”; “because of the
complete breakdown of law and order we were forced
to occupy the dam sites”; “they asked us to hang
on until such time as they could do it; they never
came, and it is solely for that reason and not for any
ulterior motives that we are still there”.
73. How obedient those racists of South Africa
are! They are there just because they were asked to
be there, allegedly, by one country, Portugal. If they
are so obedient, why then do they not heed the other
repeated requests by some 140 Member States to
evacuate Namibia and cease their policy of apartheid
against the legitimate South African majority? All
aggressors try to justify their aggression by using the
pretext of protecting lives and property. Yet in committing their aggression they do not hesitate to spread
death and destruction in the territories which fall
under their occupation.

threat to international peace and sect&y and,a danger
to the independence and territorial integrity of
Namibia’s neighbours. South Africa has no common
borders with Angola, and without its illegal occupation
of Namibia its present aggression against the People’s
Republic of Angola would not- have been possible, or
at least would not have been that easy.
76. Therefore, in addition to the need to verify the
claimed completion of the withdrawa on 27 March
of South African troops from the People’s Republic of
Angola, the Security Council must also ensure the
complete withdrawal of South Africa’s forces from
Namibia and must take effective measures to prevent
any repetition of the South African aggression against
Namibia, the People’s Republic of Angofa or any other
African country having or not having common borders
with South Africa. South Africa’s aggression against
the People’s Republic of Angola must not remain
unpunished. It must be condemned‘most severely by
the Council, and the racist white- minority South
African regime must compensate the Government and
people of Angola for the great losses in human lives
and material property which resulted from South
Africa’s aggression. The South African aggressors
should release all the prisoners- and hostages that they
have abducted.from Angola and restore all the equipment and property that they looted during their
invasion.
77. In this connexion, the draft resolution distributed
in document S/12030and sponsored by Benin, Guyana,
the Libyan Arab Republic, Panama, Romania and
the United Republic of Tanzania is the minimum that
the Council can do. My delegation does not interpret
the last paragraph of the preamble of that draft,
“Noting the letter of the Permanent Representative
of South Africa’*, as giving-any credence to the false
and rejected arguments contained in that letter.
78. it is very significant that the representative of
the Pretoria regime in his intervention yesterday
followed the same pattern which is usually used by
ail colonialists and aggressors. Mr. Botha wondered
why the Council was meeting to discuss his regime’s
aggression against the Angolan people, saying “there
are other flash-points in the world which should
demand the urgent attention of the Council” (190&h
meeting, para. 931. A simiIar stupid argument was
used only a few days ago by the representative of
another racist regime, in Tel Aviv, who also wondered
why the Council was wasting its-time considering the
Israeli crimes against the Arab population in the
occupied territories.

74. The representative of Angola, Ambassador Pascal
Luvualu, whose presence my delegation salutes as
the representative in the Security Council of his heroic
people, described in his statement on 26 March
{19OOth meeting] the atrocities and the barbaric
massacres that were committed by the South African
racists against the civilian Angolan population. He
also enumerated the pillaging, looting and destruction
carried out by the Pretoria soldiers and the abduction
of thousands of persons. Nothing whatsoever could
justify those crimes by South Africa’s white minority
regime, much less, of course, the ridiculous claim
by that racist regime of wanting to protect the lives
and interests of the people of Namibia. For how
could an aggressor andoppressorof that very Namibian
people like the racist South African regime pretend’to
protect the people who are its victims?

79. This common racist logic is not surprising, given
the identical nature of the racist. settlers itl Shtli
Africa and the racist settlers in occupied’ Palestine
and other Arab territories. It is also not surprising
that the representative of the racist South African
regime should, in an attempt to divert the Council’s
attention from the crimes of his authorltie~s,remind it

75. South Africa’s illegal presence in Namibia, in
addition to constituting an act of aggression against
the Namibian people and a continued violation of their
national and human rights, has proved to be a
10

of similar crimes being committedatthis very moment
by the Zionist racist regi,meagainst the Arab population
in the occupied territories, for newspapers and television screens these days are full of photographs of girls
and boys and. elderly men and women subjected to
the atrocious brutalities of the Israeli soldiers.

proof of this. And it is precisely within this context
that we should analyse them. They are a promising
augury for the total liberation from oppression,, aggression and interference that will come quite soon to the
peoples of Africa, and this in spite of that very
oppression, aggression and interference.

80. The repeated crimes and acts of aggression
committed by the South African racist regime against
the African people inside and outside South Africa
.would not have been possible without the overt and
covert encouragement and support of certain colonialist Powers, just as the crimes and repressive acts
committed by the Zionist racist regime would not
have been possible either, without the strong support
of such Powers and sometimes of the same Powers.

85. Mr. President, the honour is yours to preside
over these most important proceedings. We the Members of the United Nations have the satisfaction and
the benefit of knowing that our work is being conducted with such competence and dignity. It is a
pleasure for me to acknowledge this and to thank you
and the other members of the Council for having
given me this opportunity to participate in this work.
86. The way in which the South African authorities
have tried to justify their illegal occupation of part of
the territory in southern Angola has changed curiously
over the last few months, and this fact of itself illustrates the total lack of justification for their claims.

81. Our African brothers in Angola, Namibia,
Zimbabwe and, in fact, in allthe African continent no
doubt realize why the Arab countries are so enthusiastic and so sincere in their unconditional support of
the struggle of the African people against racism and
colonialism.. It is because.t-he Arab people suffer from
the same evils and because they are determined to
struggle against colonialism, racism, apartheid and
Zionism and any other oppressive ideology wherever it
exists. The Syrian Arab Republic feels that in defending
the cause of the Angoian people it is defending its
own cause, for the cause of freedom is indivisible.

87. In November 1975, Mr. Botha, Defence Minister
of South Africa, claimed publicly that South African
troops had penetrated Angolan territory with the
knowledge and prior agreement of the Portuguese
Government in order to protect work on the hydroelectric installation at Calueque. This argument of the
South African Government-which,
incidentally,
was put forward after my statement in the plenary
meeting of the General Assembly on 21 November,Z
in which I repeated in quite unambiguous terms the
protests of my Government against the invasion of the
territory of Angola by South African troops-was
immediately rebutted and rejected by my Government,
as can be seen by reading the press release published
by the Permanent Mission here in New York on
24 November last.

82. In concluding, permit me to express once more
the warmest sentiments of welcome to Mr. Pascal
Luvualu, the representative of the People?s Republic
of Angola, and the hope to see his heroic country
occupying the seat it deserves in the Organization as
soon as possible.
83. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Portugal.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

88. This falsehood was denounced by the Portuguese
Government, which had no knowledge whatsoever
beforehand of the invasion committed by the South
African forces, and South Africa was accordingly
obliged to abandon its initial version of the facts and
consequently presented a new official argument.
Indeed, on 21 March in the statement circulated as
document S/12019, Mr. Vorster, Prime Minister of
South Africa, claimed that troops from his country had
entered Angoian territory on 9 August 1975to protect
the Calueque installations and that the Portuguese
Government had been immediately apprised of this.
There was no longer any question of prior permission
given by the Portuguese Government but simply of
knowledge ex post facto of the invasion and of a
supposed request to the South African Government
that it would undertake protection of the dam until
this task could be performed by the military forces of
my country. But this version is not true either. That
is why I was determined to deny it categorically in
the letter which I sent on 23 March to the SecretaryGeneral, distributed in document S/12023. The feeble
argument which the South African Government tried

84. Mr. GALVAO TELES (Portugal) (interpretation
On 25 April 1974, almost two years ago,
the Portuguese people freed itself from the political
regime which had been oppressing it for almost
50 years. Since its liberation it has realized that its
struggle was also that of the peoples which were under
Portuguese colonial domination, that. its victory was
also that of those peoples. Thus, with the fall of the
Portuguese colonial regime, new prospects opened
up for the peoples of Africa in their struggle against
oppression and foreign domination. The independence
of Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Sao Tome and
Principe and Angola was a first, albeit an essential,
stage. From that moment on, the political-military
balance was profoundly changed in southern Africa.
Both Rhodesia and South Africa realized this, as did
the.great Powers. The debates which have been going
on this month in the Council-that concerning Mozambique and Rhodesia and the present one in which
Angola and South Africa confront each other-are

from French):

11

\

to use in order to justify its illegal occupation of a
foreign territory was thus totally undermined. The
various countries which in the course of this debate.
have mentioned our letter of 23 March understood
this perfectly.

we must clarify. Saying that it was a quotation, he
stated: “ ‘the present situation must be accepted, but
that they’-the Portuguese+‘requested that everything possible be done to avoid any direct confrontation’ ” [ibid., paru. 10.31.It is apparently this sentence,
the partemity of which has not been revealed to us,
which forms the basis of South Africa’s argument as
to the- consent of the Portuguese Government with
regard to the presence of South Africa troops in the
Calueque region. Now I should like to state most
categorically that my Government has no idea from
what document this sentence-this shred of a senten&,
I might say-was taken. It is certainly not any document subscribed to by the Portuguese. authorities.
Quite the contrary, everything suggeststhat it is simply
an assumption made by the South African Ambassador
and communicated to this Government following the
interview I have mentioned, It is therefore a communication devoid of any value.
.

89. That was sufftcient to make the Government of
South Africa feel obliged to present a new version of
the facts or, more precisely, new proof, timid and quite
unconvincing, of a so-called request on the part of
Portugal that South African troops should remain in
Angolan territory. Indeed, in his statement yesterday
[190+/r meeting], the representative of South Africa,
in presenting a detailed version of, the events and
in an attempt to demonstrate that the. Portuguese
Government had agreed that South African troops
should remain on Angolan territory then under
Portuguese administration, recalled certain facts
which I propose to analyse.
90. First, according to claims of the representative of
South Africa, the Ambassador of his country in Lisbon
‘is. supposed to have received instructions on 8 August
1975to request the’portuguese authorities, as a matter
of urgency, to ensure the security of the region of the
dam in order to protect the workers and safeguard the
equipment; but it was only on 11 August that a brief
memorandum to this effect was handed to the Foreign
Minister of Portugal. Now Mr. Vorster expressly
acknowledged in his statement of 21 March that the
‘occupation of the Calueque zone by troops of his
country had taken place on 9 August, or two days
before the transmittal of this memorandum to the
Portuguese authorities. This then once again demonstrates that the Portuguese authorities had no prior
knowledge of the invasion of the territory of Angola by
South African forces.

93. Fourthly, again according to the statement of the
representative of South Africa, on 2 September- the
Foreign Ministry of Portugal addressed a note to the
South African Embassy in Lisbon, and, indeed.,.in this
note the Ministry reminded the Embassy of the conditions in which the violation- of Angolan territory in
Calueque had taken place and. the protests consequently made by the Portuguese Government to-the
South African Government. It is regrettable- that in
transcribing certain passages of this note the representative of South Africa should have omitted precisely
those paragraphs which correspond to the protests
made at that time, as we have just pointed out, and
which removed all the legality that is claimed for the
armed occupation of Calueque. It should be noted that
paragraph 5 of the note quoted by the representative
[ibid., paru. 1051 contains a request, to the. South
African Government to take the necessary steps for
the removal of the South African forces from Calueque,
and this following upon paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of the
note; which state in absoiuteIy clear terms that
Portugal in no way considered legitimate the presence
of South African military forces on the territory of
Angola.

91. Secondly, again according to the representative
of South Africa, on 12 August the Portuguese Ambassador to Pretoria was summoned to the Foreign Office
of South Africa in order to be informed of an armed
action undertaken by South Africa-three days earlier,
as can be seen. What the representative of South
Africa omitted to say was that the Portuguese Ambassador there and then protested in clear-cut and
unequivocal terms against such a serious violation of
frontiers and against what consequently constituted
an attack on the sovereignty of Angola. This is explicity
mentioned in the diplomatic note handed over on
2 September by the Portuguese Government to the
South African Government.

94. Fifthly and finally, the representative of South
Africa claimed that:
“in the last week of September an emissary from-the
Portuguese High Commissioner in Luanda informed
the South African authorities that the High Commissioner had asked him to say that the Portuguese
authorities would Iike our troops to stay until a
take-over by the new Government of Angola, and
he implied it wouldbe the MPLA”. [Ibid., pm-u. 108.1

92. Thirdly, the representative of South Africa also
claimed that the Ambassador of his country had in
the meantime been called to the Foreign Ministry
in Lisbon where once again the concern of the Portuguese Government at the conduct of the South African
military authorities was communicated to him; this,
too, is contained in the afore, mentioned diplomatic
note. In this regard, the representative of South Africa
made an ambiguous quotation in this Council which

Here then is the second “fact” on which the South
African Government is apparently basing its allegation of the agreement of the Portuguese Govermment
to the stationing of South African troops in the
Calueque region, the first being the quotation without
an author which I mentioned just now and which
12

annears to originate with the South African authorities
themselves, g circumstance which quite obviously
deprives it of all significance. It is quite clear that this
second “fact” has no value either and cannot possibly
be used to justify the attitude of the South African
Government. Indeed, the representative of South
Africa himself recognizes that the question of the
presence of his country’s troops in Angola in the
Calueque region’ was dealt with between the two
Governments at the highest level, through the diplomatic representatives accredited to the two capitals,
and this was even the subject of a diplomatic note
the content of which was communicated to the
Secretary-General.
95. In the circumstances, how can the South African
Government now claim justification’for its action or,
what is even more serious, attempt to make my Govemment equally guilty of that action by basing itself on
the statements of an imaginary envoy of the High
Commissioner, statements supposedly made at a time
and a place which are not made clear, and whiCh,
furthermore, are not in writing? How can it now claim
greater significance for the imaginary oral statements
of an unknown envoy of the High Commissioner in
Luanda than for the written and oral statements
made by the Portuguese Government and transmitted
at the appropriate time by diplomatic channels to the
Government of South Africa, which latter statements
leave no doubt whatsoever as to the categorical and
formal rejection by my Government of the invasion of
the Calueque region. by South African troops?
96. Whatever the cost to South Africa, Portugal is
not ready to provide unjustly any shiled, pretext or
justification for the invasion of the territory of Angola.
A quotation of unknown source, which in the final
analysis seems to have come from the South African
authorities themselves, and an imaginary statement
of an envoy of the Portuguese High Commissioner
cannot possibly destroy the validity of diplomatic
protests, of written notes and of public statements
in which Portugal has repeatedly affirmed and reafllrmed its opposition to the armed action undertaken
by the Pretoria Government, an opposition which
I once again confirm here in all solemnity.
97. It is to be pointed out that the allegation of the
South African representative that his Government had
received a request from the Portuguese Govemment to remain in the territory of Angola is not only
untrue, it is not even relevant. If such a request had
existed, it would only have been relevant in so far as
it meant that South Africa maintained troops in Angola
because its presence there had the agreement of the
Government responsible for the territory, which agree‘ment could legitimize the stationing of its troops in
foreign territory.

98. But what is true is that, at least from the moment
when the sovereignty of Portugal as administering
Power in Angola came to an end, it became even more
absurd to claim that South African troops were in
Angola-at least they were until three days ago-with
the consent of the respective Governments. In other
words if the South African Government were really
convinced that the occupation of Calueque was made
legitimate by the consent of the responsible Govemment of the territory, and if South African troops were
‘there only for that reason, the South African Govemment should have withdrawn them immediately after
the proclamation of Angola’s independence on 11 November 1975. we cannot see the purpose of claiming
the existence of a request which never existed and
which in any case could not have justified keeping
South African troops in Angola until 29 March 1976,
just as it could not have been used to justify other
incursions of the same troops into Angolan territory.
Furthermore, these incursions, which were at the time
condemned by the Portuguese Government, particularly in the Fourth Committee and in the General
Assembly, cannot fail to raise the most well-founded
doubts about the true reasons for the prsence of South
African troops in the Calueque region.
99. In making this statement the Portuguese delegation wished primarily to clarify certain questions, as it
was its duty, and to present the dorrect version of the
facts brought to the Council’s attention. That seemed
to the Portuguese delegation the most useful and
constructive contribution it could make to the
Council’s deliberations at this time.
100. However, I do not want to let this opportunity
pass without expressing, on behalf of my Govemment-and I do so with the greatest satisfaction-our
support for the Government of the People’s Republic of
Angola in its struggle to ensure, in the full exercise of
its prerogatives as a sovereign State, that its territorial
integrity is guaranteed and respected. Angola is now
an independent country, and its true freedom is being
built day by day. That independence was won at the
price of so much sacrifice. There is still a long and
hard path to tread before that freedom is truly attained.
A new Portugal too is under construction. It is on
behalf of that new Portugal that I greet the people of
Angola, in the certainty that it will build a new Angola,
truly free, independent, progressive and unified.
The meeting

rose at 1.35 p.m.

Notes
’ A/AC.115/L.430, p. 24.
2 Official Records of the General Assembly,
Plenary Meetings, 2414th meeting.

Thirtieth

Session,

._.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS

PUBLKXlTONS

United Nations publicationsmay be obtainedfrom bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, SalesSection,New York or Geneva.

.

COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publicationsdes Nations Unies sont en vcntedansles lib@iri.eset la agencesdQositahes du
mondeentier.Informez-vous aup& de votre tibrain ou aaresscz-vousP : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes. New York ou Genhe.

R3AaxxK
Opraxu3aqxu
OCiaenxnexxbxx
3Hxax
x areHTcTBax
so Kcex
pafioHax
eameld
Kxxxcxou
xara3xxe
xtnx nitmuTe
H~qxR,Ce~qxf1no~po~a~ex3~axxR.Hbm-PIopKunnlSCexeKa.

HauxR
~oxcxo
Kynxra
B Kxuxtxblx
SMiYsxupa.
?hBCIgHTe
CnpaaKH
06 AJAaxHflX
B
no anpecy:Oprann3aunx
06aeAuxexxblx

COMO CONSECUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicacionesde las Naciones Unidat esdn en venta en lib&as y casasdistniuidoras cn
todas partes de1mundo. Consulte a su $brero a dirijasea: NacionesUnidas. Secci6nde Ventas,
Nuew York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United Nations, New York

00300

8360801-Aug(lst 1984-2,200

. . .
