S/PV.7623

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7623rd meeting

Tuesday, 16 February 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ramírez Carreño . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of))

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Mahmoud
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Second report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution
2233 (2015) (S/2016/77)
Ninth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security
Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2016/87)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-03969 (E)
*1603969*

S/PV.7623

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

This success also demonstrates the increasingly
resolute and effective support provided to Iraq by the
Global Coalition to Counter ISIL in its fight against ISIL
and provides lessons for preparations for the liberation
of the remaining territories, most notably of Mosul. It
serves as an encouragement to other members of the
international community to assist Iraq in combating
ISIL.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Second report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution 2233
(2015) (S/2016/77)
Ninth report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution
2107 (2013) (S/2016/87)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Iraq to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/77, which contains the second
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
7 of resolution 2233 (2015), as well as to document
S/2016/87, which contains the ninth report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution
2107 (2013).
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: In the past reporting period, the heroic
people of Iraq have been steadily gaining ground
against the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), which is gradually losing its appeal to
the disenfranchised population. The liberation and
holding of Beiji, Sinjar and, most of all, Ramadi, and the
continuing clearance of the surrounding areas of ISIL
fighters, have instilled in the people of Iraq the hope
that the country can and will be liberated from ISIL.
It has also documented how important it is to rely on
local and tribal fighters from areas under ISIL control
to participate in the liberation and take responsibility
for the security of their cities and provinces.
2/6

16/02/2016

The terrorist organization ISIL, with its radical
ideology and policies of sectarianism, violent extremism
and terrorism, constitutes a global and unprecedented
threat to international peace and security. Combating
ISIL by all means is a priority of the whole international
community, and Member States are called upon to
redouble and coordinate their efforts.
Following the 18 December 2015 meeting of
the Security Council (see S/PV.7589), bilateral and
diplomatic efforts, assisted by international partners
and the United Nations, continue to resolve the issues
of the presence of Turkish forces in Camp Bashiqa, so
far without mutually acceptable results. I reiterate the
calls made by the Secretary-General for a solution in
line with the Charter of the United Nations and in full
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Iraq. I also urge both sides to take steps that will enable
the deepening of cooperation in the field of security and
continuous support to Iraq in fighting ISIL, based on
consultations with and full consent of the Government
of Iraq.
Regardless of those successes, ISIL remains a
formidable and determined enemy that constantly
adjusts its tactics and attack patterns, taking into
account also the developments in Syria. ISIL cannot be
defeated by military means alone without addressing
the root causes of violence and the underlying ideology;
otherwise their effect will not be sustainable and lasting.
Military victories need to be complemented by massive
stabilization and rehabilitation efforts that prioritize and
allow for the safe return of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) to their towns of origin. Simultaneously, Iraqis
must prioritize political and community reconciliation.
The lack of progress in implementing the national
political agreement reflects the absence of political
consensus and the continued pursuit of partisan
interests. The stability, security and unity of Iraq
hinge on an effective and inclusive political system
and equality in decision-making at the federal and
local levels. Tangible solutions to prevent political and
16-03969

16/02/2016

The situation concerning Iraq

sectarian exclusion have to include amendments to or
the adoption of priority legislation, followed by swift
implementation, such as the justice and accountability
law, the national guard law and the general amnesty
law. Efforts by Sunni political forces and their leaders
to unify their stance on national reconciliation,
effective federalization and decentralization, and
how to more successfully counter ISIL are equally
necessary. I welcome such steps provided they add to
internal consolidation and not divisions, while urging
Sunni leaders and forces to continue such activities in
the most inclusive manner possible.
In early January, lethal attacks in Baghdad and
in Muqdadiya, in Diyala governorate, perpetrated by
ISIL and revenge violence by rogue militia elements
and criminal groups prompted concern that the nation
was again continuing down a spiralling trajectory of
sectarian violence, compounded by internal political
divisions along sectarian lines, as well as regional
tensions and context. Those attacks were an attempt
to further stoke sectarian tensions and political
polarization in Iraq and weaken the unity of Iraq and
its people. They also highlighted the urgent need to
reach progress in intercommunal relations and swiftly
restore State and local authority, the rule of law, good
governance, justice and the provision of services to
the newly liberated areas and exert firm control over
all fighters and weapons. Security sector reform
addressing the issue of uncontrolled armed groups and
their presence in cities, notably in liberated areas, is a
priority.
Stabilization in liberated areas and the safe return
of IDPs are of enormous political importance. I am
happy to report that the stabilization phase of Tikrit is
almost complete. Overall, the Government has given
very high priority to returns and so far, more than
500,000 displaced Iraqis have returned to their home
communities. The Government expects that up to
900,000 will return in 2016.
There are, however, a number of complicated
factors impacting the pace of returns. These include
a huge number of improvised explosive devices that
have been laid by ISIL and that must be removed before
populations can return home, as well as devastating
destruction to infrastructure and homes. We are seeing
this right now in Ramadi. I call on Iraq’s regional and
international partners to enhance their support to the
Government of Iraq’s efforts to hold and stabilize areas
retaken from ISIL. Those efforts also ought to focus on

S/PV.7623

building the capacity of local security and police forces
through training and material support.
Persistent political polarization and divisions
continue to hamper Prime Minister Al Abadi’s
ability to advance the reform agenda, including in
decentralization and fighting corruption. The Prime
Minister’s recent announcement aimed at establishing
a more professional Cabinet with members selected on
merit, and not on sectarian or political quotas, should
be accompanied by an accelerated implementation
of a genuine political, security and economic reform
package. The complex and deepening set of challenges
before the country and its people requires that the
political blocks finally work together in support of
comprehensive and profound reforms, as they did when
adopting the budget for 2016.
Iraq’s persistent and rapidly deepening fiscal crisis
and growing budget deficit, compounded by the security
and humanitarian situation and drastic decline in global
oil prices, has almost halved the State’s planned income
since then, and the Kurdistan region faces at least a
situation as grave as that of Baghdad. Fiscal challenges
are also likely to impact the fight against ISIL, as a
significant number of fighters, notably the Peshmerga,
have not received salaries for several months.
I am mindful that, if left unaddressed, such an
unsustainable situation may seriously undermine
the renewed morale of pro-Government forces and
the confidence of the people — including youth,
communities, minorities and IDPs — that they can
have a future in Iraq. And while the Governments in
Baghdad and Erbil must rapidly prioritize and take full
ownership over the State finances and reforms, I urge the
international community to assist Iraq in overcoming
those difficulties through increased technical support
and funding, including through lending by international
and regional financial institutions. Genuine economic
reforms by the governments in Baghdad and Erbil could
pave the way for such financial and budgetary support.
The severe economic crisis is having a sobering
effect on the relationship between Baghdad and Erbil,
with both sides showing renewed will to work together,
militarily and economically, including on reforms. I
am therefore hopeful that realism and pragmatism will
prevail and help boost efforts in ensuring the stability
and prosperity of Iraq, including the Kurdistan region,
needed to continue jointly the existential fight against
ISIL.

16-039693/6

S/PV.7623

The situation concerning Iraq

16/02/2016

The humanitarian crisis in Iraq is highly complex
and is expected to widen and worsen this year. Today,
not only 3.3 million IDPs, but altogether some 10 million
Iraqis — almost one-third of the population — urgently
require some form of humanitarian assistance. Let
us not forget that without the necessary support,
today’s IDPs will become tomorrow’s refugees. The
humanitarian needs are now so great they far outstrip
national capacities. The Government of Iraq and the
Kurdistan Regional Government simply do not have the
resources to keep providing assistance, not because of
a lack of will or a reluctance to assume responsibility,
but because of the grave economic and fiscal situation.

Security Council that yesterday we received the news
that the staff member of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq who was abducted in Diyala in April
2015, Mr. Al-Kaissy, has been found dead. I am deeply
shocked and saddened by this news. I strongly urge the
Iraqi authorities to conduct a thorough and transparent
investigation into this abduction and murder
immediately and to hold the perpetrators accountable.
I would like to remind the Government of Iraq that the
national authorities bear full responsibility for serving
justice in this case, just as they do for safeguarding and
protecting all United Nations personnel serving in the
country.

On 31 January, the United Nations, jointly with the
Government of Iraq, launched a humanitarian appeal
requesting $861 million to help ensure that the most
vulnerable people receive the assistance they need.
On top of that, a potential catastrophe from the Mosul
developmentam adds new grave challenges and pressures
and requires urgent action by both the Government of
Iraq and the international community, including the
United Nations, as well as public awareness campaigns
and disaster-response plans, including the evacuation
of the affected population in case of such catastrophe.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
informative briefing.

Allow me to turn now to the ninth report of the
Secretary-General (S/2016/87) on the issue of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing
Kuwaiti property, including the national archives. As
part of the Government of Iraq’s reform programme,
the Council of Ministers agreed on the distribution of
the files formerly under the mandate of the Ministry
of Human Rights, deciding to transfer the technical
overview of the missing Kuwaiti persons file to the
Ministry of Defence. While this is a positive step, the
Government of Iraq must now implement the decision
and allocate the financial resources needed to ensure
that the work continues unabated.
Cooperation between Iraq and Kuwait continues
to reach new heights. In December, during the fifth
session of the Iraq-Kuwait Joint Ministerial Committee,
the parties signed agreements covering several fields,
including youth and sports, inspection and control, and
communications. Nonetheless, the Government of Iraq
continues to be under its international obligation to
ensure progress.
The United Nations continues to operate in difficult
and often dangerous conditions in Iraq. It is with
deep regret that I have to inform the members of the

4/6

I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by congratulating Venezuela on its
accession to the presidency of the Council this month
and by thanking the Venezuelan delegation for its
considerable efforts and transparency in organizing the
Council’s work in February. I would also like to thank
the delegation of Uruguay for its work in presiding
over the Council last month. I take this opportunity to
congratulate our sister nation Egypt on its membership
of the Council. We wish the Egyptian Ambassador and
his team every success in their work in service of Egypt
and the Arab world. I also congratulate Japan, Senegal,
Ukraine and Uruguay on their election to the Security
Council.
The Iraqi delegation would like to express its great
appreciation for the efforts of the Jordanian delegation
in representing the Group of Arab States in the Security
Council during the past two years. I am heartily grateful
to Mrs. Kawar and her team for their work on behalf
of the Arab region, which is currently going through
difficult times. And I thank Chad, Chile, Lithuania and
Nigeria for their efforts on the Security Council over
the past two years.
We offer our sincere condolences to the Egyptian
delegation, and indeed to all the staff of the United
Nations, on the passing of former Secretary-General
Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
I would like to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),

16-03969

16/02/2016

The situation concerning Iraq

and his team for their efforts. They have rendered great
service to Iraq at a very difficult time.
The
war
against
international
terrorism — which includes combatants from more
than 100 countries — together with the fall in oil
prices, the rebuilding of infrastructure and the
restoration of basic services for the displaced in
the cities that have been liberated from Da’esh, all
represent significant challenges for Iraq. Iraq now has
some 3 million internally displaced persons who left
the towns occupied by Da’esh in the wake of its acts
of terrorism and are now in urgent need of assistance
from the international community and international
organizations if they are to be able to deal with these
problems and their consequences. What is especially
needed is the provision of essential services for the
refugees and the displaced, including women, children
and ethnic and religious minorities, as well as the
establishment of conditions that will enable them to
return home and ensure their safety in the liberated
towns.
We are grateful to the United States and the
countries that have committed to helping to finance
stabilization programmes for Iraq’s liberated regions.
On behalf of my delegation, I would also like to thank
all the member States of the international coalition,
the countries of the European Union and other nations
that are not members of the coalition for the part they
have played in fighting terrorism and for the military
and logistical support they have given the Iraqi
security forces, while respecting Iraq’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. They have coordinated their action
with the security forces and have avoided bombing
civilian targets, in accordance with the message we
delivered through the Security Council in 2014. We
would also like to thank the Security Council for
urging the international community to strengthen its
assistance to the Government of Iraq in its efforts to
combat Da’esh and the armed groups affiliated with it.
We would first like to ask the Security Council
to encourage countries to implement resolutions 2170
(2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015), including those
provisions having to do with border controls and
halting the flow of fighters, as well as those related
to the prevention of access to arms, the Internet and
so forth. We also request that the Council demand
that Turkey withdraw the troops whose presence is a
violation of Iraqi sovereignty. The Government of Iraq
was not consulted about their entry into Iraq, which is a

S/PV.7623

flagrant violation of the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, the provisions of international law and
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The Government of Iraq pays tribute to the efforts
and the bravery of the Iraqi security forces and the tribal
combatants who are fighting together with them under
a unified central command. We pay tribute to them
for their military successes, including the retaking of
the western, northern and southern areas of the city of
Ramadi, and their continued and unflagging efforts
to liberate the eastern part of the city in order to be
able to return those displaced from it. These joint and
united forces continue to labour to fully retake the city
captured by Da’esh.
Iraq has continued to work to strengthen its ties to
other Arab countries and its neighbours, particularly
Kuwait, Jordan, Iran and Saudi Arabia. I should also
point out that we are in constant contact with the
Syrian Government. Iraq remains as fully engaged on
the judicial as on the military front. It is committed to
achieving progress on the Kuwaiti issue. The Secretary
responsible for this case, along with all of his employees,
has been transferred to the Ministry of Defence. All
the archives, bodies, equipment, databases and files
have also been transferred to the Ministry of Defence
along with him in order to guarantee that the work on
this issue continues. It was also done to guarantee the
continuation of hearings in order to obtain information
on the disappeared Kuwaitis and those disappeared
from third-party countries.
On 10 January, the Committee met with Mr. Falah
Daham, a witness from the Doha region in Kuwait,
in order to collect the information he possessed. The
Ministry for Foreign Affairs has continued to publish
announcements in the local press, without ceasing, in
order to encourage citizens to come forth and provide
any information they may have on the location of mass
graves, archives or any other Kuwaiti property.
Kuwait and Iraq are in constant communications in
order to update the project of delineating the borders.
The most recent event in that context was the highlevel meeting of the Iraq-Kuwait Joint Ministerial
Committee, which was held in Kuwait in December
2015. The participants in the meeting addressed a
number of issues, especially those of common interest
economically, politically, socially and environmentally.
Iraq is faithful to its commitments, especially
with regard to the protection of the residents of Camp

16-039695/6

S/PV.7623

The situation concerning Iraq

Hurriya. The Iraqi Council of Ministers is responsible
for working with Ms. Jane Holl Lute, the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General for Relocation of
Camp Hurriya Residents Outside of Iraq, who is
responsible for their assistance. She has visited a
number of different countries to convince them to take
in and host the residents of the Camp. We are working
with the Special Adviser to find a permanent situation
for the residents of the Camp.
Finally, we would like to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš and
his team for their assistance and for their very helpful

6/6

16/02/2016

advice provided to the Iraqi Government as well as for
the UNAMI activities in Iraq to create a unified, stable
Iraq without terrorists.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Iraq for his statement.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on this subject.
The meeting rose at 3.35 p.m.

16-03969
