A /75/PV.92

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

92nd plenary meeting

Wednesday, 21 July 2021, 11.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Arriola Ramírez
(Paraguay), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 11.30 a.m.
Agenda item 12
Improving global road safety
Draft resolution (A/75/L.109)
Draft amendment (A/75/L.114)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the representative of the United Kingdom
to introduce a draft amendment to draft resolution
A/75/L.109. The draft amendment is contained in
document A/75/L.114.
Mr. Reed (United Kingdom): I want to thank the
co-facilitators, Russia and Côte d’Ivoire, for their work
on draft resolution A/75/L.109. We look forward to
fully supporting the high-level meeting on improving
global road safety in 2022. However, we regret
that operative paragraph 12 of the draft resolution
represents a departure from recent consensus and seeks
to take the power of decision-making away from the
General Assembly.
We have put forward draft amendment A/75/L.114
with support from 41 other countries because we have
serious concerns about the restrictive language in
the draft resolution on civil-society access. That will
come as no surprise to Member States in this room,
as this is the fourth time that we have been asked to
opine on the matter. It is the same question every time.

This draft amendment is not controversial. Full civilsociety participation in this meeting has a long history,
and quite rightly. Road safety is an issue in which
civil society has played a critical role over the years.
But there is language in the draft under consideration
that will allow any Member State to arbitrarily and
unilaterally block any non-governmental organization
from anywhere in the world from participating in this
event. We are proposing the draft amendment to ensure
that their voices are heard.
I would like to make three points about the
draft amendment. First, it seeks to return the
General Assembly to the consensus approach of
the three modalities resolutions adopted early this
year — resolution 75/260, entitled “Organization of
the 2021 high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS”, resolution
75/282, entitled “Countering the use of information and
communications technologies for criminal purposes”
and resolution 75/283, entitled “Modalities, format and
organization of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on the appraisal of the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons” — and
of similar texts as far back as 2001.
Secondly, it amends the language from previous
resolutions on road safety modalities because that
language denied access for the voices of legitimate
partners, people with real experience on the issue,
people we ought to hear from and who can inform our
thinking with their knowledge and expertise.
Thirdly, our draft amendment does not remove,
check or control. It simply gives decision-making power

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-19953 (E)

*21XXXXX*

A/75/PV.92

back to the Assembly rather than to any single Member
State. It empowers us to take a corporate decision on
whom we can and cannot hear. It removes the power of
censorship from individual States. We therefore call on
all Member States to vote in its favour. Our ability to
hear from all the relevant voices in our global fight for
road safety depends on their support.
Ms. Sulaiman (Brunei Darussalam): I have
the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
At the outset, we would like to express our
appreciation to the Deputy Permanent Representatives
of Côte d’Ivoire and the Russian Federation and to
commend their efforts in their role as co-facilitators
of the intergovernmental process to define the scope
and modalities for the high-level meeting on improving
global road safety, on which draft resolution A/75/L.109
is to be adopted today.
Approximately 1.3 million people are killed
each year as a result of road traffic crashes. Between
20 million and 50 million more suffer non-fatal
injuries, with many incurring disabilities as a result of
their injuries. More than half of all road traffic deaths
are among vulnerable road users such as pedestrians,
cyclists and motorcyclists. There is no doubt that road
crashes are a major threat to public health and global
development. The initiative on raising awareness
in order to improve global road safety is therefore
very timely.
ASEAN is committed to doing its part to support
the General Assembly in achieving its target of halving
the global number of deaths and injuries from road
traffic crashes by 2030, as set out in resolution 74/299.
ASEAN’s efforts towards that end were reflected
through its adoption in 2004 of the Phnom Penh
Ministerial Declaration on ASEAN Road Safety, which
saw the establishment of an ASEAN multisector roadsafety working group to coordinate and oversee the
implementation of the ASEAN Road Safety Strategy
and Action Plan 2005-2010. On 6 November 2015,
recognizing the need to identify the key strategic
directions that could enable ASEAN Member States
to reduce their road fatalities by 50 per cent by 2020
and to work to further decrease the forecast level of
road fatalities in ASEAN countries by 2030, the
twenty-first ASEAN Transport Ministers Meeting
adopted ASEAN’s Regional Road Safety Strategy.
That document provided a framework for road safety
2/14

21/07/2021

strategies at the regional level in accordance with the
Decade of Action for Road Safety 2011-2020.
We are also committed to enhancing cooperation
and networking among national road safety centres in
ASEAN. We acknowledge the role of the Malaysian
Institute of Road Safety Research as an ASEAN road
safety centre in integrating the effort among ASEAN
Member States concerning road safety in the region.
As part of that commitment, the Institute organized
ASEAN’s Road Safety Week programme with the
theme of “Managing speed” from 17 to 23 May 2021,
in conjunction with the sixth Global Road Safety Week
2021 organized by the United Nations. Furthermore,
the Institute will organize the third conference on
ASEAN Road Safety this September in Malaysia.
The conference aims to bring together policymakers,
scientists, researchers, practitioners, law-enforcement
representatives, academicians and a wide range of
public and private organizations from the region with
an interest in the future of road safety. It will be a
premier platform for bringing together key players in
road safety within the South-East Asian region as well
as at the international level.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm ASEAN’s
commitment to improving global road safety and its
support for the successful convening of the high-level
meeting on improving global road safety in 2022.
Mr. Sharma (India): India welcomes the
opportunity to participate in this debate on the
important issue of global road safety. We would like
to thank the delegations of the Russian Federation and
Côte d’Ivoire for their work in bringing draft resolution
A/75/L.109 before us today.
We welcome the decision to organize a high-level
meeting of the General Assembly next year on improving
global road safety and look forward to adopting the
draft resolution on its scope, modalities and format
today. We believe that the meeting will be an important
platform for further accelerating our efforts to improve
global road safety, including supporting developing
countries in building their capacities and providing
financial and technical support for their efforts.
The issue of road safety is directly and importantly
linked to economic and social development as well
as public health, as is reflected in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and its Sustainable
Development Goals, particularly Goals 3 and 11. India
attaches great importance to addressing the problem
21-19953

21/07/2021

of road safety. As a developing country, India’s
economic growth relies in part on rapid expansion of
our infrastructure, including roads. We are therefore
acutely conscious of the imperative need to address
road safety and reduce the adverse consequences of
traffic accidents. The Government of India is actively
engaged in efforts to enhance road safety through
a multifaceted approach. Our Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways is the nodal body entrusted
with the responsibility of formulating policies for road
safety. Various initiatives being implemented include
grants and aid to non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) for organizing road safety programmes and
creating awareness, a national highway accident relief
service scheme, the establishment of model driving
training schools and refresher training for drivers of
heavy vehicles. Awards have also been instituted at
various levels to recognize important contributions to
road safety.
India is restructuring and strengthening “the four
E’s” of road safety, that is, engineering, enforcement,
education and emergency care services. They include
better and safer road engineering, more effective
legislation, improved vehicular safety standards,
training of drivers, improved trauma care and public
awareness-raising. Our recent enactment, in 2019, of a
Motor Vehicles Amendment Act is an important step
towards the improvement of the overall road safety
ecosystem in India. The law includes high penalties
for traffic violations and sections on the utilization
of documents, vehicular safety standards, sustainable
public transport, insurance-based reforms and the use of
an information-technology-based enforcement system.
In line with the direction of the Supreme Court of
India, the Government has issued detailed guidelines for
protecting bystanders who assist road accident victims,
also known as good Samaritans. Recognizing civil
society’s important role in improving road safety, the
Government is working closely with its representatives
and providing them with support, as it did last year
through its provision of financial assistance to more
than 300 NGOs for road safety advocacy programmes.
We strongly support efforts to increase cooperation
at the national, regional and global levels for achieving
road safety objectives. In New Delhi in 2017, India
hosted a forum for Transport Ministers in cooperation
with the International Road Federation. The forum
culminated in the signing of the Delhi Declaration,
which stressed key road-safety measures, including

A/75/PV.92

international legal instruments, capacity-building, road
infrastructure safety standards and the importance of
mobilizing funding. At the third Global Ministerial
Conference on Road Safety, held in Stockholm in
February last year, India committed to halving its road
accident deaths by 2030.
In conclusion, we firmly believe that international
cooperation is vital to assisting developing countries
in effectively addressing road safety issues. Adequate
financial resources, technical assistance, capacitybuilding, the sharing of best practices and advocacy are
crucial in that regard.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/75/L.109 and draft amendment A/75/L.114. In that
connection, I give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This oral statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of operative paragraphs 1, 3, 4,
6 and 13 of draft resolution A/75/L.109, in operative
paragraph 1 the General Assembly would decide that
the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
improving global road safety would be held in New
York in 2022, back-to-back with the high-level political
forum on sustainable development convened under the
auspices of the Economic and Social Council, with a
view to addressing gaps and challenges, mobilizing
political leadership, promoting multisectoral and
multi-stakeholder collaboration in that regard and
assessing the progress made in attaining the objectives
of the road safety-related targets of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
In operative paragraph 3, the General Assembly
further decides that the organizational arrangements
for the high-level meeting should be as follows. The
high-level meeting will consist of an opening segment,
a plenary segment, up to three multi-stakeholder
thematic panel discussions and a brief closing segment.
The opening segment, to be held from 10 to 10.30 a.m.
on the first day, will feature statements by the President
of the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session,
the Secretary-General, the Director-General of the
World Health Organization and the Special Envoy of

21-199533/14

A/75/PV.92

the Secretary-General for Road Safety. The plenary
segment, to be held from 10.30 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from
3 p.m. to 6 p.m. on the first day, and from 4.30 p.m. to
5.30 p.m. on the second day, will consist of statements by
Member States and observers of the General Assembly.
A list of speakers will be established in accordance with
the rules of procedure and established practices of the
Assembly, and the time limits for those statements will
be three minutes for individual delegations and five
minutes for statements made on behalf of a group of
States. The closing segment, to be held from 5.30 p.m.
to 6 p.m. on the second day, will consist of summaries
of the multi-stakeholder thematic panel discussions and
concluding remarks by the President of the Assembly.
In operative paragraph 4, the General Assembly
decides that the organizational arrangements for the
multi-stakeholder thematic panel discussions will be as
follows. Up to three multi-stakeholder panels will be
held from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 4.30 p.m.
on the second day. Each of the multi-stakeholder panel
discussions will be co-chaired by two representatives,
one from a developed and one from a developing
country, to be appointed by the President of the General
Assembly from among the senior representatives of
Member States attending the high-level meeting, in
consultation with Member States, taking into account
gender balance, level of development and geographical
representation. The themes of the multi-stakeholder
panels will take into consideration the road safety-related
targets of the 2030 Agenda, as well as the interactive
multi-stakeholder hearing, with a view to ensuring the
most effective and efficient outcomes and potential
deliverables and sharing experiences and lessons
learned in order to address remaining implementation
gaps. The President of the General Assembly should
also consider inviting parliamentarians, representatives
of local Governments, Heads or senior representatives
of Member States, relevant United Nations entities,
including the World Bank, development partners,
civil society, the private sector, academia, youthled organizations, medical associations, indigenous
leadership and community organizations to serve
as speakers in the panel discussions, taking into
account gender balance, level of development and
geographical representation.
In operative paragraph 6, the General Assembly
invites the President of the General Assembly, with
the support of the World Health Organization and the
United Nations regional commissions, in cooperation
4/14

21/07/2021

with other relevant partners, before the end of 2021,
as part of the preparatory process for the high-level
meeting, to convene, preside over and prepare a
summary of an informal one-day supporting event
consisting of two segments, as follows: an interactive
thematic dialogue on investment in road safety, to
be held from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., in order to discuss
the importance of road safety-related domestic and
international finance for achieving the road safetyrelated Sustainable Development Goal targets and
its broader positive impact on public health and the
economy; an interactive multi-stakeholder hearing, to be
held from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m., with the active participation
of representatives of Member States, observers of the
General Assembly, parliamentarians, representatives
of local Governments, relevant United Nations
entities, invited civil-society organizations, including
non-governmental organizations in consultative status
with the Economic and Social Council, philanthropic
foundations, academia and medical associations, as well
as the private sector and broader communities, so as to
ensure the participation and voices of women, children,
persons with disabilities, youth and indigenous leaders.
In operative paragraph 13, the General Assembly
decides that the proceedings of the high-level meeting
will be webcast, and encourages the President of the
General Assembly and the Secretary-General to give
the highest visibility to the high-level meeting, through
all relevant media platforms and information and
communications technologies.
With regard to operative paragraphs 1, 3 and 4, the
Secretariat understands that the high-level meeting to
be held in New York in 2022 would use the meeting
entitlements of the General Assembly. When such
meetings are held using entitlements of the Assembly, if
the meetings are held in a virtual or hybrid format rather
than an in-person format, the respective programme
would be adjusted to two hours per morning meeting
and two hours per afternoon meeting, taking into
consideration that remote simultaneous interpretation
is available for two hours per meeting only. Otherwise,
additional cost implications would arise that cannot be
met within the 2022 programme budget.
Furthermore, with regard to operative paragraphs 6
and 13, the Secretariat understands that the proceedings
of both the high-level meeting and the informal one-day
supporting event would require meeting coverage and
webcast services. While both services would entail
an additional workload for the Department of Global
21-19953

21/07/2021

Communications, the related resource requirements,
totalling $12,500, would be met within the programme
budget in the applicable year. Accordingly, the
adoption of draft resolution A/75/L.109 would not
entail any budgetary implications with regard to the
programme budget.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
we proceed to take a decision on draft resolution
A/75/L.109 and the draft amendment to it contained
in document A/75/L.114, delegations wishing to make
a statement in explanation of vote or position before
the adoption of or voting on the draft resolution and
the draft amendment are invited to do so now in
one intervention.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote or position, I would like to remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by representatives from their seats.
Mrs. Košir (Slovenia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
27 member States.
The candidate countries North Macedonia,
Montenegro, and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.

A/75/PV.92

between 15 and 29. Draft resolution A/75/L.109 has set
a goal of reducing road traffic deaths and injuries by at
least 50 per cent by 2030. All stakeholders should join
forces and share experiences to help achieve that goal.
The activities of civil-society organizations have played
a crucial role in this area for decades and continue to
make extensive contributions, as demonstrated by their
active participation in the third Global Ministerial
Conference on Road Safety in Stockholm in 2020 and
during the United Nations Global Road Safety Week
in May 2021. Civil-society organizations influence
decision-making through advocacy, provide essential
capacity-building in the global South and represent the
voices of vulnerable road users such as pedestrians,
cyclists and motorcyclists, as well as the rights of
crash victims. The high-level meeting will discuss
how to best improve global road safety with a view to
addressing gaps and challenges as well as mobilizing
political leadership and promoting multisectoral and
multi-stakeholder collaboration. In order for us to stay
informed, we need to hear about the experiences of all
involved. We cannot afford to leave such experiences
unheard. We cannot afford to be without the support of
any stakeholder when it comes to road safety.

Let me turn to the issue of civil-society participation
in the high-level meeting, which is a high priority for the
European Union and the reason why, together with others
in a broad cross-regional initiative, we have proposed
and sponsored draft amendment A/75/L.114, which will
not only provide more transparency but aims to restore
to the General Assembly the power of decision-making
on the participation of civil-society organizations.

We want to remind the Assembly that the draft
resolution explicitly foresees a role for multi-stakeholder
collaboration, including civil society. And yet in our
view the current proposal fails to provide space for
meaningful participation on the part of civil society. As
it stands now, the text of operative paragraph 11 states
that objections to the inclusion of organizations on the
list that the President of the General Assembly draws up
must be made transparent and explained. The EU and
its member States, together with other delegations, have
consistently raised strong concerns on various occasions
about the way in which previous non-objection clauses
have been abused. Rejections cannot be exercised in an
arbitrary manner. The final decision on the list of civilsociety organizations must be made by the General
Assembly itself, not by any individual Member State.
In our amendment, we therefore request that the final
decision on the list of civil-society organizations be
made by the General Assembly. We want to bring back
the power of decision to the Assembly.

With an estimated 1.3 million people killed on the
world’s roads every year and tens of millions seriously
injured, improving global road safety is a matter of
concern for all. Road traffic crashes are currently the
number-one killer globally among young people aged

Let me be clear on two issues. First, this is not
about any specific decision taken by any civil-society
organization. It is about ensuring that all voices are
heard and that experiences can be broadly shared.
We believe firmly that there are no reasons for the

We welcome today’s meeting and would like to
thank the President and the co-facilitators, Russia
and Côte d’Ivoire, for their efforts. Agreeing on the
modalities for the high-level meeting on improving
global road safety today is an important milestone for
the high-level meeting. We therefore welcome draft
resolution A/75/L.109.

21-199535/14

A/75/PV.92

United Nations and the General Assembly to be afraid
of hearing all voices in taking our decisions. I would
also like to emphasize that we would have favoured
a more open clause on participation by civil-society
organizations, as we proposed in the negotiations on
the draft resolution. However, we listened carefully
to delegations that consider a right of objection
important. The amendment was drafted in that spirit of
compromise with a broad, cross-regional coalition, and
it also represents a return to well-established United
Nations modalities from previous years.
Mr. Kelson (Australia): I am making this statement
on behalf of Canada, New Zealand and my own
country, Australia.
At the outset, we would like to express our
appreciation to Côte d’Ivoire and the Russian Federation
for their efforts on draft resolution A/75/L.109, and we
look forward to a successful high-level meeting on
improving global road safety in 2022.
Canada, Australia and New Zealand strongly
support inclusive and transparent approaches to civilsociety participation at United Nations events, meetings
and conferences. For that reason, we regret the inclusion
of language in operative paragraph 11 that would move
the General Assembly away from that principle. As
currently formulated, operative paragraph 11 would
allow any individual Member State to unilaterally
block a civil-society organization from participating in
the high-level meeting. That would remove the General
Assembly’s power to have a final say in the matter.
We therefore note with appreciation that the United
Kingdom has proposed a draft amendment to operative
paragraph 11 (A/75/L.114) that responds to the broad
support in this body for a more inclusive approach to
civil-society participation at United Nations meetings,
placing the final decision-making power back in the
hands of the General Assembly. Importantly, it also
aligns with language from the three most recently
adopted modalities texts, as well as the practices
of many General Assembly high-level events and
conferences over the years.
It is critical to see that the General Assembly
takes the necessary steps to ensure the meaningful
participation of civil society at United Nations
meetings. We therefore strongly urge all delegations to
vote in favour of the draft amendment.
Mr. Walter (United States of America): To
start with, the United States would like to thank
6/14

21/07/2021

the co-facilitators, Côte d’Ivoire and Russia, for all
the hard work that they have put into leading us in
these negotiations.
The United States appreciates the time that all
delegations devoted to negotiating this modalities
draft resolution (A/75/L.109). We value United Nations
efforts to promote and improve global road safety and
look forward to the high-level meeting on improving
global road safety next year. We strongly support the
draft amendment (A/75/L.114) proposed to operative
paragraph 11 of the draft resolution, which will
guarantee the inclusive participation of civil society
and ensure accountability and transparency by bringing
issues of concern to the whole General Assembly for a
decision. We therefore urge all members to vote in favour
of this important draft amendment today. Those same
modalities have also been adopted in recent resolutions,
including in the consensus modalities text on the Ad Hoc
Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International
Convention on Countering the Use of Information and
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes
(resolution 75/282). It is critical that through this draft
amendment today, we enable civil society’s meaningful
participation in order to ensure that its views are heard
and can inform our discussions on road safety at the
high-level meeting next year.
Mr. Liu Yang (China) (spoke in Chinese): My
delegation would like to explain its vote before the
voting on draft amendment A/75/L.114, introduced by
the United Kingdom.
Regarding the participation of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) in the high-level meeting on
improving global road safety, China believes that
draft resolution A/75/L.109, proposed by Côte d’Ivoire
and Russia, its co-facilitators, reflects the consensus
text formulated within the framework of the General
Assembly over the years. The consensus is that NGOs
with consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council are allowed to register with the Secretariat to
attend meetings, while other relevant NGOs may attend
meetings upon consideration by Member States on a
non-objection basis.
The consensus text not only ensures NGOs’
effective participation in the high-level meeting, it also
maintains the intergovernmental nature of meetings
held in the framework of the General Assembly. That is
reasonable, appropriate and in line with long-standing
Assembly practices. As examples, I would like to
21-19953

21/07/2021

point to recent General Assembly resolutions such as
72/243, on the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit, 73/292,
on the 2020 United Nations Conference to Support
the Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal
14, 73/303, on the commemoration of the twentyfifth anniversary of the International Conference on
Population and Development, 74/269, on the scope,
modalities, format and organization of the summit on
biodiversity, and 74/276, on the special session of the
General Assembly against corruption, to name just a
few. All of them reasonably and properly solved the
issue of NGO participation through this modality and
were adopted by consensus. I want to reiterate that all
those resolutions were adopted by consensus.
Regrettably, some countries have proposed a draft
amendment (A/75/L.114) on the participation of NGOs
that fundamentally weakens the role of Member States
in considering this matter on a non-objection basis,
undermines a balanced and pragmatic arrangement
that has been in place for years and deviates from a
consensus reached among the broad membership. For
that reason, China will vote against it.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote before
the voting.
Before proceeding further, I would like to inform
the Assembly that draft amendment A/75/L.114
has closed for e-sponsorship. I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
amendment, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft amendment A/75/L.114: Albania,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guinea-Bissau, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia,
Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands, North
Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Timor-Leste, Ukraine and the United States.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
we proceed to take a decision on draft resolution
A/75/L.109, in accordance with rule 90 of the rules of

A/75/PV.92

procedure, the Assembly will first take a decision on
draft amendment A/75/L.114.
A recorded vote has been requested on the
draft amendment.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Belarus, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, China, Comoros, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Guinea, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Madagascar, Mauritania, Nicaragua,
Pakistan, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sri Lanka, Syrian Arab Republic,
Uganda, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan,
Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, Ghana, Indonesia,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Malaysia, Mali, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Philippines, Sao Tome and Principe, Singapore,
South Africa, Trinidad and Tobago, United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Yemen, Zambia

21-199537/14

A/75/PV.92

Draft amendment A/75/L.114 was adopted by 81
votes to 36, with 30 abstentions.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
Since draft amendment A/75/L.114 is adopted, we
shall proceed to take a decision on draft resolution
A/75/L.109, as amended.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/75/L.109, as amended, entitled “Scope,
modalities, format and organization of the high-level
meeting on improving global road safety”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/75/L.109, as amended?
Draft resolution A/75/L.109, as amended, was
adopted (resolution 75/308).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor for explanations of vote or position
after the voting, I would like to remind the Assembly
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Ghadirkhomi (Islamic Republic of Iran): In a
spirit of constructive engagement, my delegation joined
the consensus on the adoption of resolution 75/308,
entitled “Scope, modalities, format and organization
of the high-level meeting on improving global road
safety”. However, we regret that the sponsor of the draft
amendment (A/75/L.114) to operative paragraph 11 of
the draft resolution was not able to agree to its previously
agreed language. We believe that the co-facilitators’
text for operative paragraph 11 was based on established
General Assembly practice providing for Member
States’ consideration of the list of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) on a non-objection basis,
whereas the new language, as contained in the
amendment adopted, interferes in the duties of the
Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations and
downgrades the consultative status with the Economic
and Social Council. At the same time, it undermines
the Assembly’s intergovernmental nature, contrary to
its terms of reference and the Charter of the United
Nations. Having said that, my delegation dissociates
itself from operative paragraph 11 of the resolution, as
amended based on draft amendment A/75/L.114.
Ms. Mustafa (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
would like to thank the two co-facilitators, the
Russian Federation and Côte d’Ivoire, for their efforts
in facilitating the negotiations on draft resolution
8/14

21/07/2021

A/75/L.109, entitled “Scope, modalities, format and
organization of the high-level meeting on improving
global road safety”. We look forward to the successful
holding of the high-level meeting in 2022, and we
underscore the importance of working to implement the
road safety goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. The goals and objectives of sustainable
development are integrated and indivisible, and we
therefore believe that investing in road safety has a
positive impact on public health and economies.
My delegation participated actively in the
negotiations on resolution 75/308. The co-facilitators
made commendable efforts to arrive at language that was
previously agreed on in resolutions on the modalities
of work of high-level meetings, especially with regard
to the participation of non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) in the high-level meeting to be held in 2022
on improving global road safety. We regret the lack
of consensus on the issue of the participation of those
organizations, as expressed in the resolution’s operative
paragraph 11, for which some insisted on introducing
non-consensus language and replacing the original
with language establishing a new, non-consensus-based
practice that undermines the principle of non-objection
in particular and the working methods of the General
Assembly in general.
The willingness of some delegations to introduce
non-consensus language into a context of multilateral
action undermines that action and the spirit of plurality
that we should maintain for it. It also constitutes a
serious violation that deprives Member States of their
no-objection-based right to review and consider the
participation of NGOs. We are not opposed to the principle
of NGO participation in General Assembly meetings.
But given our Organization’s intergovernmental nature,
we believe that the participation of NGOs that do not
have consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council should be considered in accordance with the
current rules of procedure of the United Nations. My
delegation therefore dissociates itself from operative
paragraph 11 of resolution 75/308.
Mr. Pilipenko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Belarus
supported the consensus adoption of resolution 75/308,
entitled “Scope, modalities, format and organization of
the high-level meeting on improving global road safety”.
The issue of road safety affects the health of populations
and has a wide range of socioeconomic impacts that are
capable of negatively affecting countries’ sustainable
development and undermining their progress on
21-19953

21/07/2021

implementing the Sustainable Development Goals. The
period from 2021 to 2030 has been declared the second
Decade of Action for Road Safety, and its objective is to
reduce death and injury from road accidents by at least
50 per cent.
We supported the co-facilitators’ efforts to
prepare a consensus document that incorporated the
positions of all parties. We are concerned about the
introduction of the draft amendment (A/75/L.114)
to operative paragraph 11 of the resolution, which
contains controversial language. We want to point out
that initiatives promoting wording that is not based on
consensus and runs counter to existing practice are
becoming systematic when it comes to the participation
of non-governmental organizations, something that
runs counter to the principles of multilateralism. In
view of that, Belarus voted against the amendment to
the resolution.
Mr. Toure (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to make this statement on behalf of Côte
d’Ivoire and the Russian Federation.
I would first like to express our gratitude for
the confidence that Member States placed in us by
entrusting the Deputy Permanent Representatives of
our countries with the worthy task of coordinating
the negotiations on resolution 75/308, which has just
been adopted. I would also like to thank all delegations
for working together constructively on this important
document, as well as our colleagues from the World
Health Organization for their support before and during
the consultations.
We are genuinely pleased that the idea of a highlevel meeting on improving global road safety, proposed
by the Russian Federation in 2018, has received the
support of the States Members of the United Nations. We
welcome the General Assembly’s adoption of resolution
75/308, on the modalities of that high-level meeting to
be held in New York in the summer of 2022. We hope
that thanks to our joint efforts, the event may become
a milestone in the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) related to road safety.
Road accidents continue to pose a wide range of
challenges for the international community, including
on the humanitarian and socioeconomic fronts, as
well as in the areas of urbanization and public health.
Nevertheless, a decade after the first Global Ministerial
Conference on Road Safety, held in Moscow, work at the
United Nations on this issue has been systematized and

A/75/PV.92

has reached a new qualitative level. The international
community has significant tools at its disposal,
particularly SDG target 3.6, the second Decade of
Action for Road Safety 2021-2030, the United Nations
Road Safety Fund to finance relevant actions, and public
national and regional campaigns such as that featuring
the famed Ivorian footballer Didier Drogba. We hope
that the first political declaration of the United Nations
General Assembly on road safety, to be adopted at the
outcome of the high-level meeting next July — we
hope by consensus — will add to the impressive list
of actions supporting this crucial agenda for achieving
the SDGS.
The declaration will bring together the results of
efforts to combat road accidents over recent years and
lay out solid, robust guidelines for the second United
Nations decade in this area, up to 2030. We feel sure
that the meeting scheduled to take place before the end
of this year in preparation for the high-level meeting
will also enable us to address such important issues as
investment in road safety, the creation of reliable road
infrastructure, traffic management, the development of
public-private partnerships and so on. Along with every
other delegation we are prepared to continue to make a
constructive contribution to international cooperation
in order to improve road safety worldwide.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 12?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution A/75/L.115
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the Permanent Representative of
Morocco to introduce draft resolution A/75/L.115.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
am particularly pleased today to be introducing
draft resolution A/75/L.115, entitled “Promoting
interreligious and intercultural dialogue and tolerance
in countering hate speech”. The draft is a continuation
of the Assembly’s historic resolution 73/328, adopted
by consensus in 2019. The text presented under

21-199539/14

A/75/PV.92

General Assembly agenda item 15 seeks primarily to
strengthen our collective commitment to promoting a
culture of peace and non-violence for the well-being of
humankind and future generations, and to reiterate the
importance of collectively combating hate speech and
of our obligation to do so.
In recent years, and particularly in recent months,
we have seen an exacerbation and exponential increase
in hate speech. Among the major repercussions of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, a number
of regions around the world are dealing with the spread
and proliferation of disinformation and messages
fomenting hate, stigmatization and mistrust, which
represent a flagrant denial of the values of peace,
tolerance, coexistence and dialogue enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
His Majesty King Mohammed VI of Morocco,
Commander of the Faithful, became aware early on of
the danger of hate speech spread by violent extremism,
obscurantism and populism as well as racism of all
types. That is why he alerted the United Nations
community at the High-level Event on the Power of
Education for Countering Racism and Discrimination:
The Case of Anti-Semitism, held here on 26 September
2018, saying that
“several regions around the world are following
the logic of exclusion, isolation and rejection of
others. Hate speech is increasing, fuelling racism,
xenophobia, Islamophobia, anti-Semitism and
many other forms of discrimination. It creates a
breeding ground for violent extremism and thereby
spreads insecurity”.
In order to address that danger, King Mohammed
advocated for a vision of global solidarity, and this was
well before the COVID-19 crisis. Indeed, in his message
to the second International Conference on Intercultural
and Interfaith Dialogue in Fez in 2018, he stated that
“we wish to establish, as a collective, a new
world order of peace based on the principles of
coexistence, acceptance, pluralism and integrity.
Only in those circumstances will it be possible to
continue building, developing and consolidating
security, faith and prosperity”.
The initiative of this draft resolution today is born of
that humanistic vision of interpersonal and inter-State
relations, based on interfaith coexistence, intercultural
10/14

21/07/2021

harmony and the peaceful coexistence of civilizations.
The foundational principle of all those universal values
is the acceptance of humankind and of others in all
their diversity.
The draft resolution is the result of three rounds of
substantive negotiations, several informal meetings and
dozens of bilateral discussions. From the beginning,
our goal was to achieve a consensus resolution. In
that regard, the Moroccan facilitator took an open,
transparent and inclusive approach with the goal of
rallying goodwill around the draft resolution’s noble
and humanistic cause. The current draft, which I have
the honour to present, draws its strength from and
reaffirms United Nations doctrine intended to promote
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, including the
Rabat Plan of Action on the prohibition of advocacy
of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes
incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence, the
Fez Plan of Action for Religious Leaders and Actors
to Prevent Incitement to Violence that Could Lead to
Atrocity Crimes, the United Nations Strategy and Plan
of Action on Hate Speech, as well as the United Nations
Plan of Action to Safeguard Religious Sites.
In addition, the draft resolution provides for three
concrete measures to be taken by the United Nations in
the context of multilateral engagement, with a view to
collectively strengthening the fight against hate speech,
racism and discrimination. The first is to proclaim
18 June as the International Day for Countering Hate
Speech, to be observed annually. The second is to
convene a high-level meeting of the General Assembly
on 18 June 2022, to mark the commemoration of the first
International Day for Countering Hate Speech. And the
third is to urge Member States to support transparent
and accessible systems for identifying, tracking and
collecting data and analysing trends regarding hate
speech in order to support effective responses.
I should not conclude without expressing Morocco’s
sincere thanks to all the delegations that contributed
constructively to the enrichment of this draft resolution
throughout the negotiation process and demonstrated
the engagement, flexibility and wisdom that enabled
us to achieve consensus on the draft text. I would also
like to warmly thank the delegations that have already
become sponsors of this initiative. I hope for the support
and sponsorship of others that have not yet done so.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We shall
now proceed to consider draft resolution A/75/L.115.
21-19953

21/07/2021

I give the
the Secretariat.

A/75/PV.92

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This oral statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of operative paragraph 12 of draft
resolution A/75/L.115, the General Assembly would
request the President of the General Assembly to
convene an informal high-level meeting on 18 June 2022
to mark the commemoration of the first International
Day for Countering Hate Speech, in order to contribute
to spearheading political support to develop strategies
to identify, address and counter hate speech at the
national and global levels, taking into account, as
appropriate, the United Nations Strategy and Plan of
Action on Hate Speech.
With regard to operative paragraph 12, the
Secretariat understands that the informal high-level
meeting to be held in New York on 18 June 2022 would
use the meeting entitlements of the General Assembly.
When such meetings are held using entitlements of
the General Assembly, if the meetings are held in a
virtual or hybrid format rather than in an in-person
format the meeting would be adjusted to two hours
in duration, taking into consideration the fact that
remote simultaneous interpretation is available only
for two hours per meeting. Otherwise, additional cost
implications would arise that could not be met within
the 2022 programme budget.
Furthermore, the Secretariat understands that
the proceedings of the informal high-level meeting
will be webcast. While the webcast would entail an
additional workload for the Department of Global
Communications, the resource requirements would be
met within the 2022 programme budget. Accordingly,
the adoption of draft resolution A/75/L.115 would not
entail any budgetary implications with regard to the
programme budget.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/75/L.115, entitled “Promoting interreligious and
intercultural dialogue and tolerance in countering hate
speech”. I should inform the Assembly that the draft
resolution has closed for e-sponsorship.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/75/L.115, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Afghanistan,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cameroon, Canada, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Dominica,
Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Gabon,
the Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, India, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Mali, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Monaco, Mozambique,
Nepal, the Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, the Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Suriname,
Tajikistan, Togo, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, the
United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen
and Zambia.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May
I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/75/L.115?
Draft resolution A/75/L.115 was adopted (resolution
75/309).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor to speakers in explanation of position,
I would like to remind delegations that explanations
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
representatives from their seats.
Mrs. Košir (Slovenia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries North
Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania; the country of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine
and the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with
this statement.
We thank Morocco for bringing resolution 75/309
to the General Assembly. However, we feel compelled
to express our concern about the proliferation of
initiatives on interreligious and intercultural dialogues
outside the Third Committee.
The EU is opposed to all forms of incitement to
violence or hatred and hate speech online and offline,

21-1995311/14

A/75/PV.92

while maintaining full articulation of the right to
freedom of opinion and expression. According to the
United Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate
Speech, hate speech covers any kind of communication
in speech, writing or behaviour that attacks anyone
or uses pejorative or discriminatory language with
reference to a person or a group on the basis of who they
are — in other words, based on their religion, ethnicity,
nationality, race, colour, descent, gender or other
identity factor. We regret that the text before us looks at
hate speech only in the context of religious intolerance.
Only a comprehensive approach tackling all aspects and
grounds of discrimination and violence can have a real
impact. In that regard, we insist on the vital importance
of ensuring respect for the right to freedom of opinion
and expression, to access to information, and to privacy,
which are all interlinked. Attempts to restrict or violate
those rights can only fuel violence and hatred. For
that reason, the EU made several proposals aimed at
reflecting those rights in the text. We are disappointed
that they were not all taken on board.
The final text also includes unclear concepts that
are designed to question the rules-based international
order and the universality of human rights. The EU
reiterates its full support for multilateralism, with the
United Nations at its core. We reaffirm the universality,
indivisibility, interdependence and interrelatedness of
all human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Finally, the EU would like to remind the Assembly
of its principled position against the proliferation and
duplication of international days.
Mr. Reed (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom thanks the delegation of Morocco for its
work in facilitating resolution 75/309. We support the
promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue
and tolerance. We also support freedom of expression
as both a human right in itself and for the contribution it
can make to supporting other rights. However, we reject
any incitement of violence or hatred against individuals
or members of religious or belief minorities. That is
why incitement to violence is a criminal offence in the
United Kingdom.
Beyond general principles, and regarding the
specifics of the text, the United Kingdom wants to
make an observation on the resolution’s twenty-third
preambular paragraph. While we believe in the principle
of mutual respect, we disagree with specific elements
in the statement attributed to the spokesperson of the
12/14

21/07/2021

High Representative for the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations. The statement, entitled “A Call for Mutual
Respect”, lacks evidence for some of its conclusions.
We want to stress that in line with common General
Assembly practice, the reference in the twenty-third
preambular paragraph noting that Call does not amount
to the Assembly’s endorsement of its contents. With
regard to that paragraph, people must be allowed to
freely discuss and debate issues, peacefully challenge
their Governments, exercise their right to freedom of
thought, conscience and religion and speak out against
violations of human rights wherever they occur.
Ms. Brisbane (Australia): We thank Morocco for
bringing this important resolution (resolution 75/309)
to the General Assembly. Australia commends the
strengthening of efforts to identify and understand
the impact of hate speech in undermining tolerance
and heightening the risk of identity-based tension
and violence. We also appreciate the challenge of
protecting people from malicious harm as a result
of misinformation, disinformation or hate speech
while at the same time assuring our right to freedom
of opinion and expression. We strongly support the
resolution’s overall aim of promoting interreligious and
intercultural dialogue and tolerance in countering hate
speech, but we must also express some disappointment
in its negotiation.
While noting the references to the Fez Plan of
Action for Religious Leaders and Actors to Prevent
Incitement to Violence that Could Lead to Atrocity
Crimes, the United Nations Strategy and Plan of Action
on Hate Speech and the role of the Special Adviser of
the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide,
the resolution could have been strengthened by a more
collective effort to adopt language that positions it
within the context of the overarching United Nations
framework on peace and security, and particularly by
highlighting the linkages between hate speech and the
heightened risk of violence and mass atrocities. We
believe it is critical to develop consistent language and
joined-up approaches across the human rights, peace,
security and justice spectrum.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has exacerbated
vulnerabilities and significantly challenged our
collective progress on human rights. Its scarring and
ongoing effects are also providing a tragic foundation
for increasing levels of identity-based hate speech and
incitement to violence, as well as other drivers that
heighten the risk of the very worst of crimes — that
21-19953

21/07/2021

is, mass atrocities. More than ever, it is our shared
responsibility to take every opportunity to interrogate
the ways in which the United Nations system, in
all its moving parts, can improve our capacity for
accountability, early warning, mitigation and prevention
in the area of human rights violations, abuses and mass
atrocity crimes.
Australia is committed to the spirit and intent
of resolution 75/309. We thank the facilitators for
their work, and we encourage continued constructive
dialogue on the challenges ahead.
Ms. Khusanova (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the adoption of resolution 75/309,
entitled “Promoting interreligious and intercultural
dialogue and tolerance in countering hate speech”, and
we thank the delegation of Morocco for its painstaking
efforts to reach a consensus on the draft. The Russian
Federation attaches great importance to interreligious
and intercultural dialogue and supports the work of
combating hate speech. We firmly believe that this
resolution will be a valuable addition to the efforts of
the international community on these issues.
The building of trusting relationships and the
promotion of good-neighbourliness and mutual respect
among States, peoples and communities play a major
role in combating the inequalities that help xenophobia,
racism, intolerance, hate speech and disinformation
flourish. In that regard, we regret that the corresponding
passage was removed from the draft resolution at the
request of some States.
Russia has centuries of experience in ensuring the
peaceful coexistence of many nationalities, cultures
and faiths, and we are ready to share it. One platform
designed to share precisely such experience is the World
Conference on Intercultural and Interfaith Dialogue
being organized by the Inter-Parliamentary Union
together with the United Nations, with the participation
of Heads of State and Government, parliamentary and
religious leaders, as well as representatives of civil
society and youth, and which will be held in our country
in May 2022.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of position. We
will now hear a statement after adoption. I give the floor
to the observer of the Observer State of the Holy See.
Monsignor Hansen (Holy See): The Holy See
acknowledges the adoption of resolution 75/309, entitled

A/75/PV.92

“Promoting interreligious and intercultural dialogue
and tolerance in countering hate speech”, and thanks
Morocco for its efforts in facilitating the negotiations.
The Holy See would like to reiterate its longstanding commitment to the promotion of interreligious
and intercultural dialogue as important components
in the cause of peace, and points to such examples as
the interreligious meeting in Assisi in 1986 organized
by Pope John Paul II and the signing in 2019 of the
document “Human fraternity for world peace and living
together” by Pope Francis and Grand Imam Ahmad
Al-Tayyib. As Pope Francis remarked during his recent
apostolic journey to Iraq,
“only if we learn to look beyond our differences
and see each other as members of the same human
family will we be able to begin an effective process
of rebuilding and leave to future generations a
better, more just and more humane world.”
The promotion of dialogue among nations, including
intercultural dialogue, is at the heart of the work of
the United Nations. However, my delegation would
like to remind the Assembly of a crucial distinction
between intercultural dialogue on the one hand and
interreligious dialogue on the other. Interreligious
dialogue, which is also essential to promoting lasting
peace, social cohesion and all the elements and aspects
that it touches on — that is, religious beliefs and
practices — is a competence of religious leaders and
believers and not of the United Nations, which has no
mandate to establish the confines or the purpose of
such religious dialogue. Indeed, that could limit the
scope and possibility of such dialogue. My delegation is
therefore concerned about the possibility that a lack of
understanding of the nature of interreligious dialogue
sets a worrying precedent by which the sacred space
of religion may be encroached on even by the United
Nations and its various offices.
The negotiations on the resolution showed clearly
that issues surrounding hate speech, discrimination,
freedom of religion or belief, freedom of expression
and privacy are subject to ongoing discussions and
disagreements among States, as today’s discussions
have also confirmed. That unfortunately points to a
lack of a shared understanding of the broader issues
on the table, including the protection of the right to
freedom of opinion and expression, the right to freedom
of assembly and association and the right to privacy,
all of which are inextricably linked to the exercise of

21-1995313/14

A/75/PV.92

the right to freedom of religion or belief. It is vital to
advance a common understanding of the concepts used
in the context of the agenda item “Culture of peace” and
related forums and contexts, as well as the respective
roles of States, religious communities and leaders and
the Secretariat. Also, by devoting sufficient time and
space to the discussion of texts of this nature, we can
avoid the risk of imposing priorities and ideologies

14/14

21/07/2021

that are not shared by all States, which creates division
rather than unity.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 15.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

21-19953
