S/PV.8990

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8990

th meeting
Thursday, 10 March 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abushahab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Leite Novaes
Mr. Xing Jisheng
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Mibissa
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Maitra
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 4 March 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2022/181)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-28342 (E)
*2228342*

S/PV.8990

The situation in the Middle East

programme and its engagement with the Syrian Arab
Republic to that end.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

Efforts by the OPCW Declaration Assessment Team
(DAT) are still ongoing to clarify all the outstanding
issues related to the initial and subsequent declarations
submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic in accordance
with the Chemical Weapons Convention.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 4 March 2022 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/181)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/181, which contains a letter dated
4 March 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I thank Council members for this
opportunity to brief them again on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 2118 (2013), on the
elimination of the chemical-weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Since my most recent briefing, on 28 February
2022 (see S/PV.8982), the Office for Disarmament
Affairs has, as always, maintained regular contact with
counterparts at the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on its activities related to
this matter.
As I have previously informed the Council, the
ongoing coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
impacted the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s ability to
deploy to the Syrian Arab Republic. Nevertheless, the
Secretariat maintains its readiness to deploy. Despite
continued travel restrictions, the Technical Secretariat
continues to undertake its mandated activities related
to the elimination of the Syrian chemical-weapons
2/14

10/03/2022

I have been advised that the OPCW Secretariat
has not yet received the requested declaration from
the Syrian Arab Republic on all undeclared types and
quantities of nerve agents produced and/or weaponized
at a former chemical-weapons production facility
that was declared by the Syrian Arab Republic as
never having been used to produce and/or weaponize
chemical-warfare agents.
I have also been advised that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat has not yet received the requested further
information and documentation from the Syrian Arab
Republic regarding the damage caused during the
8 June attack on a military facility housing a declared
former chemical-weapons production facility. Nor has
it received a response to the request for information
regarding the unauthorized movement and remains of
two destroyed cylinders related to the chemical-weapon
incident that took place in Douma on 7 April 2018.
In that regard, I call on the Syrian Arab Republic to
respond to the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s requests
with the necessary urgency.
I regret to inform Council members that the OPCW
Technical Secretariat is still not in a position to conduct
the twenty-fifth round of consultations in Damascus
between the Syrian National Authority and the DAT
owing to the continued refusal by the Syrian Arab
Republic to issue an entry visa for one member of the
DAT. It is my understanding that although the exchange
of correspondence between the OPCW Secretariat and
the Syrian National Authority on this matter continues,
the Syrian Arab Republic has yet to confirm that all visas
requested by the Secretariat will be issued. I have been
informed that the OPCW Technical Secretariat stands
ready to deploy the DAT to the Syrian Arab Republic
subject to the issuing of visas to all DAT members as
well as the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic.
I urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
to facilitate arrangements for the deployment of
the DAT and to comply with resolution 2118 (2013),
including by allowing immediate and unfettered access
22-28342

10/03/2022

S/PV. 8990

The situation in the Middle East

for the personnel designated by the OPCW Secretariat
as soon as possible.
Full cooperation by the Syrian Arab Republic with
the OPCW Technical Secretariat is essential to closing
all outstanding issues. As has been stressed repeatedly,
owing to the identified gaps, inconsistencies and
discrepancies that remain unresolved, the Technical
Secretariat continues to assess that at this stage the
declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic
cannot be considered accurate and complete in
accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention.
I have been advised that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat is planning to conduct the next rounds of
inspections of the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities of the
Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre (SSRC)
in the course of 2022. With regard to the detection of a
Schedule 2 chemical at the Barzah facilities of the SSRC
in November 2018, I regret to inform the Council that
the Syrian Arab Republic has yet to provide sufficient
technical information or explanations that would enable
the OPCW Technical Secretariat to close this issue.
I note that preparations for the in-person meeting
between the OPCW Director-General and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab
Republic remain ongoing. The Technical Secretariat
will keep the OPCW Executive Council informed of
further developments on this matter.
Consistent with previous updates to the Council,
the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) remains in the
process of studying all available information related
to allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the
Syrian Arab Republic. I note that the OPCW DirectorGeneral’s monthly report (see S/2022/181) refers to the
FFM reports issued by the Technical Secretariat on
24 and 31 January 2022, which concluded that sulfur
mustard was used in Marea on 1 September 2015 and
that a chlorine cylinder was used as a weapon in Kafr
Zeita on 1 October 2016, respectively. Copies of both
FFM reports were circulated to members of the Security
Council last month.
I have been advised that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat planned to deploy the FFM to the Syrian
Arab Republic from 22 January to 4 February 2022
to collect information and conduct interviews with
regard to incidents in the Aleppo governorate in 2016.
However, due to confirmed positive coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) cases identified within the
support team in Damascus, the deployment had to

be postponed. The FFM is preparing for upcoming
deployments, which remain subject to the evolution of
the COVID-19 pandemic.
I understand that the Investigation and Identification
Team (IIT) continues its investigations into incidents in
which the FFM has determined that chemical weapons
were used or likely used in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The IIT will issue further reports in due course, subject
to the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic. I take this
opportunity to once again reiterate my full support for
the integrity, professionalism, impartiality, objectivity
and independence of the work of the OPCW.
With regard to the decision entitled “Addressing the
Possession and Use of Chemical Weapons by the Syrian
Arab Republic” (C-25/DEC.9), adopted on 21 April
2021, I have been informed that, unfortunately, the
Syrian Arab Republic has not yet completed any of the
measures stipulated in paragraph 5 of decision EC-94/
DEC.2. I therefore reiterate my call on the Syrian Arab
Republic to cooperate fully with the OPCW Technical
Secretariat in this regard.
The use of chemical weapons is a grave violation of
international law and an affront to our shared humanity.
We need to remain vigilant to ensure that these awful
weapons are never used again and are eliminated, not
only in Syria, but everywhere.
Let me close by assuring Council members of the
commitment of the United Nations to work with all
Member States to restore the taboo against chemical
weapons and to ensure that those responsible for their
use, who have violated such a profound international
norm, are held to account.
The President (spoke in
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Council met 10 days ago to discuss the
Syrian chemical weapons (see S/PV.8982), and since
then there have been no changes on the ground or at
the level of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW). This was reconfirmed
by the report of the Director-General of the OPCW for
the month of February (see S/2022/181). Indeed, the
fact that the report came out with a delay in March,
rather than in the last days of February, as usual, can
only be interpreted as an attempt to provide us with a

22-283423/14

S/PV.8990

The situation in the Middle East

formal reason to meet today, which in turn confirms the
fact that our current schedule for discussing chemical
weapons in Syria in the Council is completely artificial.
The delegations have nothing to discuss, so when the
discussions are held this frequently, we are simply
repeating the same thing all over again.
On many occasions, we have proposed that the
schedule be amended so that the Council can work
more effectively on this issue. In addition, the same
proposals were put forward by the delegation of China,
but our proposals were not supported by our Western
colleagues. We regret that, for them, holding meetings
for the sake of holding meetings is more important than
having a substantive discussion in the Council, and this
kind of approach can but undermine the authority of
this body of ours.
Now, to illustrate the exaggerated attention that our
Western colleagues are paying to Syria, I propose that
we recall what is happening in other hotspots and which
is not being discussed in the Council as frequently. For
example, let us take Libya. In Libya, on 10 February, the
House of Representatives confirmed Fathi Bashagha
as the new prime minister of the country, while there
continues to be an acting head of the Government of
National Unity, Abdul Hamid Dbeibeh. The new prime
minister was inaugurated. Prior to the inauguration,
however, two new Ministers were kidnapped, and, as
recently as February, there was an attempt on Abdul
Hamid Dbeibeh’s life. In such conditions, there is a
growing risk of ending up with de facto dual Government
and deterioration of the situation in the country, which
could in turn lead to a renewed armed confrontation.
But the penholders on Libya in the Security Council are
pretending that nothing extraordinary is taking place.
Despite such a kaleidoscope of worrying events,
no one proposed that we amend the schedule that we
have on Libya, which is once every two months. But, on
the other hand, every month, we have to discuss Syria
at least twice, and only because the number of such
meetings is of importance for our Western colleagues.
In this, we can see yet another egregious manifestation
of double standards.
Turning to the issue at hand, I must say that
our concerns with regard to the OPCW on Syria are
very well known. Let me repeat them briefly since,
after all, we are meeting on this topic. They include
the politicized work conducted by the OPCW; the
breaches by the Technical Secretariat of Chemical
4/14

10/03/2022

Weapons Convention methodology; the discovered
facts of direct forgery conducted when the OPCW
Fact-Finding Mission report on the Douma incident
was being prepared; the activity of the illegitimate
Investigation and Identification Team, which time
and time again churns out biased conclusions about
Damascus’ culpability, ignoring the fact that chemical
weapons were used by terrorists; and most importantly,
the lack of a desire on the part of the OPCW leadership
to rectify this deplorable situation.
We addressed this in great detail at our most recent
meeting, less than two weeks ago, so I am not going to
dwell on it now. Let me simply repeat that we expect
that the Director-General of OPCW will, in the very
near future, find time in his allegedly busy schedule to
brief the Council and answer all of the questions that
the Russian Federation put to him earlier. Otherwise,
our suspicion that the Technical Secretariat does have
something to hide will only be heightened. There is
nothing else for me to say today.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank the
High Representative for her briefing this morning.
It continues to be essential that the Security Council
receive these regular updates on chemical weapons
in Syria and on the critical work of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in
that regard.
Last week, the Security Council received the
101st report of the OPCW Director-General on
Syria’s chemical weapons (see S/2022/181) — the
101st report — and yet, sadly, very little is new. This
report, as well as the contents of the 23 February
Technical Secretariat briefing to the CWC States
parties in The Hague, continues to drive home a
simple point — the Syrian regime has yet to meet its
obligations under resolution 2118 (2013). We urge Syria
to stop obstructing the work of the OPCW and to come
into compliance with its obligations.
We have heard again that the Syrian Government
continues to refuse to issue the necessary visas to all
members of the OPCW Declaration Assessment Team
so that they can travel to Syria for the twenty-fifth
round of consultations. It has been over a year since
the previous such consultations occurred. The Syrian
Government does not get to select which OPCW experts
are involved in the assessment. It is obligated instead to
cooperate fully with the OPCW.
22-28342

10/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8990

We have heard again today that the Al-Assad regime
continues to withhold evidence corroborating the
claimed destruction in 2021 of two chlorine cylinders
related to the April 2018 chemical weapons attack in
Douma. We have heard again that the Al-Assad regime
continues to fail to explain why those chlorine cylinders
were moved from their inspected and documented
location, despite specific instructions not to move them
without prior OPCW notification and approval. They
were moved to the site of the air strike, where they were
purportedly destroyed.

weapons and violations of its international obligations
puts not just the Syrian people and not just the people
in the Middle East, but all of us at risk.

I think it is important again to note that every single
one of the 17 amendments that the Syrian Government
has made to its declaration has been in response to
unreported materials and irregularities in Syria’s
Declaration uncovered by OPCW experts conducting
their thorough examinations. The amendments are not
evidence of serious cooperation, but rather were made
because of its failure to fully cooperate.

Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her
briefing.

Despite the regular claims to the contrary by Syria
and its enablers, the Al-Assad regime has not fully
cooperated with the OPCW, as it is required to do by
resolution 2118 (2013). Syria has not been forthcoming
in its declaration regarding the scope of its chemical
weapons programme. It has yet to carry out any of the
measures requested by the OPCW Executive Council
after it was found by the OPCW Investigation and
Identification Team to have use those weapons on its
own people in three separate attacks in Ltamenah in
March 2017.
Instead of cooperation, the Al-Assad regime offers
thin excuses and claims of bias. Those claims are
belied by the detailed reports of the impartial, objective
and thorough investigations that are performed by
OPCW experts.
Unfortunately, the Al-Assad regime has help on
the Council. The Russian Federation has repeatedly
spread disinformation regarding Syria’s repeated use of
chemical weapons. The recent web of lies that Russia
has cast in an attempt to justify the premeditated and
unjustified war it has undertaken against Ukraine
should make clear once and for all that Russia also
cannot be trusted when it talks about chemical weapons
use in Syria.
The global norm against the use of chemical
weapons and the Chemical Weapons Convention have
helped to make the world a safer place. Failure to hold
the Syrian regime to account for its use of chemical

In conclusion, the United States once again calls on
the Al-Assad regime to end its systematic obstruction of
the work of the OPCW, to fully cooperate with the FactFinding Mission, the Declaration Assessment Team and
the Investigation and Identification Team and, to fulfil
its international obligations related to such horrific
weapons once and for all.

First of all, China would like to echo Russia’s
comment about improving the working method on the
Syrian issue. The Security Council should proceed in
its work on the basis of effectiveness by reducing the
frequency with which it considers the issue of chemical
weapons in Syria or combining relevant issues for
joint consideration. China has taken note of the latest
monthly report (S/2022/181, annex) on the issue of
chemical weapons in Syria submitted by the DirectorGeneral of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
The Council discussed the issue of chemical
weapons in Syria just last week (see S/PV.8982). No
further progress has been made thus far.
I wish to reiterate China’s position. The issue of
chemical weapons is of great importance. The OPCW’s
investigation and attribution of the alleged use of
chemical weapons should be conducted strictly within
the framework of the Chemical Weapons Convention,
while respecting the facts and drawing conclusions
based on conclusive evidence.
In that connection, China has always been
concerned about the establishment of the Investigation
and Identification Team and its work. Before issuing
a new report, the Fact-Finding Mission should first
clarify the questions on the Douma incident report,
as well as setting norms on the sources of information
and working methods and improving the credibility of
its work.
The issue of chemical weapons in Syria must be
resolved through dialogue and cooperation. We call on
the Technical Secretariat to show flexibility by sending
experts with valid visas to Syria for consultations

22-283425/14

S/PV.8990

The situation in the Middle East

on the assessment of the initial Declaration to avoid
a stalemate.
We also encourage the Technical Secretariat to
maintain communication with the Syrian Government
on such matters as visits to the Syrian Scientific Studies
and Research Centre and face-to-face meetings between
the OPCW Director-General and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of Syria. With regard
to the information provided by the Syrian Government
on the position and use of chemical weapons by
terrorist organizations, the Technical Secretariat must
take that seriously.
The OPCW currently faces challenges in its work.
The parties are seriously divided and opposed. We hope
that the Director-General and the Technical Secretariat
will make greater efforts to uphold objectivity and
neutrality, depoliticize the work of the OPCW,
encourage States parties to return to the tradition of
making decisions by consensus and maintain the
authority and effectiveness of the organization.
China also hopes that the Director-General himself
will come to brief the Security Council as soon
as possible.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank High
Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Just 10 days ago, we discussed Syria and its
chemical weapons in the Council (see S/PV.8982). It
was clear then that Syria remained uncooperative. The
serious outstanding issues on its chemical weapons
declaration, which include the fate of thousands of
chemical munitions and hundreds of tons of chemicals
agents, remain unresolved.
The terms of resolution 2118 (2013) continue to be
breached. We therefore call on the Syrian regime, as we
do every month, to cooperate with Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and return
to compliance with the Chemical Weapons Convention.
In the 10 days since we last met, Russia has
continued its war of aggression against Ukraine,
besieging cities, killing civilians indiscriminately and
forcing millions to flee in search of safety. The parallels
with Russian action in Syria are clear. Regrettably, the
comparison also extends to chemical weapons, as we
see the familiar spectre of Russian chemical weaponsrelated disinformation raising its head in Ukraine.
6/14

10/03/2022

Russia has a long history of deflection, denial
and obstructive behaviour when it comes to chemical
weapons. In 2017, President Putin claimed that the Khan
Shaykhun attack — for which the expert and impartial
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
found the Al-Assad regime responsible — was staged
by the West.
Russia has offered more than 40 different narratives
about the chemical weapons attack its military agents
carried out in Salisbury four years ago. We have seen
nothing but obfuscation and falsehoods in relation to
the Novichok attack on Alexei Navalny.
As colleagues listen to the Russian statements
during this meeting, I ask them to consider who we
should believe. Should we believe the State, with
a track record of using chemical weapons, that has
denied and deflected questions about attacks by
its clients, the Al-Assad regime, whether in Khan
Shaykhun, Ltamenah or Saraqib, or should we believe
the independent, impartial international organizations
that have conducted rigorous investigations, attributing
responsibility based on clear evidence?
The Council has heard enough lies about chemical
weapons from the Russian Federation. We must stop
pretending that the Al-Assad regime is acting in good
faith. We should stand up for the rules that we have all
agreed, look those who break them in the eye and hold
them to account for their actions.
Finally, I note that Libya is on our agenda for next
Wednesday. I look forward to discussing it then.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank Mrs. Nakamitsu
for her briefing.
I have a moral obligation to say a few words on
what is happening these days in Mariupol before I
return to Syria.
There is this city of roughly half a million people in
Ukraine — the country that for two weeks has been under
a brutal attack from Russia. It is a city besieged, cut off
by the aggressor, which has not been able to capture it
and is bombarding it savagely. It is a city that has been
left without electricity, water and food — whatever is
needed to live — and where civilians are cutting trees
to fight the cold and melting snow to drink and not die
from dehydration. That is Mariupol — once a centre
for industry and education in Ukraine, now a scorched
earth, the face of the Russian aggression.
22-28342

10/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Yesterday, the most vulnerable and defenceless
people, pregnant women with their newborns, might
have believed that they were in one of the most secure
places one can image — a hospital, where one goes to
heal and where one is taken care of. They were not.
Russian bombs found them in a deliberate attack. We
heard that it was a base for the Ukrainian army. What
we saw were women in labour among rubble.
We condemn that in the strongest terms. It is a
crime, which should not remain unpunished, and no one
should get away with a crime.
(spoke in French)
Less than a fortnight ago, we made an observation
on this issue that has unfortunately become a constant,
damning fact — the deliberate lack of cooperation on
the part of Syria to respond to the demands clearly
formulated in resolution 2118 (2013) (see S/PV.8943).
We commend the professional and impartial work of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and its Technical Secretariat to shed full light
on the use of chemical weapons in Syria, which is not
in doubt.
However, for more than a year, the OPCW team of
experts has not carried out any verification on Syrian
territory, and that is because Syria is hiding behind a
response that is neither accurate nor complete under
the terms of the Chemical Weapons Convention. We
demand full and unequivocal cooperation from the
Syrian authorities with the OPCW Technical Secretariat
and reject any efforts to discredit or politicize its work.
Syria has no right to decide on the rules of procedure or
the choice of inspectors.
We reiterate our strong condemnation of the use of
chemical weapons by any actor under any circumstances.
We remain convinced that the swift conclusion of
the investigations into the use of chemical weapons
in Syria serves, first and foremost, Syria and its
citizens and will, in turn, enable the Council to more
effectively support the Syrian people in their quest for
a peaceful and better future. It is time for the regime to
understand that.
(spoke in English)
Let me end where I started — in Ukraine. As we
speak of chemical weapons in Syria, we are extremely
worried by the claims from Kremlin officials about
alleged chemical and biological weapon laboratories in

S/PV. 8990

Ukraine. We know how harmful such information can
be. We consider it yet another false pretext that we have
seen Russia repeatedly use to justify the unjustifiable
and to excuse the inexcusable — its horrific actions
in Ukraine.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
We must not lose sight of why we are here. Since
2013, the Syrian regime has used chemical weapons
against its own population on at least eight occasions.
That has been demonstrated unequivocally by the
investigations of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations.
Yet, since the unanimous adoption of resolution 2118
(2013) more than eight years ago, no progress has
been made.
I would like to make three points.
First, France welcomes the publication a few weeks
ago of the two reports of the Fact-Finding Mission
(S/2022/85, annex and S/2022/116, annex). They are very
well documented. They show that chemical weapons
were used in Marea in 2015 and in Kafr Zeita in 2016.
The work of the Investigation and Identification team
to identify the perpetrators is essential. France will be
paying attention to its further conclusions.
Secondly, it is not acceptable that the Syrian regime
continue to obstruct the work of the OPCW. It has still
not issued the necessary visas for the deployment of
the initial Declaration Assessment Team. It continues
to interfere in the selection of inspectors. Under false
pretences, it seeks to obstruct the tasks of the Technical
Secretariat, which is showing persistence and great
professionalism. The disinformation campaigns against
it are unacceptable and must stop.
Thirdly, the measures taken in April 2021 at the
Conference of States Parties to the Chemical Weapons
Convention are not irreversible. The suspended rights
and privileges can be restored. All that is required is for
Syria to comply with its treaty obligations.
Everyone knows the despicable acts for which the
regime is responsible. That is why France is firmly
committed to fighting impunity. Victims are turning
to national courts. Let us be clear: there will be no
leniency for the war criminals who use these shocking
weapons, banned by international law.

22-283427/14

S/PV.8990

The situation in the Middle East

Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank the
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mrs. Nakamitsu, for another briefing on the progress
towards the full elimination of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme.
Let me start by underlining Norway’s consistent
message that the Syrian Arab Republic must fulfil its
obligations in accordance with the Chemical Weapons
Convention and resolution 2118 (2013). Today, I would
like to highlight four items that require immediate
attention in that regard.
First, and most urgently, there are 20 outstanding
issues from Syria’s initial declaration that stand
unresolved. We urge Syria to provide sufficient
technical information and explanation to close those
outstanding gaps.
Secondly, we regret that persistent delays
remain in the issuance of visas to the Declaration
Assessment Team (DAT). Regular DAT consultations
are important for ensuring consistent cooperation and
exchanges of information and for providing technical
assistance to Syria. In that regard, I would also like to
underline Syria’s obligation to cooperate fully with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). Resolution 2118 (2013) explicitly mentions
Syria’s obligation to: accept personnel designated by the
OPCW and to provide these personnel with immediate
and unfettered access and the right to inspect any and
all sites.
Thirdly, the OPCW has requested further
information about the reported attack on a former
chemical-weapons production facility that apparently
contained equipment of relevance to an ongoing
OPCW investigation. The OPCW has also requested
the declaration of all undeclared types and quantities of
nerve agents produced and/or weaponized at a certain
former chemical weapons production facility. It is vital
that Syria comply with those requests.
Fourthly, it is critical that Syria complete the
necessary measures to lift the suspension of its
rights and privileges as a State party to the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
Let me conclude by underlining that cooperation is
essential for settling all unresolved issues and finally
achieving this eight-year-long effort to ensure the full
elimination of the Syrian chemical-weapons programme.
8/14

10/03/2022

Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I want to thank High
Representative Nakamitsu for her very important
briefing to the Security Council today.
I want to begin by stressing the importance of
maintaining our collective commitment to upholding
the international legal norm against chemical weapons,
which are abhorrent. There can be no justification for
their use at any time, anywhere.
The role of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), as the independent
organization mandated by the international community
to implement the provisions of the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC), in maintaining the absolute
prohibition on chemical weapons remains essential.
In carrying out that role, the OPCW has clearly and
repeatedly demonstrated its integrity, professionalism
and impartiality, including in its work on Syria.
The ongoing efforts within the Council and
externally to politicize the work and findings of
the OPCW and to defend Syria’s actions are deeply
disturbing. The Council should be united and clear in its
full support for the OPCW and Director-General Arias
and in its rejection of disinformation efforts aimed at
undermining the work of the Organization.
The efforts by Syria and others to frustrate the
work of the OPCW have serious consequences. For
more than eight years, the OPCW has sought to
resolve Syria’s issues around Syria’s declarations.
Twenty substantive issues are outstanding. These cover
production facilities, stockpiles of munitions and agents
and research and development activities left undeclared
by Syria.
Over the same period, the OPCW, with clear and
compelling evidence, has shown 17 incidents where
chemical weapons were likely or definitely used in
Syria, in some cases by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, but in most cases by the Syrian Air Force. Those
attacks have led to the deaths of hundreds of people
and lasting injury and suffering for many more. Similar
conclusions have been reached by the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic and the United Nations-OPCW Joint
Investigative Mission. There is no justification for
those attacks and no one should be allowed to confuse
or excuse these facts.
The Council must uphold its decisions in resolution
2118 (2013) and stand united behind the OPCW in
22-28342

10/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East

its work to ensure that Syria’s chemical-weapons
programme is verifiably destroyed. At the same
time, Syria should engage in serious and meaningful
cooperation with the OPCW. That is the only route to a
resolution on this file.
We hope that the proposed meeting DirectorGeneral Arias and Foreign Minister Mekdad will take
place soon and that it will focus on achieving concrete
outcomes. Ireland calls on Syria to engage sincerely with
the OPCW to finalize arrangements for that meeting.
The Technical Secretariat has made clear the concrete
actions necessary to resolve outstanding issues with
Syria’s declarations. Syria should implement them and
provide the necessary clarity on all outstanding matters.
We urge Syria to cease blocking the deployment
of the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) to Syria,
now outstanding for almost a year. Under resolution
2118 (2013) and the CWC, Syria is obliged to provide
immediate and unfettered access to OPCW personnel
in Syria. We call on Syria to issue the necessary visas
for all members of the DAT in order to enable the
Organization’s inspection work to continue.
Syria’s engagement should take the form of
positive, productive action rather than excuses and
delays. Ireland will continue to support all efforts to
resolve outstanding issues on this file.
Mr. Leite Novaes (Brazil): I would like to thank
High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing. I would
also like to welcome the delegations of the Syrian Arab
Republic, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Turkey.
Only 10 days ago we met here to debate this very
topic and to discuss the same reports by the DirectorGeneral of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the Fact-Finding
Mission in Syria (FFM). The Council must pay close
attention to the progress in the elimination of chemical
weapons in Syria and everywhere, as well as enforce
accountability for their use. However, Brazil does
believe that the periodicity of these meetings should be
better discussed among members or we risk diminishing
the importance that Member States and other actors
attach to the subject.
Having said that, I once again thank the OPCW
Director-General for his latest report (S/2022/181,
annex). Brazil firmly supports the work of the
Organization in implementing the provisions of the
Chemical Weapons Convention. Brazil condemns in

S/PV. 8990

the strongest possible terms the use of weapons of mass
destruction, including chemical weapons, anywhere,
by anyone and under any circumstances. We therefore
support a strong, transparent and independent OPCW.
I would also like to take this opportunity to once
again note the important work of the Fact-Finding
Mission, including its latest reports on allegations of
the use of chemical weapons in Marea and Kafr Zeita.
Brazil has thoroughly analysed not only these, but
also previous reports issued by the FFM, the OPCWUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism and
the Investigation and Identification Team on episodes
related to the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
Given the gravity of the situation, we reiterate that all
investigations pertaining to those incidents must be
impartial, balanced, technical and comprehensive.
We continue to advocate for the need to restore
trust between the OPCW and the Syrian Arab
Republic, which would constitute a fundamental step
towards overcoming the regrettable politicization that
has undermined the culture of consensus within the
Organization and its decision-making bodies.
Brazil welcomes recent efforts made by both the
OPCW Director-General and the Syrian Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Expatriates to have an in-person
meeting. That is the kind of constructive approach
that helps build confidence and paves the way for
the consolidation of a comprehensive and effective
dialogue. We encourage both parties to keep up the
good work in order to ensure that the meeting takes
place as soon as possible.
Finally, we encourage the Syrian Government to
provide full access to the OPCW expert teams, including
by issuing the necessary visas. Once travel restrictions
worldwide begin to be lifted, we look forward to the
deployment of further on-site inspections, which could
help advance a conclusion to the Syrian file.
Mrs. Maitra (India): We would like to thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu, Under-Secretary-General and High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for her update.
We have taken note of the contents of the latest
reports by the Director-General of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW),
submitted to the Security Council pursuant to resolution
2118 (2013), as well as of the monthly submission
made by the Syrian Arab Republic detailing measures

22-283429/14

S/PV.8990

The situation in the Middle East

undertaken in order to implement its obligations under
the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC).
We encourage continued engagement between
Syria and the OPCW Technical Secretariat in order to
resolve the outstanding issues. We continue to hope that
the twenty-fifth round of talks between the Declaration
Assessment Team and the Syrian Arab Republic will
be organized at the earliest possible date. We also hope
that the in-person meeting between the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of Syria and the OPCW
Director-General of will be held soon.
It is our principled stand that the CWC is a unique,
non-discriminatory disarmament instrument for the
elimination of an entire category of weapons of mass
destruction. India attaches high importance to the CWC
and stands for its full, effective and non-discriminatory
implementation. We support the collective efforts of all
the parties to ensure that the credibility and integrity of
the Convention are maintained to the fullest.
India is against the use of chemical weapons
by anybody, anywhere, at any time and under any
circumstances. India has consistently maintained that
any investigation into the use of chemical weapons
must be impartial, credible and objective. Such an
investigation should follow scrupulously the provisions
and procedures embedded in the Convention and in
conformity with the delicate balance of power and
responsibility enshrined in it to establish facts and
reach evidence-based conclusions.
India has also repeatedly cautioned against the
possibility of terrorist entities and individuals gaining
access to chemical weapons, including in the region.
The reports of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant have also
referred to the repeated deployments of chemical
weapons by United Nations-proscribed terrorist groups
and those affiliated with the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) against civilian populations between
2014 and 2016. ISIL/Da’esh remains active in Syria
and Iraq, where the group is seeking to rebuild its
capabilities, as indicated by the Al-Hasakah prison
attack in January.
India continues to believe that progress on other
political and humanitarian tracks would also help in
facilitating the overall political peace process in Syria,
as advocated by resolution 2254 (2015).
10/14

10/03/2022

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council (A3): Gabon, Kenya and my
country, Ghana.
To begin with, let me express our appreciation
to Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, for her briefing on the activities
undertaken in the past month towards the implementation
of the elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons
programme, pursuant to resolution 2118 (2013) and
other relevant decisions of the Executive Council of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). The A3 welcomes the report of the OPCW
covering the period from 24 January to 23 February
(S/2022/181, annex). We also welcome the participation
of the representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic, the
Islamic Republic of Iran and Turkey in this meeting.
In adopting resolution 2118 (2013), the Council
signalled its unanimous and strong objection to the use
of chemical weapons anywhere, by anyone and under
any circumstance and, recognizing the threat posed to
the maintenance of international peace and security,
endorsed the expeditious and verifiable destruction
of Syria’s chemical weapons. It is in this context
that we acknowledge the role of the OPCW in the
implementation of the elimination of Syria’s chemical
weapons programme.
We note with concern, however, the persisting
divergence between the positions of the OPCW and
the Syrian authorities with regard to the unaddressed
gaps, inconsistencies and outstanding issues in Syria’s
initial and subsequent submissions in accordance with
the Chemical Weapons Convention. We believe that
meaningful progress can be made towards the full
implementation of the elimination programme through
enhanced relations and good-faith cooperation between
the OPCW, together with its implementing bodies, and
the Syrian National Authority. We therefore urge the
Council to concertedly support efforts in that direction.
In our view, the proposed in-person meeting
between the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates, Mr. Fayssal Mekdad, and the DirectorGeneral of the OPCW could be a useful opportunity
for confidence-building and a recommitment by Syria
to its obligations. It is therefore our expectation that the
officials in charge will make meaningful progress for
that meeting to be held sooner rather than later.
22-28342

10/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East

The A3 takes note of the Syrian National Authority’s
submission to the Executive Council of its ninety-ninth
monthly report concerning activities on its territory
related to the destruction of its chemical weapons, as
well as its chemical weapons production facilities, as
required of it by the Executive Council.
With regard to the deployment of the Declaration
Assessment Team (DAT) to Syria, the A3 urges the
Syrian National Authority to comply with its obligations
to grant unfettered and unhindered access to Syria for
all members of the Team. We believe that the DAT and
the Syrian National Authority, working collaboratively
through enhanced communications and exchange of
information, can explore opportunities to overcome the
present limitations to the holding of the twenty-fifth
round of consultations
We also look forward to further information on
subsequent rounds of inspections of the Barzah and
Jamrayah facilities of the Syrian Scientific Studies
and Research Centre, which have been planned for this
year. We take note of the continuous support of the
United Nations Office for Project Services within the
framework of the Tripartite Agreement reached with
the OPCW and the Syrian authorities. The A3 also
acknowledges the difficulties posed by the ongoing
coronavirus disease pandemic to the work of the
OPCW in Syria and notes the Technical Secretariat’s
commitment to ensuring continuity, pending
improvement in the situation.
The A3 will continue to support accountability
measures to hold perpetrators to account, deter the
further use by State and non-State actors of chemical
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, and
reinforce the international norms against their use. We
acknowledge, in this regard, the important work of the
Fact-Finding Mission in Syria and the Investigation
and Identification Team and stress the need for them
to remain independent, transparent and impartial in
carrying out their mandates.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate Africa’s
principled position against the use of chemical weapons
anywhere, by anyone and under any circumstances,
as no cause could justify their use. In that regard,
let me express our support for efforts towards the
early closure of the elimination of Syria’s chemical
weapons programme.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I thank High Representative Nakamitsu

S/PV. 8990

for her presentation and welcome the participation of
the delegations of Syria, Iran and Turkey.
We are meeting once again today to review the
Syrian chemical weapons dossier, and we note that
inconsistencies persist in the initial Syrian declaration.
Unfortunately, despite many attempts, convening the
twenty-fifth round of consultations has also not been
possible, owing to the refusal to issue visas to all
members of the Declaration Assessment Team. We
once again respectfully but firmly appeal to the Syrian
authorities to facilitate the work of the Declaration
Assessment Team.
With regard to the visits scheduled for 2022 to
the Scientific Studies and Research Centre facilities
in Barzah and Jamrayah, we urge the authorities to
allow the timely deployment of the inspectors of
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW). Likewise, we renew our request for
clarification concerning the facts in connection with the
unauthorized custody and transfer of chlorine cylinders
related to the April 2018 Douma attack.
We regret that Syria continues to fail to comply with
the obligations set out both in resolution 2118 (2013) and
under the Chemical Weapons Convention itself. We call
once again for compliance with both. As we mentioned
at February’s meeting (see S/PV.8982), we have noted
with concern that the investigations of the Fact-Finding
Mission in Syria have found reasonable grounds to
believe that chemicals were used as weapons at Marea
and Kafr Zeita. Without question, the possibility that
non-State actors, including those listed as terrorist
groups by the Council, could acquire chemical weapons
is of great concern.
Mexico once again expresses its confidence in
the professionalism, impartiality and independence
of the OPCW Technical Secretariat and investigation
teams, and reiterates its condemnation of the use of
any type of chemical weapon by any actor and under
any circumstances.
In conclusion, Mexico reiterates that there is
no military solution to the conflict in Syria. We call
for full compliance with resolution 2254 (2015) and
constructive participation in the political process
facilitated by the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United Arab Emirates.

22-2834211/14

S/PV.8990

The situation in the Middle East

At the outset, I would like to thank Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu for her briefing.
The total elimination of chemical weapons is
a shared goal among the international community,
considering the horrific effects of their use. In this
context, we reiterate the principled position of the
United Arab Emirates, which rejects and condemns the
use of chemical weapons under any circumstances, by
anyone and anywhere, especially as their use constitutes
a flagrant violation of the provisions of the Chemical
Weapons Convention and international law and is also a
serious threat to international peace and security.
With regard to today’s discussion, any tangible
progress in the chemical weapons file of the Syrian
crisis requires addressing the existing gaps. In principle,
a constructive and meaningful dialogue between the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and the Syrian Arab Republic should be encouraged.
Furthermore, the modalities of their cooperation should
be improved upon, in line with the principles on which
the organization was established and its technical nature,
which includes consensus and non-politicization. We
believe that facilitating the Declaration Assessment
Team’s visit to Syria will contribute to achieving
these goals.
In the context of the presence of terrorist groups
and armed militias in Syria, such as the terrorist
organization Da’esh, and these groups’ efforts to
develop their weapons and combat capabilities, special
importance should be accorded to preventing terrorists
from obtaining chemical weapons, in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions. Accordingly,
we stress the importance of continuing to combat
Da’esh in Syria to prevent it from reorganizing its ranks
or acquiring chemical weapons.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates stresses
the need to continue working with State parties and
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons to eliminate this peril, which poses a grave
threat to international peace and security. We also note
the importance of ensuring progress on the chemical
weapons file in accordance with resolution 2118 (2013).
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
requested the floor to make a further statement.
12/14

10/03/2022

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am not going to take up too much of my
colleagues’ time.
Since a number of our Western colleagues touched
on issues that are not related to the topic of today’s
meeting — namely, Russia’s special military operation
in Ukraine — I would like to respond to what has
been said. For example, the representative of Albania
mentioned the situation of maternity hospital No. 1
in Mariupol, where there were allegedly casualties
after an attack by Russian aviation. Yesterday, we
distributed, as an official document of the Security
Council, a letter by the Permanent Representative of
the Russian Federation, in which we underscored that
as early as 7 March, in our statement to the Council
(see S/PV.8988), we drew members’ attention to the fact
that the facility in question had long been taken over by
Azov Battalion and converted into a military facility
for Ukrainian nationalists. There have not been women
in labour there for a long time, which can be confirmed
in the abundant evidence on social media.
Furthermore, if Council members are considering
exploring this topic further, I would like to underscore
that the people of Mariupol, whom the Azov Battalion
is using as human shields, saw the photos that were
published on the Internet and identified the model in
the photos as Marianna Podgurskaya. She plays three
pregnant women, with different makeup for each
character. She can also be seen in other photos by the
same photographer, Evgeniy Maloletka, who is covering
the tragedy in Ukraine. That photographer works with
the Associated Press, The New York Times and so forth.
I urge my colleagues to not spread fakes in the
Security Council. We had enough of those with the
White Helmet story, but Council members have not
learned their lesson. Therefore, I call on them to be
responsible at our meetings.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The delegation of
China has asked for the floor for a further statement.
Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
subject of today’s meeting is the issue of chemicals in
Syria. China hopes that the members of the Security
Council can focus on the topic of this meeting and
refrain from introducing issues that are not related to
the subject under discussion, so as to ensure that the
Council can consider and deliberate on relevant issues
in an efficient and normal manner.
22-28342

10/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Aldahhak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): My country’s delegation would like at the
outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, and your
sisterly country, the United Arab Emirates, on your
accession to the presidency of the Security Council
this month. We are confident that you will manage
its work successfully. We would also like to thank the
permanent delegation of the Russian Federation for its
efforts during its presidency of the Council in February.
Nine years ago, on 19 March 2013, terrorist groups
launched a chemical weapons missile in Aleppo
governorate. That attack claimed 25 martyrs, most of
whom were from the Syrian Arab Army, and 110 others
who suffered asphyxia and fainting in Khan Al-Assal.
In the wake of that incident, my country’s Government
sent a request to the previous Secretary-General,
asking for the creation of an independent technical
mission to investigate the incident. Unfortunately,
and despite months-long delays, the mission has never
visited the site or investigated anything to date. The
Khan Al-Assal incident remains evidence of the fact
that some well-known countries are covering for the
crimes of terrorist organizations, which is living proof
of the scope of manipulation and politicization of what
is called the Syrian chemical dossier.
The approach to addressing the incident of Khan
Al-Assal, which, I repeat, claimed 25 martyrs, most
of them members of the Syrian Arab Army, and 110
others who suffered asphyxia and fainting, became
the approach adopted by the OPCW Investigation and
Identification Mission for all these past years. Requests
from the Syrian Government to investigate similar
incidents, in which terrorist groups used lethal chemical
weapons against civilians and Government forces, have
been met with the same delaying tactics.
Furthermore, the Fact-Finding Mission has used
faulty and dangerous methods that are not in line
with the provisions of the Convention and the terms
of reference, whereby it accepts and receives samples
from anonymous third parties outside of Syria, instead
of collecting and preserving samples itself. In addition,
the Mission uses open sources and information from
terrorist groups and their sponsors, which leads to
erroneous results and undermines the credibility of its
reports and the professionalism of its work.

S/PV. 8990

My country, Syria, voluntarily acceded to the
Chemical Weapons Convention and destroyed its
stockpile of chemical weapons and their production
facilities. We were mindful of addressing specific
outstanding issues by cooperating with the OPCW
in order to close this dossier permanently. In that
regard, the Syrian National Authority has facilitated
the holding of 24 rounds of consultations with the
Declaration Assessment Team over the years. We
welcome the twenty-fifth round of consultations, to be
held in Damascus or in The Hague.
The Technical Secretariat of the OPCW bears full
responsibility for the delay of the twenty-fifth round of
consultations. That is because its Director-General has
stated, right here in the Council, that it was too hot in
Syria during the summer months for its staff to go there.
He then linked the delay to the non-issuance of a visa
to one member of the Team. Just one individual was
denied a visa. It was not, as speakers have said today,
that all Team members were denied visas. Work does not
depend on that one person who was not granted a visa.
My country, Syria, is not obstructing the deployment of
the Team. This is yet another example of the pressure
being exerted and of attempts to undermine Syria’s
cooperation efforts.
With regard to its cooperation efforts, the Syrian
Arab Republic submitted its ninety-ninth monthly
report on its destruction of chemical weapons and
associated production facilities. Efforts are under way
to facilitate the holding of a high-level meeting between
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the
Syrian Arab Republic and the Director-General of the
OPCW as quickly as possible, and to define its agenda
and work programme to allow progress to be made on
certain issues related to the erroneous practices of the
teams of the OPCW.
The success of the work of the OPCW and its
mandate will neither be achieved by subjecting it to
pressure and dictates, nor by politicizing the work of
its organs and compelling the Executive Board to adopt
resolutions that are impossible to implement, nor by
the suspension of Syria’s rights and privileges by the
OPCW Conference of States Parties.
The success of the work of the OPCW depends on
undertaking a comprehensive review of all erroneous
working methods used by the Technical Secretariat
and its teams and on returning to the purely technical,
non-politicized nature of its work. It should not become

22-2834213/14

S/PV.8990

The situation in the Middle East

a tool that serves the agendas of some countries at
the expense of the non-proliferation regime and our
shared values.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Politicizing the implementation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention and exploiting the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for
politically driven national goals has major negative
consequences for the Convention’s authority and
credibility, as well as those of the organization. We
reiterate our call for the complete, effective and
non-discriminatory implementation of the Convention,
as well as the preservation of the authority of the OPCW.
Syria has complied with its obligations under
the Convention and continues to cooperate with the
OPCW, submitting its 99th report on operations linked
to the destruction of chemical weapons and associated
production sites on its territory, on 17 January. In
addition, Syria regularly provides information to the
Technical Secretariat of the OPCW and the Secretariat
of the United Nations about the possession and use of
chemical weapons by some terrorist organizations,
as well as the fabrication of chemical incidents. The
Syrian army is then blamed for those heinous acts.
Recently, in Idlib governorate, members of the terrorist
group Al-Nusra fabricated a chemical incident.
Mindful of the disastrous and horrific repercussions
of the systematic use of chemical weapons by Saddam
Hussein, Iraq’s ex-dictator, during his aggression
against our country, Iran reiterates its opposition to the
use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere, at any
time and under any circumstances. Only the complete
destruction and elimination of all chemical weapons
on a global scale, as well as the implementation of all
essential measures to prevent their production, can
ensure that chemical weapons are never used again.
We reiterate our call on the Security Council to
optimize its meetings on Syria. Dedicating one monthly
meeting of the Council to the repetition of positions and
unfounded allegations against the Syrian Government
is not conducive to efficiency in the Security Council.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Keçeli (Turkey): We thank you, Mr. President, for
keeping this topic on the agenda of the Security Council.
14/14

10/03/2022

We also thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
her continued work on this important issue.
The most recent report (S/2022/181, annex) of
the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) underscores
one simple fact — the Syrian regime flouts its
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention
by failing to fully declare and destroy its chemical
weapons. The outstanding issues we have discussed on
numerous occasions persist, namely, identified gaps,
inconsistencies and discrepancies in chemical weapons
declaration. The information requests of the OPCW
remain unanswered.
Furthermore, the regime continues to obstruct
technical consultations with the OPCW Declaration
Assessment Team by manipulating and abusing the visa
issue. In addition, the regime refuses to cooperate with
and grant access to the Investigation and Identification
Team (IIT). We also take note of the two most recent
reports of the Fact-Finding Mission in Syria (FFM),
which have established the use of chemicals as weapons
in Marea, on 1 September 2015, and Kafr Zeita, on
1 October 2016 (S/2022/85, annex and S/2022/116,
annex, respectively). We await further investigation by
the IIT into the identification of the perpetrators.
There is now a growing body of scientific evidence
behind the Syrian regime’s continued failure to comply
with its international obligations. The reports of the
United Nations-OPCW Joint Investigation Mechanism,
as well as of the FFM and the IIT, all point in the same
direction. Such violations have serious repercussions
for international peace and security.
It takes a war criminal to use chemical weapons
once, but it takes the Al-Assad regime to use chemical
weapons on at least eight separate occasions. We
condemn in the strongest possible terms the use of
chemical weapons by the Syrian regime. We once again
underscore the special responsibility of those backing
the regime on its current course.
The Security Council must speak with a unified
voice on this grave issue. The Syrian regime must be
urged to fully cooperate with the OPCW.
The perpetrators of those attacks must be identified
and brought to justice without further delay. Impunity
for such abhorrent crimes against humanity cannot and
should not be tolerated.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.
22-28342
