S/PV.7070

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7070th meeting

Tuesday, 26 November 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(China)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan
Mr. Park Yong Min
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Menan
Mr. Tatham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on the restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau (S/2013/680)
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and the activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) (S/2013/681)

13-58226 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1358226*

S/PV.7070

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on the
restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau (S/2013/680)
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (S/2013/681)
The President (spoke in Chinese): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau and
Mozambique to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome the presence
of Mr. Fernando Delfim da Silva, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of GuineaBissau.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. José Ramos-Horta, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar
Patriota, Permanent Representative of Brazil, to
participate in this meeting in his capacity as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to
draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2013/680, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau, and to document S/2013/681, which
contains the report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ramos-Horta.
Mr. Ramos-Horta: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to introduce the two reports of the

2/8

26/11/2013

Secretary-General (S/2013/680 and S/2013/681) on the
continuing efforts to help restore constitutional order
in Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS).
As the Secretary-General indicates in his report,
progress towards the restoration of constitutional order
in Guinea-Bissau, especially with respect to the holding
of credible presidential and legislative elections, has
continued to be slow. Lengthy consultations among
national stakeholders to agree on the voter registration
system and to finalize the electoral budget and timeline
have significantly contributed to the delay in advancing
electoral preparations, including in mobilizing the
required resources to cover the elections.
On 31 October, the Transitional Government
announced that digital voter registration would
take place both in Guinea-Bissau and in the
diaspora from 1 to 22 December. The Transitional
Government subsequently announced that the voter
registration period would be modified to run from 1 to
31 December. On 15 November, Transitional President
Serifo Nhamadjo issued a decree announcing that
general elections would be held on 16 March 2014. He
also indicated that the costs of the elections would be
fully covered by pledges made by the country’s key
international partners.
While some progress has been made in the past
few weeks in advancing preparations for the elections,
much remains to be done. To assist in these efforts,
the Transitional Prime Minister has established a
coordinating committee for the electoral process and
financial support to the general elections of 2013-2014,
under his chairmanship, to ensure coordination among
partners.
On 5 November, an electoral mission from TimorLeste, headed by the Timorese Secretary of State of
Administrative Decentralization, Mr. Tomás Cabral,
arrived in Bissau. The delegation, which includes 20
advisers from the election management body of TimorLeste, will remain in Guinea-Bissau for four months to
provide advice to the Government’s technical electoral
support office. The Government of Timor-Leste has
pledged $6 million for the voter registration process
and donated 200 electoral kits. Overall, pledges made
by international partners are now well in excess of the
budget prepared by the Transitional Government.

13-58226

26/11/2013

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Please allow me to say a few words on other key
developments in the country since the issuance of the
two reports of the Secretary-General.
With respect to political developments, the first
ordinary session of the 2013-2014 parliamentary year
opened on 18 November and is expected to end on
18 December. Parliamentarians will discuss, inter alia,
the amnesty bill in favour of the authors of the coup d’état
of 2012, the public finance management transparency
code, and the State budget for 2014. Members of the
Council will recall that the amnesty bill proposed by
the Transitional Government, with the support of the
Social Renewal Party (PRS), was initially rejected by
the National Assembly on 10 September. At that time,
the PRS Secretary-General had announced that his
party would resubmit the bill, arguing that amnesty
was part of the “normalization process” under way.
As to the judiciary, since the assassination of a
Nigerian citizen in Bissau on 8 October and the opening
of an investigation into the case, 10 individuals have
been formally charged with the crime and are being
held at the Judiciary Police detention centre pending
their trial. The Prosecutor-General has also opened
another investigation into the attack on the Minister
of Transport and Communications of the Transitional
Government, Mr. Orlando Viegas Mendes, which
occurred on 5 November. The Minister is still out of
the country receiving medical care for the injuries he
sustained during the violent beating. We have been
informed that 11 individuals have been questioned by
the Judiciary Police in relation to the attack.
With respect to the UNIOGBIS mandate, delays
in preparations for the elections have had a negative
impact on its implementation. Most of the mission’s
efforts have been focused on responding to the
country’s immediate political, security and human
rights challenges. However, the Mission has made
some progress, in establishing two regional offices, in
the north-central region of Bafatá and in the southern
region of Buba. The inauguration ceremonies on
9 November were attended by hundreds of people,
including the Governors of Bafatá and Quinara, sector
administrators, military and security personnel,
traditional and religious leaders. In my statements on
the occasion, I emphasized that the regional offices
would contribute to bringing the United Nations closer
to the people and help the Organization to have a better
understanding of the problems facing the people in the
interior of the country.

S/PV.7070

In conclusion, allow me to highlight two key points.
First, progress in the restoration of constitutional
order in Guinea-Bissau remains frustratingly slow.
Indeed, and as highlighted in the two reports, the
human rights and security situation in Guinea-Bissau
has continued to deteriorate, with increased cases
of intimidation, threats, and restrictions of freedom
of expression and assembly, as well as continuing
interference of the military in the affairs of the State.
In a joint letter to the Transitional President dated
19 September, the Economic Community of West
African States Special Representative in Bissau and
I expressed concern over continuing human rights
violations and impunity in the country. We also
referred to the generalized climate of fear created by
the unlawful behaviour of the defence and security
forces. That climate of fear has persisted to date and
is not contributing to establishing an environment
conducive to the holding of peaceful and credible
elections. The transitional authorities must ensure that
those responsible for these unlawful acts are brought
to justice. The United Nations will continue to provide
support for the implementation of the recommendations
of the National Conference on Impunity, Justice and
Human Rights, which was held in Bissau in July. I invite
other international partners to lend further support in
this area.
Secondly, the holding of credible and peaceful
presidential and legislative elections in Guinea-Bissau
on 16 March 2014, as announced by the Transitional
President, should remain our key priority in ensuring
a return to constitutional order in the country. I would
like to commend Guinea-Bissau’s international partners
for their generous pledges of financial support to the
electoral process, which I urge them to disburse rapidly,
following arrangements for proper management. As
stressed by the Secretary-General in his report, the
onus is now on the Transitional Government to take
the necessary steps towards the timely holding of the
elections.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Ramos-Horta for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Patriota.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you, Sir, for convening
this meeting and for the invitation to brief the Security
Council in my capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
I also thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-

13-582263/8

S/PV.7070

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

General, Mr. José Ramos-Horta, for his briefing and his
outstanding leadership and vision. His assessment and
proposals deserve our attentive consideration.
As Guinea-Bissau enters what we hope will be
the last stages of its transition back to constitutional
order, the Council’s active engagement remains
critical. In September, the Council was encouraged by
developments such as the creation of a more inclusive
transitional Government, and called for the holding of
free and credible presidential and legislative elections
as soon as possible and for an inclusive dialogue
towards key reforms.
Today, a new date has been set for the elections;
donors, especially those from the region, have made
substantive pledges; and key preparations for elections,
such as voter registration, are to begin soon. Still, recent
episodes of violence and intimidation are a matter of
deep concern and a reminder of the fragility of the
security situation and of the long way to go towards the
goal of stability.
The Guinea-Bissau configuration of the PBC stands
ready to work closely with all partners, particularly the
Security Council and Special Representative RamosHorta, not only to help sustain the necessary support
for the electoral process, but most importantly to
help articulate a comprehensive strategy for the postelectoral phase. Considering the importance of early
planning in this regard, I intend to accept an invitation
from Mr. Ramos-Horta to visit Guinea-Bissau, in my
capacity as Chair of the configuration, in mid-January
with a view to identifying the areas in which the GuineaBissau configuration of the PBC can make a difference.
If the elections are to be successful, adequate
preparation, including voter registration, must take
place in a credible manner. I am encouraged by and
grateful for the generosity of countries providing
technical and financial support, the bulk of which is
coming from the region, as well as for the contributions
of the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States, and the European Union. I firmly
believe that regional and subregional support, as well
as South-South cooperation, are key elements of an
effective peacebuilding strategy for Guinea-Bissau. I
am committed, as a priority, to working closely with
regional and subregional partners as we reinstate the
PBC’s engagement with Guinea-Bissau.
We all know that elections in themselves, while
an essential prerequisite for sustained stability, will

4/8

26/11/2013

not provide a comprehensive answer to the numerous
challenges that Guinea-Bissau faces. Much more
needs to be done to secure a constructive postelectoral environment. It will be necessary to ensure
that inclusive, broad-based participation in political
understandings is maintained following the elections.
Efforts towards the reform and modernization of the
defence, security and justice sectors — a key dimension
for stability and the consolidation of civilian rule — must
be decisively enhanced. The PBC can play a central role
in generating international support for reforms under a
democratically elected national leadership, with strong
emphasis on capacity-building for State institutions.
At the same time, comprehensive steps will need to be
taken to help the country’s economy, including through
improvements in infrastructure, the generation of
revenue, civilian institutions and job creation, which
are important elements in the effort to break the cycle
of political instability in Guinea-Bissau.
The PBC will continue to support efforts by the
future democratically elected Government of GuineaBissau to articulate national peacebuilding priorities
with international assistance. Guinea-Bissau’s diverse
economic potential, from agricultural production to
fisheries and mining, holds one of the keys for the
country’s peaceful and stable future.
Despite the daunting challenges that the country
is still facing and the dire social and economic
situation, aggravated by the suspension of international
assistance, Guinea-Bissau has the potential to become
an African success story. A fertile country with a
resilient, peaceful people, abundant water and mineral
resources and beautiful beaches, Guinea-Bissau
deserves our long-term and sustained attention. As
Special Representative Ramos-Horta has pointed out
before, the silent political emergency of Guinea-Bissau,
as serious and dangerous as it may be, has not drawn
the attention of international mass media.
On the other hand, the scale of the problems in
Guinea-Bissau is relatively small, if compared to much
bigger challenges that the Security Council and the
international community have successfully tackled in
the recent years, and need to deal with in Africa and
other parts of the world. There is no reason that our
concerted actions should not achieve positive results.
With strong engagement by the PBC and sustained
support from the Security Council, as well as from its
regional and international partners, and with dedicated

13-58226

26/11/2013

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

transcontinental solidarity from Portuguese-speaking
countries, which can provide critical support in
capacity-building, I am confident that we will be able
to assist the people of Guinea-Bissau to devise a better
future for themselves.
It is my strong expectation that Guinea-Bissau can
become a successful exercise in the display of steadfast
solidarity and collective responsibility to achieve the
interlinked goals of sustainable development and
lasting peace.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Patriota for his brifing.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Da Silva (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on behalf of GuineaBissau, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month, as well as to convey
to you my sincere wishes for the success of your work.
I also wish to extend to the members of the Council our
deep gratitude for having devoted particular attention
in recent years to the situation in my country.
I would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his enlightening report (S/2013/681) of
the reality on the ground in my country, which has just
been introduced, as well as to thank him for his tireless
commitment to the cause of Guinea-Bissau.
We pay well-deserved tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in GuineaBissau, Mr. José Ramos-Horta, for the new impetus
he has brought to the transition process in my country.
We hope that we will be able to continue to count on
his long experience in support of our peacebuilding
process.

S/PV.7070

transition period started after the coup d’état of April
2012. Despite efforts by our authorities, the timeline
initially established by ECOWAS, and approved by the
transitional authorities of my country, could not be met,
resulting in the postponement of the general elections
that were scheduled for 24 November.
In that context, we would like to pay tribute to
ECOWAS, whose member States were able to provide
a large part of the budget required for the elections at
the latest summit held in Dakar, on 25 October. I also
wish to express our sincere thanks to People’s Republic
of China for its invaluable support, as well as to the
European Union for its financial contribution to the
process.
Guinea-Bissau duly appreciates the intentions
expressed by other bilateral partners to support the
electoral process, as that will allow us to achieve the
restoration of constitutional order in accordance with
the requirements of the international community, in
general, and particularly the desire of the people of
Guinea-Bissau.
I would like to take this opportunity to express the
deep gratitude of my country vis-à-vis a brother country
that has made the decision to engage with the people
and the authorities of Guinea-Bissau at a particularly
time difficult. The Republic of Timor-Leste, a CPLP
member State, has taken full responsibility for the
entire process of voter registration. This is the second
time in the history of our democracy that this process
has reached out to the diaspora.
Given those conditions, and in the spirit of resolution
2048 (2012), the Transitional President issued a decree
setting a new date for the general elections — 16 March
2014. Voter registration must therefore begin in the
coming days, that is, on 1 December.

I thank Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar Patriota,
Permanent Representative of Brazil and President of
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission; Ambassador Youssoufou Bamba,
Permanent Representative of Côte d’Ivoire and
Chair of the Economic Community of African States
(ECOWAS); and Ambassador António Gumende,
Permanent Representative of Mozambique and Chair
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP), for their respective commitment to the
transition process under way in my country.

As the Council is aware, elections in Guinea-Bissau
will be but a first step in a process that should naturally
begin with the restoration of the constitutional order,
with a view to providing our country with legitimate
institutions so that, in collaboration with all our
partners, it will lead the country to peace and enable it
to face the challenges that are before us. We are fully
aware of the magnitude, and at times the complexity,
of our challenges. But our belief that Guinea-Bissau
is a viable country where everyone can live in peace
remains unassailable.

I speak before the Security Council at a time
when my country is heading towards the end of the

In the post-election period, we will very much
need the support of the international community,

13-582265/8

S/PV.7070

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

as recommended by the Secretary-General’s report
of 6 May (S/2013/262), as the challenges we face are
numerous and often complex in the our current political,
social and economic contributionext.
Reform in the defence and security sectors
remains at the top of the hierarchy of priorities for
our country. However, beyond that imperative, other
equally important challenges also lie ahead. They
include the fight against drug trafficking, ensuring
the effective functioning of the judiciary, creating
conditions conducive to the promotion of human rights
and building the capacity of the public administration
to ensure good governance, so that our country can also
aspire to develop in the manner our people so desire.
In that context, I would like to take this opportunity to
appeal to all our international partners to continue to
support Guinea-Bissau in this phase.
Guinea-Bissau is currently facing a social crisis
of unprecedented proportions owing to the sanctions
imposed by our main partners following the break
in the constitutional order that was the result of the
12 April coup. We understand those measures, but it
should be recalled that the sanctions’ effects go beyond
political considerations and should rather be looked at
from a humanitarian perspective, in regard to which we
call on Guinea-Bissau’s partner organizations to lift
the sanctions in order to minimize the consequences
of the crisis that the country is currently undergoing.
We welcome the initiative of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in July in making
$5 million available to the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, which has
enabled it to undertake some pre-electoral activities.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my thanks
to the members of the Security Council for their
commitment to finding solutions to the situation that
Guinea-Bissau finds itself in.
Mr. Gumende (Mozambique): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to congratulate you on your
country’s presidency of the Security Council for the
month of November. I would also like to thank you for
inviting me to participate on behalf the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), comprised of
Angola, Brazil, Cabo Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Portugal,
Sao Tome and Principe, Timor-Leste and my own
country, Mozambique, at this briefing on the situation in
Guinea-Bissau. The CPLP countries continue to follow
with great interest the ongoing process towards the
restoration of constitutional order and the conclusion
6/8

26/11/2013

of the transition in Guinea-Bissau. We therefore
welcome the comprehensive report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2013/681) on the latest developments in
Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS).
The delays in the electoral process continue
to prolong the people’s suffering, hindering their
realization of their aspirations and forcing the country
to remain dependent on assistance for its basic survival
needs, since the April 2012 coup d’état has exacerbated
social and economic hardships in the country.
We commend the recent positive developments,
particular the announcement of the voter registration
process planned from 1 to 21 December, and the
scheduling of presidential and legislative elections
for 16 March 2014. We welcome and commend the
Government of Timor-Leste’s creation of a mission
to support the electoral process in Guinea-Bissau,
along with a contribution of $6 million to assist in the
voter registration process. The technical team will be
working in close partnership with the technical office
supporting the electoral process in Guinea-Bissau. The
mission will have a high-level technical capacity and
is committed to sharing its knowledge and experience
and providing assistance in conducting simultaneous
elections in the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, thereby
contributing to the restoration of constitutional order.
We hope that with the support of the international
community, in particular the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), as well as
Timor-Leste, Nigeria, and the European Union, the
transitional authorities will fully respect that calendar
by discharging their main responsibility for organizing
free, fair, inclusive and credible elections that are
a precondition for a return to constitutional order,
in line with resolution 2048 (2012), without further
postponements, which should clearly be unacceptable
to the international community. Recognizing those
positive developments in the country, we would like to
commend the tireless efforts and vision of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. José
Ramos-Horta, aimed at a sustainable solution to the
crisis.
The holding of elections is an urgently needed step
in establishing legitimate institutions. Their results
must be fully acted on in order to respect the true will
of the people of Guinea-Bissau. The election and the
establishment of a legitimate Government should also
13-58226

26/11/2013

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

strengthen civilian oversight and supervision of the
defence and security forces. We call on the transitional
authorities, with the active engagement of the
international community and in particular the Security
Council, to ensure that the elections are conducted in
a peaceful environment, with the safe participation of
all actors in the political process. In that regard, I must
convey our deep concern about the recent episodes of
violence and intimidation in Guinea-Bissau, affecting
representatives of the media, human rights advocates,
artists and political figures, as well as the lack of
concrete action being taken to fight impunity.
The international community, including the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
must firmly support the legitimate authorities of
Guinea-Bissau once they assume their functions, in
order to once and for all break the cycle of violence
and instability that has affected that fragile country
for many years. In a climate of inclusive dialogue,
the future legitimate authorities should implement
the reforms that have been identified as necessary in
the security, justice and administrative sectors. But in
order to do that, as Mr. Ramos-Horta has pointed out,
they will need international technical and financial
support. They will also need security and stability.
In that regard, the Council should discuss further
the Secretary-General’s recommendation on the
importance of providing support for strengthening the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) in
order to guarantee adequate security for the elections
and in the post-election period as the country reforms
and strengthens its institutions. Such support could
include a broader international presence on the ground
under an enhanced ECOMIB.
As the Security Council has affirmed in previous
statements, combating impunity in Guinea-Bissau is
a priority and a condition for long-term stability. We
reiterate our concern about the prevailing culture of
impunity and lack of accountability in the country.
In that regard, we welcome the ongoing efforts of
UNIOGBIS and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime to support the fight against drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime in Guinea-Bissau.
They will continue to be key to helping the future
legitimate authorities to overcome that challenge in
a sustainable manner and to promote stability in the
country and beyond.
Let me conclude by reiterating the commitment of
the CPLP to continue working with the international

S/PV.7070

community to create the necessary conditions for
stability, the consolidation of peace and the restoration
of the foundations necessary to the development of
Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the 15 States
members of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), and I welcome the excellent reports
of the Secretary-General presented to us today on the
situation in Guinea-Bissau (S/2013/680 and S/2013/681).
In view of the fact that my delegation is taking
the floor for the first time this month, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your presidency of
the Council for November.
My delegation has taken note of the reports of the
Secretary-General and has listened to the briefing by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. José Ramos-Horta, as well as the various statements
by the speakers before me.
Since the adoption of resolution 2013 (2013) on
22 May, there have been a number of positive developments
and concrete results in Guinea-Bissau under the Special
Representative’s watch, particularly regarding the
restoration of constitutional order, preparations for the
presidential elections, the strengthening of the judicial
and security sectors, and preparations for post-crisis
reconstruction after elections have been held. That is
why, on behalf of the Heads of State and Government
of ECOWAS, I would like to pay tribute to the Special
Representative for the results obtained to date, and to
affirm the entire Community’s support to him in the
challenges still to overcome. We firmly believe that his
experience as a statesman and his charisma as a Nobel
Peace Prize laureate have greatly contributed to those
positive developments. He is to be congratulated on his
commitment, particularly considering that his country,
Timor-Leste, has contributed to the financing of the
electoral process to the tune of $6 million and is fully
involved in the voter registration planned for December.
Despite those encouraging results, we have to admit
that much remains to be done, particularly in the area of
security and stability. For their part, at the forty-third
ECOWAS Summit, the Heads of State and Government
of ECOWAS committed firmly and concretely to
extending the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau
(ECOMIB) for an additional 12 months, until 16 May
2014.

13-582267/8

S/PV.7070

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

In that specific context, and to support the electoral
process under way, ECOWAS is ready to make a
contribution of $19 million for the financing of the
presidential elections scheduled for 16 March 2014. In
addition to that contribution, ECOWAS also intends
to send two formed police units as reinforcements to
ECOMIB. We have been informed that there is an urgent
request to meet logistics and air needs to guarantee the
security of the electoral process and ensure calm and
peaceful elections. We take this opportunity to call for
such equipment and materials to be made available.
Like all of Guinea-Bissau’s development partners,
ECOWAS remains mobilized to provide all possible
support for a return to constitutional order and
economic recovery in Guinea-Bissau. I also take the
opportunity of this meeting to note the gratitude of
ECOWAS to all partners of the international community
who continue to provide substantial support to this
brotherly country of our subregion. In that regard, I am
pleased to welcome the contributions announced by the
European Union and the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, totalling some
$800,000. Likewise, the West African Economic and
Monetary Union announced funding of $2 million. We
are therefore very encouraged by all of this good news,

26/11/2013

and believe that all of those contributions will enable
Guinea-Bissau to hold credible elections.
It is therefore crucial in our view that joint work be
carried out, starting now, to develop a detailed road map
for security sector and justice reform so as to ensure the
necessary foundations for stabilization for the medium
and long term in Guinea-Bissau.
With regard to post-election reconstruction, joint
actions planned with the African Union, the World
Bank and several other development partners should be
granted the full attention of the Security Council and
all of the States Members of the United Nations in order
to guarantee their full success.
In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm the
commitment of Heads of State and Government of West
Africa to strengthening the integration of the subregion
by eradicating conflict and laying the foundations
for sustainable development in subregion. The case
of Guinea-Bissau is a priority at the heart of that
commitment of the leaders of our subregion.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

8/8

13-58226
