A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/125
14 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 91
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/49/731)]
49/125.

United Nations Institute for Training and
Research

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 46/180 of 19 December 1991, 47/227 of 8 April
1993 and 48/207 of 21 December 1993,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General 1/ and the
report of the Acting Executive Director of the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research on the activities of the Institute, 2/
Recognizing the growing importance and relevance of training within the
United Nations and the new training requirements of all Member States,
Considering the relevance of research activities related to training
undertaken by the United Nations Institute for Training and Research within
its mandate,
Acknowledging the importance for the restructured Institute of
continuing to develop closer relationships with relevant national and
international institutions in industrialized and developing countries in order
to enable the United Nations system to respond to training needs in the most
cost-effective manner and in the best interest of all Member States,

1/

A/49/634.

2/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 14 (A/49/14).

95-76483

/...

A/RES/49/125
Page 2

Taking note with interest of the steps taken to complete the
restructuring process of the Institute with a view to making it the dynamic
training institution that it was originally intended to be,
1.
Takes note of the recommendations of the Board of Trustees of the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research;
2.
Urges Member States to make voluntary contributions to the
restructured Institute, in particular to its General Fund, so as to assure its
viability and the further development of its training programmes;
3.
Reaffirms that the funding of all the administrative budget and
the training programmes of the Institute shall be covered from voluntary
contributions, donations, special-purpose grants and executing agency
overheads;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to provide for the Institute in the
future, and retroactively since the move of its headquarters to Geneva, office
space in that city as well as administrative and logistic support at fair
costs, based on the costs borne by the United Nations itself and ensuring an
equal treatment with other United Nations entities;
5.
Also requests the Secretary-General to provide for the Institute
at fair costs, based on the costs borne by the United Nations itself and
ensuring an equal treatment with other United Nations entities, liaison office
space in New York, and, in this context, requests the Board of Trustees to
give the necessary attention to these matters with a view to avoiding any
negative financial impact on the Institute;
6.
Invites the United Nations Institute for Training and Research and
the United Nations and its funds and programmes, including the United Nations
Development Programme, to develop and intensify their collaboration, with the
aim of making the Institute an important provider of training and trainingrelated research for the United Nations system and to avoid unnecessary
duplication of work;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen, in accordance with
their respective mandates, the cooperation between the Institute and other
qualified national and international institutions, including the International
Training Centre of the International Labour Organization at Turin, Italy;
8.
Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the
General Assembly at its fiftieth session on the measures taken in the
implementation of the present resolution.
92nd plenary meeting
19 December 1994
