A/RES/75/290 B*

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 June 2021

Seventy-fifth session
Agenda items 14 and 122
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up
to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences
and summits in the economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 25 June 2021
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/75/L.102)]

75/290.

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution
72/305 on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions
67/290 on the format and organizational aspects of the high-level
political forum on sustainable development and 70/299 on the
follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development at the global level
B
High-level political forum on sustainable development
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming
our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a
comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and transformative
Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for
the full implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating
poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest
global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development and
its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions –
economic, social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to
building upon the achievements of the Millennium Development Goals and seeking
to address their unfinished business,

* Reissued for technical reasons on 13 July 2021.

21-08654* (E)

130721

*2108654*

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 72/305
on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 67/290 on the format and
organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development and 70/299
on the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level

A/RES/75/290 B

Recalling its resolution 74/298 of 12 August 2020, entitled “Review of the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 67/290 on the high-level political
forum on sustainable development, resolution 70/299 on the follow-up and review of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level and resolution
72/305 on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council”,
Recalling also its resolutions 67/290 of 9 July 2013, entitled “Format and
organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development”,
and 70/299 of 29 July 2016, entitled “Follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development at the global level”,
Reaffirming its resolution 74/4 of 15 October 2019, entitled “Political
declaration of the high-level political forum on sustainable development convened
under the auspices of the General Assembly”, and the relevance of the decade of action
and delivery for sustainable development, especially in the context of recovering
better from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development,
which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda, supports and complements it, helps to
contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete policies and actions
and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing
and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the
spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Recalling that the 2030 Agenda is guided by the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, including full respect for international law, is grounded
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1 and international human rights
treaties, the United Nations Millennium Declaration 2 and the 2005 World Summit
Outcome, 3 and is informed by other instruments such as the Declaration on the Right
to Development, 4
1.
Reaffirms that, in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 5
Member States committed to engaging in systematic follow-up and review of the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda in accordance with agreed guiding principles,
including those set out in paragraph 74 of resolution 70/1, and asserted that the highlevel political forum on sustainable development would have a central role in
overseeing a network of follow-up and review processes of the 2030 Agenda at the
global level, working coherently with the General Assembly, the Economic and Soci al
Council and other relevant organs and forums, in accordance with existing mandates;
2.
Declares that the Economic and Social Council and the high-level political
forum on sustainable development should be closely coordinated, in accordance with
their respective roles and mandates, to ensure that their interconnected and interlinked
work is coherent and mutually reinforcing in supporting the accelerated
implementation of the 2030 Agenda throughout the decade of action and delivery for
sustainable development from now to the year 2030;
3.
Notes that the Economic and Social Council is a Charter body of the United
Nations and that the high-level political forum on sustainable development is held under
the auspices of the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly;

__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 55/1.
3
Resolution 60/1.
4
Resolution 41/128, annex.
5
Resolution 70/1.
1
2

2/10

21-08654

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 72/305
on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 67/290 on the format and
organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development and 70/299
on the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level

A/RES/75/290 B

4.
Adopts the annex to the present resolution on the review of the high -level
political forum on sustainable development, and calls upon the Economic and Social
Council and relevant bodies and platforms of the United Nations system to im plement
the provisions contained therein in an expeditious manner;
5.
Decides that the arrangements contained in the present resolution and its
annex shall be reviewed at its seventy-eighth session, in conjunction with the review
of the Economic and Social Council, in order to benefit from lessons learned from the
previous cycles of the high-level political forum on sustainable development as well
as from relevant processes under the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council related to the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda;
6.
Reiterates its decision that the review of the strengthening of the Economic
and Social Council at subsequent review cycles shall be in conjunction with the
review process of the high-level political forum on sustainable development, while
recognizing their distinct roles and mandates;
7.
Recalls its decision contained in resolution 74/298, and decides to agree
at its seventy-seventh session on the annual theme of the 2024 session of the
Economic and Social Council and the 2024 high-level political forum on sustainable
development and the set of Goals to be reviewed by the high-level political forum in
2024, without prejudice to the full review of the Council and the high -level political
forum to be conducted in conjunction with each other at the seventy-eighth session;
8.
Decides that all mandates contained in resolutions 67/290 and 70/299 shall
remain in effect unless updated or replaced in the present resolution or subsequent
resolutions of the General Assembly and that the mandates contained in the present
resolution and its annex should be implemented starting with the 2022 high -level
political forum on sustainable development and its preparations.
87th plenary meeting
25 June 2021

Annex
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions
67/290 on the format and organizational aspects of the high-level
political forum on sustainable development and 70/299 on the
follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development at the global level
1.
The high-level political forum on sustainable development, consistent with its
universal intergovernmental character, shall provide political leadership, guidance
and recommendations for sustainable development, follow -up and review progress in
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 6 in its entirety
and other sustainable development commitments, and enhance the integration of the
three dimensions of sustainable development in a balanced, holistic and cross-sectoral
manner at all levels, while also addressing the pledge of leaving no one behind. It
should have a focused, dynamic and action-oriented agenda, ensuring the appropriate
consideration of new and emerging challenges and mobilizing further actions to
accelerate implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals.

__________________
6

21-08654

Resolution 70/1.
3/10

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 72/305
on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 67/290 on the format and
organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development and 70/299
on the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level

A/RES/75/290 B

2.
The General Assembly reaffirms its resolutions 67/290 of 9 July 2013, 70/299
of 29 July 2016 and 74/298 of 12 August 2020 and the central role of the high-level
political forum on sustainable development, established in the 2030 Agenda, in
overseeing the follow-up and review of the Agenda at the global level, while also
contributing to knowledge-sharing and creating synergies to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals.
3.
In accordance with the political declaration of the Sustainable Development
Goals Summit (high-level political forum on sustainable development convened
under the auspices of the General Assembly), held on 24 and 25 September 2019, 7 the
follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda at the global level should support the
accelerated implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the achievement of its
17 Sustainable Development Goals through the decade of action and delivery for
sustainable development.
4.
The principles established in the 2030 Agenda for guiding follow -up and review
processes at all levels, including those set out in paragraph 74 of the Agenda, should
continue to be implemented at all levels. Accordingly, follow-up and review processes
at all levels will be guided by the following principles:
(a) They will be voluntary and country-led, will take into account different
national realities, capacities and levels of development and will respect policy space
and priorities. As national ownership is key to achieving sustainable development, the
outcome from national-level processes will be the foundation for reviews at regional
and global levels, given that the global review will be primarily based on national
official data sources;
(b) They will track progress in implementing the universal Goals and targets,
including the means of implementation, in all countries in a manner which respects
their universal, integrated and interrelated nature and the three dimensions of
sustainable development;
(c) They will maintain a longer-term orientation, identify achievements,
challenges, gaps and critical success factors and support countries in making informed
policy choices. They will help to mobilize the necessary means of implementation
and partnerships, support the identification of solutions and best practices and
promote the coordination and effectiveness of the international development system;
(d) They will be open, inclusive, participatory and transparent for all people
and will support the reporting by all relevant stakeholders ;
(e) They will be people-centred, gender-sensitive, respect human rights and
have a particular focus on the poorest, most vulnerable and those furthest behind ;
(f) They will build on existing platforms and processes, where these exist,
avoid duplication and respond to national circumstances, capacities, needs and
priorities. They will evolve over time, taking into account emerging issues and the
development of new methodologies, and will minimize the reporting burden on
national administrations;
(g) They will be rigorous and based on evidence, informed by country -led
evaluations and data which is high-quality, accessible, timely, reliable and
disaggregated by income, sex, age, race, ethnicity, migration status, disability and
geographic location and other characteristics relevant in national contexts ;
(h) They will require enhanced capacity-building support for developing
countries, including the strengthening of national data systems and evaluation
__________________
7

4/10

Resolution 74/4, annex.
21-08654

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 72/305
on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 67/290 on the format and
organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development and 70/299
on the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level

A/RES/75/290 B

programmes, particularly in African countries, least developed countries, small island
developing States, landlocked developing countries and middle-income countries;
(i) They will benefit from the active support of the United Nations system and
other multilateral institutions.
5.
The preparations of the high-level political forum and its programme and
proceedings, including the thematic reviews and the voluntary national reviews, shall
reflect the universal, integrated, indivisible and interlinked nature of the Sustainable
Development Goals, and give due consideration to the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development, 8 the Paris
Agreement 9 and the outcomes of other major United Nations conferences and
summits in the economic, social and environmental fields, in the context of the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
6.
The high-level political forum shall strengthen peer learning and implementation,
by providing sufficient time for the sharing of best practices and experiences relating
to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and, on a voluntary basis, the sharing of
knowledge and advice, including on successes and challenges. It will address the
interlinkages between the global, regional, national and subnational levels of the
implementation and review of the 2030 Agenda, building on the regional forums on
sustainable development, preparations for voluntary national reviews and expert and
other preparatory meetings leading to the high-level political forum.
7.
The high-level political forum on sustainable development convened under the
auspices of the Economic and Social Council, without prejudice to the integrated,
indivisible and interlinked nature of the Sustainable Development Goals, shall
continue to review a set of Goals and their interlinkages, including with other Goals,
at each session, representing the three dimensions of sustainable development, with a
view to facilitating an in-depth review of progress made on all 17 Goals over the
course of its four-year cycle. Means of implementation, including with respect to
Goal 17, shall be reviewed annually, including based on the outcome of the Economic
and Social Council forum on financing for development follow -up.
8.
The high-level political forum on sustainable development convened under the
auspices of the Economic and Social Council shall strengthen its analysis of th e
interlinkages across the Sustainable Development Goals and targets, including policy
implications of their synergies and trade-offs, and of the economic, social and
environmental dimensions of sustainable development, while also addressing issues
cutting across the 2030 Agenda and the Goals as well as the principle of leaving no
one behind. While respecting its universal intergovernmental character, the high-level
political forum will continue to involve Governments, as well as the United Nations
system and other international and regional organizations, parliamentarians, local
governments, women, children and youth, persons with disabilities, indigenous
peoples, civil society, non-governmental organizations, business and the private
sector, the scientific and academic community and other major groups and relevant
stakeholders.
9.
The high-level political forum will strive to strike a balance between giving
greater attention to interlinkages across the Goals and targets and ensuring in -depth
reviews of individual Sustainable Development Goals. To better address the synergies
and trade-offs across the Goals, the high-level political forum shall also bear in mind,
each year, areas in which measures to achieve the Goals can have the greatest and

__________________
8
9

21-08654

Resolution 69/313, annex.
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
5/10

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 72/305
on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 67/290 on the format and
organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development and 70/299
on the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level

A/RES/75/290 B

most transformative impact across multiple Goals and targets, building on policy and
scientific analysis.
10. The high-level political forum shall strengthen the science-policy interface to
support actions by policymakers and other stakeholders with solid evidence on
progress and challenges in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the related
policies. To this end, it will also examine documentation, bringing together dispersed
information and assessments, including through the Global Sustainable Development
Report, building on existing assessments, and enhancing evidence-based decisionmaking. It will give dedicated attention to issues related to the availability of data and
the strengthening of capabilities for data collection and analysis.
11. For the remainder of the current cycle of the high-level political forum, the
themes shall be:
(a) For 2022: Building back better from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
while advancing the full implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;
(b) For 2023: Accelerating the recovery from the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) and the full implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development at all levels.
12. For the remainder of the current cycle of the high-level political forum convened
under the auspices of the Economic and Social Council, the sets of Sustainable
Development Goals to be reviewed in-depth shall be:
(a)

For 2022: Goals 4, 5, 14, 15 and 17;

(b)

For 2023: Goals 6, 7, 9, 11 and 17.

13. In 2022 and 2023, the high-level political forum shall take into account the
different and particular impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic across all Sustainable
Development Goals.
14. In 2022 and 2023, the high-level political forum will also maintain the integrity
of the 2030 Agenda and ensure continuous action on the targets of the Sustainable
Development Goals with a 2020 timeline, while keeping track of and taking fully into
account the related ongoing intergovernmental processes to allow updated targets to
reflect a suitable level of ambition for 2030.
15. In 2022 and 2023, the high-level political forum shall also promote and review
the implementation of the intergovernmentally negotiated political declaration
adopted at the 2019 Sustainable Development Goals Summit (high -level political
forum on sustainable development convened under the auspices of the General
Assembly), as well as intergovernmentally negotiated ministerial declarations
adopted by the high-level political forum convened under the auspices of the
Economic and Social Council, so as to contribute to the implementation of the 2030
Agenda.
16. In the conduct of the thematic reviews, the high-level political forum could
consider the inputs to the high-level political forum from intergovernmental bodies
and forums, including relevant multi-stakeholder forums, and, as appropriate, the
findings, research, data and recommendations from the United Nations system, as
well as those emanating from the expert preparatory process organized by the
Secretariat, and expert and scientific sources such as the Global Sustainable
Development Report and the Technology Facilitation Mechanism that strengthen the
science-policy interface.

6/10

21-08654

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 72/305
on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 67/290 on the format and
organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development and 70/299
on the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level

A/RES/75/290 B

17. The high-level political forum shall dedicate adequate time to review progress
in implementing the 2030 Agenda in countries in special situations, especially with
regard to the Sustainable Development Goals under review and their interlinkages,
particularly in African countries, least developed countries, landlocked developing
countries, small island developing States and countries in conflict and post-conflict
situations. The dedicated thematic sessions for countries in special situations in
previous high-level political forums must be maintained and the circumstances and
challenges of countries in special situations should also be addressed throughout the
high-level political forum thematic reviews. Specific challenges facing middle income countries should also be considered.
18. Countries presenting voluntary national reviews are encouraged to report on
their progress in implementing the 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development
Goals, consistent with the provisions of the 2030 Agenda and resolution 67/290.
While bearing in mind the voluntary and country-led nature of voluntary national
reviews and previous experience with presentations of such reviews, countries may
wish to share best practices and experiences, including success es, challenges, gaps
and lessons learned, as well as next steps. Such forward-looking accelerated action
could also inform voluntary national review country contributions to the SDG
Moment, convened by the Secretary-General in September. Countries having already
conducted a voluntary national review could consider, during the next review,
highlighting trends, areas of progress, remaining challenges and, as much as possible,
the impact of measures taken since the last review.
19. While reaffirming the voluntary nature of the voluntary national reviews,
countries are encouraged to conduct a review once during the four-year cycle of the
high-level political forum at their convenience, including countries in special
situations. Countries that have not yet conducted a voluntary national review are
encouraged to do so, bearing in mind their capacities and national circumstances.
20. The President of the Economic and Social Council and the Bureau of the Council
shall consider ways to allocate as much time as possible to the voluntary national
reviews during the high-level political forum in order to strengthen interaction,
substantive discussion and peer learning. Based on the voluntary national reviews,
countries at the high-level political forum are encouraged to continue to share their
own experience and lessons learned, constructive feedback and ideas to accelerate
progress. Countries conducting voluntary national reviews may also continue to
provide written answers after the high-level political forum if they so wish, in case
time was too short for them to provide detailed answers during the forum. The
participation of major groups and other relevant stakeholders in the discussion of the
voluntary national reviews at the high-level political forum should continue to be
ensured as mandated in resolution 67/290 and the 2030 Agenda. Countries conducting
voluntary national reviews should be given priority for organizing forum side events,
on a voluntary basis, outside of the main sessions of the forum.
21. In the 2030 Agenda it was decided that the high-level political forum convened
under the auspices of the Economic and Social Council shall carry out regular
reviews, in line with resolution 67/290. Reviews will be voluntary, while encouraging
reporting, and include developed and developing countries as well as relevant United
Nations entities and other stakeholders, including civil society and the private sector.
They shall be State-led, involving ministerial and other relevant high-level
participants. They shall provide a platform for partnerships, including through the
participation of major groups and other relevant stakeholders. The essential role of
national parliaments in implementation and review is also acknowledged through
their enactment of legislation and adoption of budgets and their role in ensuring

21-08654

7/10

A/RES/75/290 B

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 72/305
on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 67/290 on the format and
organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development and 70/299
on the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level

implementation and accountability at the national level for the effective
implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals.
22. Countries are encouraged to work towards strengthening the evidence, science,
evaluation and data basis for their voluntary national reviews, which may require
enhanced national statistical capacities to address the gaps in data on the 2030
Agenda, and to obtain high-quality, timely, reliable, disaggregated data and statistics.
Support should be provided for building such capacities in developing countries.
23. Countries are also encouraged to continue the practice of using the SecretaryGeneral’s voluntary common reporting guidelines as a suggested tool in preparations
for voluntary national reviews. The Secretary-General is requested to update these
guidelines, as appropriate, notably with a view to strengthening an alysis and
evidence-based reporting on all Sustainable Development Goals and on the 2030
Agenda as a whole, and taking into account feedback from countries participating in
the high-level political forum and the lessons learned from the forum, and to make
them available to Member States.
24. Countries are further encouraged to participate in the various preparatory
processes for the voluntary national reviews organized by the Secretariat and other
relevant partners, as well as in the voluntary national review labs and other side events
during the high-level political forum which may allow them to continue the
interaction on their reviews or discuss specific themes from the reviews with other
countries.
25. During the preparation of the voluntary national reviews, countries, the United
Nations system and other international and regional organizations and other
stakeholders in a position to do so are invited to provide support to countries that
request it for the conduct of their review.
26. To improve the follow-up to the voluntary national reviews, countries, the
United Nations system and other international and regional organizations and other
stakeholders are invited and encouraged to launch partnerships and provide support,
including capacity-building, to voluntary national review programme countries, at
their request and in consultation with them, in order to help them to address the
challenges related to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. The United Nations
development system is invited to support the follow-up to the voluntary national
reviews in developing countries, at their request, including by addressing gaps and
challenges in implementation identified by the reviews in implementing United
Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Frameworks whe re possible.
27. Countries may use the voluntary national reviews as a voluntary, effective and
integrated follow-up and review framework to raise awareness about the Sustainable
Development Goals and their efforts and progress in the implementation of the 2030
Agenda.
28. The regional forums on sustainable development convened by the regional
commissions make an important contribution to the preparations of the high -level
political forum and to peer learning and knowledge exchange in the regions. The
regional forums shall feed into the thematic reviews and the interaction on the
voluntary national reviews at the high-level political forum. They are encouraged to
prepare the thematic reviews of the high-level political forum and discuss regional
progress, challenges, gaps and approaches as well as best practices, emerging issues
and innovative ideas to accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, as well as to continue to
strengthen regional capacity-building and networking. The regional forums are also
encouraged to enhance peer learning and exchange of experiences among countries
during the preparation of the voluntary national reviews and to discuss and follow up
8/10

21-08654

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 72/305
on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 67/290 on the format and
organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development and 70/299
on the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level

A/RES/75/290 B

on issues arising from the reviews, while avoiding overlap with the high-level
political forum. They should also provide adequate space for stakeholder
participation.
29. The high-level political forum should continue to strengthen the attention given to
the outcomes of the regional forums in its proceedings and intergovernmentally
negotiated declaration, with inputs from the regional commissions and other regional
and subregional entities as needed, while improving cross-regional dialogue and
incorporating regional dimensions in its reviews. The regional forums are encouraged
to submit their respective reports as early as possible to ensure a timely consideration
by the high-level political forum.
30. In recognition of efforts by local authorities to conduct local reviews, the high level political forum should continue to strengthen the attention given to efforts to
bolster local action to accelerate implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals, in accordance with national circumstances, policies and priorities, and the
regional forums are encouraged to discuss trends and findings from voluntary local
reviews.
31. The meetings of the high-level political forum convened under the auspices of
the Economic and Social Council shall continue to be informed by the annual progress
report of the Secretary-General on the Sustainable Development Goals based on the
global indicator framework and data produced by national statistical systems and
information collected at the regional level as well as other relevant inputs. The
Secretary-General is invited to consider including in the progress report on the Goals
information on data gaps and capacities and options to address the capacity gaps, as
well as to explore reporting on the interlinkages among the Goals under review that
year, while maintaining the statistical nature of the report. The progress report on the
Goals should be available early each year in order to inform the intergovernmental
negotiations of the declaration in the run-up to the high-level political forum. The
Global Sustainable Development Report will also continue to be presented to the
high-level political forum convened under the auspices of the General Assembly
every four years. The President of the Economic and Social Council and the Bureau
of the Council are encouraged to invite the scientists preparing the 2023 Global
Sustainable Development Report to participate in the high-level political forum
convened under the auspices of the Council in 2022 and 2023, including to bring new
and emerging issues related to the 2030 Agenda to the attention of the forum. The
advance unedited version of the progress report on the Goals should be available in
April to support the negotiations on the ministerial declaration and the advance
unedited version of the Global Sustainable Development Report should be available
in March to inform intergovernmental negotiations on the political declaration of the
2023 meeting of the high-level political forum convened under the auspices of the
General Assembly (Sustainable Development Goals Summit).
32. Thematic reviews of progress on the Sustainable Development Goals, including
cross-cutting issues, at the high-level political forum, shall continue to be supported
by inputs from the functional commissions of the Economic and Social Council and
other intergovernmental bodies and forums which should reflect the integrated nature
of the Goals as well as the interlinkages between them. The thematic reviews shall
also continue to engage all relevant stakeholders.
33. The intergovernmentally negotiated declaration of the high-level political forum
should be concise, focused, action-oriented and forward-looking, outlining priority
areas for accelerated action. It should demonstrate the shared political will of all
countries to implement the 2030 Agenda. The high-level political forum will continue
to have only one negotiated political declaration covering the different but

21-08654

9/10

A/RES/75/290 B

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 72/305
on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 67/290 on the format and
organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development and 70/299
on the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level

complementary functions of the forum when the forum is convened twice in the same
year.
34. The meetings of the high-level political forum convened under the auspices of
the General Assembly (Sustainable Development Goals Summit) shall begin on the
first day of the general debate or the Monday before the opening of the general debate
of the Assembly to maximize their visibility and impact. In the year preceding the
Summit, the United Nations system should focus its global public communication
efforts on the 2030 Agenda. The Secretary-General is encouraged to use the annual
SDG Moment to highlight inspiring action on the Goals, in the context of th e general
debate of the General Assembly and with the participation of Heads of State and
Government. The SDG Moment will not be held in years when the high-level political
forum meets under the auspices of the Assembly.
35. Reaffirming the provisions stipulated in paragraphs 14, 15 and 16 of resolution
67/290 on the participation of the major groups and other relevant stakeholders in the
high-level political forum, the forum should ensure broad, effective and balanced
participation of a diverse and inclusive range of major groups and other relevant
stakeholders in all aspects of its work, including the voluntary national reviews,
including through the use of information technology and innovative web -based
interface as an additional means for participation, while retaining the
intergovernmental nature of the forum. Countries could consider including major
groups and other relevant stakeholders in their delegations at the forum, as done by
some countries in the past.
36. Major groups and other relevant stakeholders are called upon to continue to
report on their contributions to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, as provided
for in paragraph 89 of the 2030 Agenda, and the Secretariat shall continue to compil e
and make available the documents from major groups and other relevant stakeholders,
as provided for in paragraph 15 (d) of resolution 67/290, presented by major groups
and other stakeholders on the theme of the high-level political forum.

10/10

21-08654
