UNITED NATIONS
!
,i.

THIRTY-SEVENTH

_,‘I

YEAR

th

MEETING:

8 JUNE

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2377)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . .

I

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162)

,..,.....,.,.,.,.......,,.......,....,,.................,

I

S/PV 92377

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supple/nents of the Official Records qftlze Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2377th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 8 June 1982, at 10 p.m.
Presidc~tlt:

Mr. Luc de La BARRE
(France).

de NANTEUIL

3. Mr. de FINIl?S
(Spain) (interpwtution from
Spunish): On 4 June, the President of the Council, on
behalf of the entire Council, upon learning of the
events in Lebanon, the loss of human life and the
destruction that had been wrought, made an urgent
appeal for the parties to abide by the cease-fire that
had been in effect since 24 July 1981 and to abstain
from any hostile act that might lead to an aggravation
of the situation [S//5/63].

The representatives of the following States:
China,
France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
PrPscnt:

Provisional

I.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 15 162)

of the agenda

Adoption
Tht~ tigctldri

4. Unfortunately,
that urgent appeal has been totally
ignored by one of the parties, Israel, which in recent
days has stepped up its air attacks and its army’s
penetration into the territory of the sovereign State
of Lebanon. These acts of aggression violate the provisions of resolution 425 (1978) and of a long series of
resolutions adopted by the Council with a view to
achieving peace in the region and strict respect for the
territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon,
within its internationallyrecognized borders. That demand, spelled out in
resolution 425 (1978) and reiterated in resolution 501
(1982), is being deliberately and persistently violated
by an act of aggression that has most serious implications for world peace.

agenda (S/Agenda/2377)

of the agenda

II*I/.S adopted.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162)

5. Hence, on 5 June, the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 508 (1982), in which, in paragraph I, after recalling the relevant resolutions and
reaffirming the statement made b,y the President of the
Council on 4 June, as well as the urgent appeal issued
by the Secretary-General
on the same date, it called
upon

I. The PRESIDENT
(itzterpretarion
fiotn
Fwnch):
In accordance
with decisions taken at previous
meetings on this item [237&h rrnd 2375th tneetitzg.s],
1 invite the representatives of Lebanon and Israel to
take a place at the Council table; I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) to take a place at the Council table; I invite the
representative of Egypt to take the place reserved for
him at the side of the Council chamber.

“all the parties to the conflict to cease immediately
and simultaneously
all military
activities within
Lebanon and across the Lebanese-Israeli
border
and not later than 0600 hours, local time, on Sunday,
6 June 1982”.
6. However, ignoring that urgent appeal by the
Council, Israeli troops have continued to penetrate
Lebanese territory in an action that now deserves
universal condemnation,
as it also violates the General
Armistice Agreement of 1949. I
7. It is useless for the Israeli authorities to attempt
to justify this true act of aggression by the recent
assassination attempt against the Israeli Ambassador
to London, which we repudiate. Contemptible
as all
acts of terrorism are, particularly
those which are
directed against diplomatic representatives, they can
in no way provide a pretext or justification for perpe-

2. The PRESIDENT
(it~te,prcttrtiot2 from French):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/I5 185, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Spain.
I

trating an act of armed aggression of such magnitude
against the territory of a sovereign State.

13. In the face of Israel’s stubborn refusal to comply
with the resolutions of the Council and the discouraging news of the intensification of military aiction and
the penetration of its armed forces further and further
northwards in the territory of Lebanon, my country
demands in the strongest terms the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of the Israeli forces, in
accordance with the provisions of that resolution.
which was adopted unanimously.

8. It is difficult for the representative of Israel, in
an equivocal attempt to turn the accused into the
accuser, to convince the Council by citing a long list
of acts of violence, when the most serious violence is
that of depriving a people of the right to its homeland,
its territory and to a free life. It is nat easy for us to
accept a justification for a large-scale invasion which,
according to all indications, had been carefully planned.
and calculated to take place at the precise moment
when a conflict elsewhere in the world was occupying
the concern of world opinion.

14. Israel’s reply to resolution 509 (198;!) of the
Council, contained in document S/15178,which states
in paragraph 2 that “any withdrawal of Israeli military forces . . . is inconceivable’,’ and making this
conditional on the conclusion of concrete arrangements which are in fact anything but specific is simply
inconceivable to us.

9. It is rather ironic, if not indeed tragic, that the
representative of Israel should venture to point an
accusing finger and attempt to undermine the prestige
and prerogatives af the Council at the very time when
his country is launching an armed invasion against a
sovereign State, ignoring both the calls of the Council
and the requests and appeals for peace made by numerous heads of State, representing peoples of diverse
persuasions and backgrounds.

15, As a result of the foregoing and in view of the
need for the Council to take urgent ‘action in keeping
with the seriousnessof the situation, my delegation has
decided to present, after consultation with other
members of the Council, a draft resolution [S//S/85]
which calls for an immediate cease-fire a,nd which
reiterates other provisions set forth in resolutions
which the Council has adopted in recent days. in
particular the appeal to the parties to ceaseimmediately
and simultaneously all military activities within tebanon and across the Lebanese-Israeli border.

10. As the representative of the PLO said at a recent meeting of the Council in this connection, quoting
the great Mexican leader, Benito Juarez: “respect
for the rights of others is peace” I237.W mesting.
pare. 831. This grave act of belligerency represents
a regrettable breach of the peace and a violation of the
most fundamental principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations.

16. In the preamble of the draft resolution, the Council recalls its resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982),
takes note of the report of the Secretary-General of
7 June [S//5/78] and also takes note of thie positive
replies received by the Secretary-General from the
Government of Lebanon and the PLO [ihid.].

1I, That is why, when the cease-fire was violated in
July 1981, the Spanish delegation, together with those
of Ireland and Japan, submitted adraft resolution which
was adopted by the Council as resolution 490 (1981),
which called for an immediate cessation of all armed
attacks and reaffIrmed the Council’s commitment
to the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of Lebanon. That is also why my delegation lent
its support to resolution 509 (1982), adopted last
Sunday, 6 June, which in paragraph I demands that
Israel withdraw all its military forces forthwith and
unconditionally to the internationally recognized
boundaries of Lebanon,

17. In operative paragraph I, the Council condemns
the non-compliance with the resolutions I have just
mentioned.
18. In paragraph 2, the Council urges the parties to
comply strictly with the regulations attach:ed to the
Hague Convention of 1907.
19. In paragraph 3, the Council reiterates the demand,
already contained in paragraph I of resolution 509
(1982), that Israel withdraw all its military forces
forthwith and unconditionally to the internationally
recognized boundaries of Lebanon.

12. On taking cognizance of the Council’s action,
my Government issued the following communique on
the day following our meeting of 6 June:

20. In paragraph 4, the Council reiterates the demand
that all parties observe the terms of resolution 508
(1982)-specifically, paragraph I of that resolution.
which calls on them to cease immediately and simultaneously all military activities within Lebanon and
across the Lebanese-Israeli border.

“In accordance with the terms of the resolution
unanimously adopted by the Security Council of
the United Nations, the Spanish Government
expresses its concern at the serious events that
have occurred in Lebanon which endanger the
territorial integrity of that country.

21. Finally, in paragraph 5, the Council demands
that within six hours all hostilities must be stopped.
I hope that this measure will be support’ed by the
members of the Council, especially taking into account

“This act of force constitutes a violation of the
sovereignty of Lebanon and a threat to peace which
the Government of Spain strongty condemns.”
2

the fact that in that same paragraph it is stipulated
that, in the event of non-compliance, the Security
Council will meet again to consider practical ways and,
means in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations,

28. My Government is currently engaged in every
possible effort to bring the violence to an end. We
shalt continue those efforts.
29. Mr. DORR (Ireland): We all know that the present
situation in Lebanon is extremely serious. On Sunday
last, the Council unanimously adopted resolution
509 (1982) which Ireland sponsored. In our view, that
resolution was balanced and clear in its terms. It
demanded that Israel withdraw its military forces
forthwith and unconditionally, and that all parties
observe strictly the cease-fire which the Council had
called for on the previous day in resolution 508(1982).
Resolution 509 ( 1982) further called on aI1 parties to
inform the Secretary-General of their acceptance of
its terms within 24 hours.

22. It is the wish of my delegation-and it hopes that
the Council is in agreement-that the draft resolution
submitted to it for its consideration and which we all
have before us will be put to the vote immediately
without discussion.
,23. The PRESIDENT (interpreration from Frcns*h):
I understand that the Council is prepared to vote on the
draft resolution contained in document S/15185. If
there is no objection, 1 shall now put the draft resolution to the vote.

30. We now know from the Secretary-General’s
report [S//5/78] that two of the parties, Lebanon and
the PLO, accepted resolution 509 (1982) as the Council directed. The third did not. Israel made four points
in reply and the second of these four points stated
clearly that Israel regarded a withdrawal of its forces
from Lebanon as inconceivable except on certain
conditions. Since resolution 509 (1982) specifically
demanded an unconditional withdrawal, it is clear
that Israel is not prepared to accept the Council’s
explicit demand. That, I believe, is a simple statement
of the present position.

In fi~wmr: China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan,
Jordan, Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zaire
Against:

United States of America

31. It appears from news reports that the fighting and
the Israeli advance through Lebanon are continuing.
The situation is therefore extremely grave. It is easy
now to look back on earlier conflicts in the region
-in 1978, 1973, 1967 and so on-and to see in retrospect their,-limits and their context, fixed now in
history. Past conflict is always limited precisely because it is past. But present conflict, as one lives
through it, is open-ended and dangerous. In the tinderbox which is the Middle East, who can talk now with
confidence of any fire as limited?

24. The PRESIDENT (interpretntion from French):
I shall now call bn those representatives who have
asked to be allowed to make statements after the
voting.
25, Mrs. KIRKPATRICK (United States of America): I desire to offer an explanation of vote on behalf
of my Government. The objective of my Government
is to end the bloodshed and the cycle of violence in
Lebanon and to restore full respect and sovereignty and
territorial integrity and independence to that trqubled
land.

32. There are, of course, other wars under way in
the world at present, All are tragic: all are dangerous.
For our part, we deplore every human life lost,
every casualty and every refugee created by such
conflicts. Our concern and our human sympathy are
not selective.

26. Two previous resolutions of the Council, resolutions 50X ( 1982) and 509 (1982), contained balancing
language that took account of the fact that the conflict
in Lebanon and across the Lebanese-Israeli border is
complex in its origin and that its resolution will require
compliance in deed as well as in word with the resolutioqs of the Security Council.

33. But if all wars are dangerous, it is plain common
sense to see that some are more dangerous than others
because they take place at the meeting point of deep
and powerful political currents. The war in Lebanon
is such a war.
34. Israel justifies its attack on Lebanon and its
massive. invasion by arguing that its own people have
been under attack for some time, from across the
frontier. Mr. Blum, the representative of Israel,
speaking here on Sunday [2375rh meeting], listed many
examples. When I spoke here on Saturday, I emphasized that Ireland’s concern extends to each and every

27. Unfortunately, the resolution now before US is
not sufficiently balanced to accomplish the objectives
of ending the cycle of violence and establishing the
conditions for a just and lasting peace in Lebanon.
For that reason, the United States voted against this
resolution.
3

life lost and to each and every casualty-Lebanese,
Palestinian and Israeli [237&h jncetin~, pnrcr. 33 J. But
each new effort by either side to exact revenge and
retribution
for a previous attack gives the spiral of
violence another upward twist and takes us farther and
farther from any hope of a comprehensive peace settlement in the region. If this is true of “tit for tat” retribution, how much more is it true of a major war?
Where is the correspondence,
where is the sense of
proportion?

attacks on various parts of Lebanon. On 5 .June. the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 508 (1982).
calling upon all the parties to the conflict to cease
all military activities by 6 o’clock, local time, on 6 June.
but within hours of this deadline Israeli ground forces
launched an invasion of South Lebanon. The Israeli
military operations are continuing and further intcnsifying, in open defiance of the Council’s seciond resolution, that is, resolution 509 (19821, demanding an
immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of :a11 IsIacli
forces to the internationally
recognized boundaries
of Lebanon. Furthermore,
Israel’s advancing of its
forces, violating the areas where UNIFIL
troops are
deployed for peace-keeping operations, constitutes a
serious challenge to the United Nations. We condemn
Israel’s actions.

35. I do not know exactly the total number of lives
lost in attacks on Israel across its borders, or in attacks
on Israeli citizens elsewhere over recent years. But
I am very sure that the total of lives lost and casualties
suffered in all such attacks over recent years is less
than the deaths and injuries caused by the recent
major Israeli air attacks on Beirut. Yet we are talking
now about a war in which these air raids in turn are
merely one aspect of a larger attack on Lebanon.

4 1. The current military conflict has seriously imperilled the sovereignty, territorial
iqtegrity alnd ptlIitical independence of Lebanon. My Government wishes
to express deep sympathy to the Government
of
Lebanon, which is now confronted with tlhis grave
situation. It also regrets deeply the tragic loss of a great
number of civilian lives and the heavy destruction of
property in Lebanon. We are truly concerneld that the
stability not only of Lebanon itself but of the entire
region may be seriously jeopardized if this, massive
invasion by Israel is prolonged and the counter-attacks
continue. My Government
therefore demands that
all the parties concerned cease hostilities at once.
and further strongly demands that Israel withdraw its
forces immediately and unconditionally.

36. In our view, it is vital in this situation that the
Council should act. We adopted here on Sunday
[2375rh meeting] in resolution 509 (1982) a clear position and we did so unanimously,
which, granted the
many political tendencies on the Council and the existence among its members of five with veto rights, must
be accounted most unusual. We had hoped that Israel
would take heed of this unanimity among the permanent members and on the Council as a whole. We
believe that it would be in Israel’s own interests to do
so, The security which it seeks through invasion of
Lebanon, with the aim of pushing its buffer frontier
farther north, must be illusory. The long-term damage
-and not least the damage to the United Nations as
a peace-keeping instrument which could result-must
far outweigh whatever benefits it thought it might gain
from its actions.

42. Before concluding, I should like to express my
Government’s
sincere condolences to the Government of Norway and the bereaved family of a Norivegian soldier who was killed serving in UNIF’IL.
43. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Sovijet Socidist Republics) (illteIp,‘ctutio,l
jhm
Russianl:
We :kll
know what the situation is. Israeli forces ;are penetrating further and further into the territory of Lchanon, bringing death and destruction to the peaceftll
inhabitants, the Lebanese and the Palestinians. ChitIlenging the United Nations, the Israeli aggressor bus
now gone into areas in which United Nations forces.
sent there by Council resolutions after Israeli acts of
aggression in 1978, are deployed. Israel is totally
ignoring the resolutions adopted by the Counscil, which
should have been binding on it as a Member of the
United Nations.

37. My delegation therefore voted in favour of the
draft resolution. We did so because we wanted to see
an end to the bloodshed; because we are deeply concerned about the dangers of the conflict spreading;
because we fear the damage done to the concept of
United
Nations
peace-keeping;
and because we
thought that nothing less as this stage would discharge
the clear responsibility of the Council to uphold its own
unanimous resolution 509 (1982) and to act in accordance with its responsibility
for the maintenance
of
international
peace and security,
38. We deeply regret that the draft resolution
not been adopted.

has
44. The facts bear witness that the leadership
of
Israel has unleashed a broad, massive act of aggression against neighbouring Lebanon and is attempting
to drown the Palestinian resistance movement in a
bloodbath. At the same time, through such banditlike acts of aggression, Tel Aviv would like to frighten
the Palestinian Arabs on the West Bank of tlhe Jordan
River and in the Gaza Strip, who are struggling SO had
against Israeli occupation for their liberation
and
independence.

39. Mr. NISIBORI
(Japan): The Government
of
Japan has been following with profound concern the
serious developments
which have been taking place
in Lebanon in the past few days.
40. As the Secretary-General
reported to the Council 12374th keeling],
on 4 June Israeli forces began
large-scale air strikes and artillery, mortar and rocket
4

45. The Soviet Union firmly condemns the acts of
aggression by Israel against the Lebanese and Palestinian peoples. Its attempt to impose on the Arabs its
diktat, to force them to renounce their legitimate
rights and to submit to the military, strategic plans of
imperialism
in the Middle East, is an adventure that
can cost Israel itself and its people dear.

inal attack and its brutalities and that it has nothing
to fear: from the military aspect it will receive $1 bit
lion-worth of weapons and politically
it will receive
support in the Council through the veto that has just
been cast.
52. A statement: by the State Department
included the following words:

46. The Council, which bears major responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security, should immediately
take measures to ensure
that the aggression ceases, to force Israel to respect
the Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions
of the Organization, and to protect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon and the legitimate rights
and interests of the Arab peoples.

on 7 June

“The United States has been doing its very best,
not only in recent days, but also as far back as last
year, to forestall the terrible tragedy that is now
unfolding.”
Of course, the United States knew very well what
would happen. Did the United States try in any way
to stop that aggression? Mr. Alan Romberg told us that
the $1 billion-worth of weapons were still in the pipeline. So what was the United States doing? Instead of
forestalling what it describes as a tragedy, it fed into
that campaign and gave Israel all the arms that it might
need, in addition to moral-or,
rather, immoral-support, as well as the diplomatic and political support
that has just been demonstrated.

47. However, that has not happened, because of the
disgraceful vote of the United States of America. This
shows yet again that Israeli acts of aggression-doubtless undertaken with the agreement and support of
Washington,
which has armed Israel to the teeth
through its policy-are
pushing it to the commission of
criminal
anti-Arab acts. The attack on Lebanon is a
direct consequence of American-Israeli
strategic cooperation.
Today the whole world sees even more
clearly the fruits of that conspiracy between Washington and Tel Aviv.

53. A few matters need to be called to the Council’s
attention. Secretary of State Haig was quoted on 7 June
as having said: “We have no signs of an escalation”
in the fighting going on. Apparently Secretary of State
Haig was not informed by his representatives at the
United Nations of a report published by the SecretaryGeneral on 6 June [S//5/74],
paragraph 5 of which
speaks of “intensive
air-attacks . . . launched by
Israel, with approximately
I IO strikes being recorded
It also speaks about “exchanges of
by UNIFIL”.
fire” and “ground forces-including
a very large
number of tanks and armoured personnel carriers”
that “had begun to move into Lebanese territory in
strength”. If that is not an escalation, what could an
escalation be, unless the Secretary of State was not
informed of that report of the Secretary-General,
ot
there was again a fault with the communications
system?

48. The PRESIDENT
(interpremion
jirotn French):
I now call on the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
49. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
Once again the United States has chosen to be in a
minority of one in support of aggression, mass murder,
the invasion of territory and a campaign of annihilation of a people,
50. The representative
of the United States described the draft resolution on which the Council has
just voted as unbalanced. I fully agree with her. The
draft resolution tells us that there were two positive
replies to the Secretary-General-one
from the Government of Lebanon and the other from the PLO.
On the other hand, there was non-compliance by Israel.
That is definitely not balance. For that reason we can
understand
that the United States, maintaining
the
balance, would veto such a draft resolution. But is
that the real reason? We would think that the United
States Government
is party to the invasion of Lebanon and to the criminal acts committed against the
Lebanese people and the Palestinians in Lebanon.

54. But why should we be surprised? Secretary
of State Haig, talking on 7 June about the events in
the region, said:
“We not only lost an aircraft and a helicopter yesterday. There is a claim a second aircraft has been
shot down, a second helicopter and a number of
army vehicles.”
55. What I would like to stress here is that Secretary
of State Haig has used the word “we”. “We” in this
case means, I presume, the United States of America.
lost an
So if “we”- that is, the United States-have
aircraft and a helicopter, then we, the PLO and the
Palestinian people, know exactly who is attacking us:
it is the United States of America in collusion with
Israel. We can therefore see that the United States
Government was not unaware of what was happening.

51. Mr. Alan Romberg, a State Department spokesman, declared on 7 June that “Israel could hardly have
been in the dark about what our attitudes are about
an invasion”.
Mr. Romberg told us very clearly that
Israel knew how the United States would react. In his
statement he assured Israel that $1 billion-worth
of
armaments were still in the pipeline, going to Israel.
So he has told Israel that it can proceed with its crim5

With the consent of the Council, I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

It had not tried in any way to stop that invasion and
that attack. The United States Government has had a
concrete part in what has happened and in what is still
happening.

62. Mr. MAKSOUD:
I do not know how history will
judge the last few days. We are not involved in anticipating the work of future historians. But at least we
can record a judgement on present-day politicians and
diplomats. The country of Lebanon is being ravaged
not by a war in Lebanon but by a war on Lebanon.
a country that has demonstrated throughout history
a unity and a resilience for survival and a belief in
itself as a refuge for all those who have been disenfranchised, for all those who have been evicted and for
all those who have been persecuted, Lebanon has had
with the United States a particular relatiorrship-not
a strategic relationship, but one built on the level of
intellectual and human values. Most of the Ileadership
of Lebanon studied in American schools and universities and many persons from the United States estab
lished their homes in Lebanon. Many Lebanese living
in the United States have become American citizens
and have contributed to the vital body politic of the
country. In the villages of Lebanon which ,are today
being destroyed by the strategic ally of thle United
States the word “America”
evoked notions of hope.
spiritual values and ability to succeed among the
elderly and the young.

56. There is a duty to be fulfilled here. The Council
is entrusted with the duty of maintaining international
peace and security. The United States has just vetoed
a draft resolution that would have helped to maintain
international peace and security. That action, in other
words, means the following: that the United States is
determined to maintain war, to maintain aggression
and to maintain bloodshed in the area.
57. The representative of the United States spoke
of a cycle of violence. There is no cycle of violence.
There is an escalation of violence with a starting point,
and the starting point is the invasion of Palestine, the
expulsion of the Palestinian
people, the methods,
including the brutality, used to prevent and prohibit
the Palestinians from returning to their homes and
living in peace in their own homes. That is where the
violence started. It started with the massacre-unfortunately one has to recall these events-of
hundreds
of Palestinians in Deir Yassin and other places. It is
an irony that the present Prime Minister and the present Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel were involved personally and directly in the crimes against
Deir Yassin, which is where more than 250 young,
innocent Palestinians
were butchered.
One was
involved in the assassination of an envoy of peace
--I am referring to the assassination of Count Folke
Bernadotte, the first envoy of peace in the Middle
East.

63. The ties that existed in Lebanon with the melling
pot of the United States constituted an exa:mple of a
pluralistic society where people of different ethnic
backgrounds, different colour, different religious and
ethnic affiliations could blend into a common citizenship. That constituted for the Lebanese an example and
a replica of their own experience.

58. The Israelis do not seem to be satisfied with
what they have done so far. We learn that they are
preventing the International
Red Cross from bringing
in medicine and from evacuating wounded civilians
from Sidon and from Tyre. That is another example
of the brutality that we are witnessing.

64. The love that the Lebanese had for the United
States as a country described by many as a superPower, but which to the Lebanese and to mamy Arabs
was a great Power, has been eliminated, along with the
distinction between greatness and super-Power status
by the veto that has been exercised.

59. I feel that the United States is happy about all
this, because it has known about it for at least one
year and has permitted it to take place. That is what
we are noting at the moment.

6.5. Perhaps I speak on behalf of the League of Arab
States, but I am also a Lebanese and I want to express
a sense of sadness that the whole input of those Americans who have experienced Lebanon and loved it, who
have lived in Lebanon and have known it, who have
sought to insert as a factor in the American decisionmaking process compassion for a Lebanon that is
living a tragedy, should have been incapable of withstanding that factor of a strategic ally that seeks to play
havoc not only with the destiny of Lebanon,, but with
the chances of peace in the region. That element of
compassion, which many people in Lebanon expected
would at least transform the veto into an abstention,
was not forthcoming: and that will make m.any Lebanese, whose affection and love for the United States
was great, transform their tears into Lebanese blood.
The sadness of which I speak is that of Gibran Khalil
Gibran, who has lived in the United States,, and that
of many of’the Lebanese intellectuals whose heritage

60. But let me assure the Council that there is one
thing that the Palestinian people love, and that is
peace: and there is one thing the PaIestinian people
will continue to do, and that is to fight for peace. But
the Palestinians, under the leadership of the PLO, can
conceive of peace only when they are back in their
homes and when they are able to exercise their rights.
That is when peace can prevail in Palestine again, as
it had always prevailed.
61. The PRESIDENT
(interpretdon
j+om Fwnc*h):
The next speaker is Mr. Clovis Maksoud, the Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States, to whom
the Council has extended an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure 12374th /n~efing].
6

has today been ignored and who could not have an
impact on the decision-making
process: it is the sadness, the agony of this rupture that the American veto
has brought.

69. This opportunity has been missed. Our hope is
that it will be retrieved as soon as possible.
70. The PRESIDENT
(intclp,‘Pttrtion
$wn Fwnd?):
The representative of Lebanon has asked to speak and
I call upon him.

66. Furthermore,
the Palestinian people, which has
also cherished many common values, finds itself today
subject to a two-pronged attack. One prong is an
attempt by Israel at physical liquidation in order to
liquidate it politically in the occupied territories, The
second prong of the attack is an attempt to satisfy the
sense of historical vengeance that Zionism feels against
the people of Palestine and to eliminate that people’s
body politic, in order to foreclose on its right to selfdetermination.

71. Mr. TU&NI (Lebanon): We do not have a resolution. We cannot but regret the fact that we do not have
one, but even though we do not have a resolution
I think we have had a unanimous expression, and
I want to stress the positive rather than the negative
side of support for resolution 509 (1982) and for my
country and its fate.
72. I say unanimous support because 1 cannot fail
to take note of the fact that the representative of the
United States expressed herself, as has her Government at the highest level, positively in essence in
favour of the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal
of Israel from Lebanon.

67. The Palestinians today are resisting with whatever they have inside the refugee camps and with
stones in the cities of Nablus, Al-Khalil,
Al-Bireh,
Ramallah and Jerusalem. But this resilient Palestine
body politic finds itself in a state of confrontation with
the United States, which could have been avoided and
which should, historically,
have been avoided. Yet
the Palestinian
constituency perceives from growing
evidence that the United States is in collusion with
Israel. This perception could have been corrected
tonight if the United States had not exercised its veto.
Today, when the Palestinians are experiencing the
threat of extermination,
they are exhibiting the resilience of the will to survive. And that is why 1 say that
tonight could be recorded in the annals of history as a
night of missed opportunities for the super-Power to
exhibit its greatness. It could have been an opportunity to heal not only the wounds that Lebanon is
experiencing
and suffering but also the agonies and
the wounds that the Palestinian people is experiencing
and suffering. It could have helped to control at least
the damage of the blood-bath that is being inflicted by
the bombs and the aircraft and the vessels that are
being supplied by the United States. Yet this opportunity has been missed, which is a matter of regret to
the millions of friends that United States society has
throughout
the Arab world. It is regrettable that the
perception will grow in the next few days throughout
the Arab world that the United States has to be in
collusion with Israel, otherwise Israel will consider
the United States in collision with it,

73. 1 trust that the Council will take note of the fact
that there is here a serious commitment
and that the
United States will continue its efforts in response to the
appeal. I want to reiterate my Government’s appeal of
this morning to every single State that is in a position
to help us in these days of tragedy.
74. I should like to take this opportunity to address
my very particular thanks to the representative of
Spain for having sponsored the draft resolution, which
will go down in the annals as a draft resolution only.
Maybe some day it will be a full resolution, when
withdrawal has taken place and the cease-fire has been
established. I should also like to thank the representative of Ireland-something
which has become a daily
tradition-and
the representative of Japan,
75. Mr. President, I should like to thank you very
much personahy for the tremendous patience you have
displayed.
76. My final words should be for the representative
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, who has on
more than one occasion-even
though sometimes he
has had to abstain-supported
my country and defended its territorial integrity and independence.

68. It is this weakness on the part of a super-Power
that paralyses our capacity to perceive the greatness
of the United States, We do not want to go into the
whole question of the merits of the case. But if politics
interrupts policies, how can global responsibility
to
world peace be ensured? It is very sad for all of us who
have studied in American universities,
who have
learned in the United States, many of the values that
we cherish, to see Lebanese villages and towns being
ravaged today. This is a sad experience for the Palestinians, who have seen in the United States anticolonial experience an example that could be very
healthy for their own ambitions in building their own
secular and democratic States.

77. May I conclude by saying in very simple terms
that we still have resolution 509 (1982), and we hope
that the Secretary-General and the President and other
members of the Council will continue their efforts by
virtue of resolution 509 (1982).
78. The PRESIDENT
(inftrpetntion
,fi*om Fro7d7):
I now call on the representative of Israel.
79. Mr. BLUM (Israel): We were deeply moved in
listening to the representative
of the Soviet Union.
The respect of his country for international law and for
the rights of other nations is common knowledge. That
7

respect has been abundantly demonstrated over the
years throughout
the world, more particularly
in
recent years through the ongoing Soviet genocide of the
people of Afghanistan.

the Council. There is no need for me to explain here
why France has no hesitation in condemning Israel’s
intervention, just as it had no hesitation in cocndemning
the other military interventions in Lebanese territory
as soon as they were carried out against the will of
the legitimate rulers of Lebanon. Nor do I need to
explain why France has given its full support to the
draft resolution submitted today by Spain [:i/15/851.

80. Not for the first time, the representative of the
Soviet Union has seen fit to accompany his remarks
with thinly veiled threats against my country. We reject
these threats and 1 wish to tell the representative of the
Soviet Union that no amount of bullying on the part
of his country will intimidate the people of Israel.

84. I am speaking now because, in the face of the
attacks on Lebanon and its inhabitants and the losses
and devastation they are suffering, I am Icompelled
to express France’s emotion and anguish. Above all
I should like to tell Lebanon and the Lebanese people
that today more than ever we are with them in our
hearts and I therefore express the hope that, although
the draft resolution has not been adopted by the Council, its appeal will be heeded by the parties to the
conflict.

81. We reject the bizarre bookkeeping
attempts
undertaken here by the representative
of Ireland.
In case he is interested-as
I hope he is-he may wish
to remember that the people I have the honour and
privilege to represent here has been decimated throughout history, including most recent history. Then perhaps he will be better able to understand our sensitivity to the loss of every human life.

The tnePting I’OSCJtrt Il.15 p.m.
82. The PRESIDENT
(interprctcrtio,l jkm Fwrd~):
If no other member wishes to speak, I should like
now to speak as the representative of FRANCE.
NOTE

83. Everything has already been said regarding the
non-compliance with the Council’s appeals for a ceasefire and with the resolutions unanimously adopted by

8

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Natiotis
Consult

COMhiENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

SE i’ROCUkER

LES PUBLICATIONS

LCS publicatiofis
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Inl’ormez-vows
auprts
ties vcntes, New York ou G&W.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations.

New

DES NATIONS

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

throughout
the
York or Gcne~.

UNIES

sent en vcnte dans Its librairies
et les agences
de votrc libraire
ou adressez-vous
i : Nations

PUBLICACIONES

Las publ/cacianes
de las Naciones
todas pHteS de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York
o Ginebra.

Lilh

PUBLICATIONS

ma? he obtained
t’rom bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nation\.
Sales Section.
New

dfpositaires
du
Units,
Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Seccibn
de Ventas,

York

I
