S/PRST/2017/8

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 June 2017
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7993rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 30 June 2017, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Côte d’Ivoire”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“As the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) completes
its mandate on 30 June 2017, the Security Council commends the remarkable
achievements made by Côte d’Ivoire since 2004.
“The Security Council takes note of the oral report del ivered by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire at the 7957th meeting of the Security Council, held
on 2 June 2017, entitled ‘The situation in Côte d’Ivoire’, including the
assessments, lessons-learned and the recommendations contained therein. The
Security Council expresses its intention to take them into account in the
framework of its ongoing work to enhance the overall effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping.
“Recalling its resolution 2284 (2016), the Security Council welcomes the
notable progress made by Côte d’Ivoire to consolidate lasting peace and
stability, as well as economic prosperity. It underlines the improvements in
strengthening national reconciliation and social cohesion as well as the overall
security and humanitarian situation, and progress on respect for human rights,
which play crucial roles in promoting peace and stability.
“The Security Council also welcomes the successful presidential and
legislative elections, conducted respectively in 2015 and 2016, which have
helped to consolidate Côte d’Ivoire’s democratic institutions. The Security
Council further welcomes the constitutional referendum held in 2016.
“The Security Council recognises the important contribution of UNOCI
in promoting peace, stability and development in Côte d’Ivoire throughout its
thirteen years of existence. The Security Council expresses its appreciation for
the efforts of the Operation and the United Nations Country-Team, under the
leadership of the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General. The
Security Council commends the contribution of troop - and police-contributing
countries and donors to UNOCI, and welcomes the support provided by the
French Forces. It welcomes the good cooperation between UNOCI and the
Government of Côte d’Ivoire, as well as with bilateral partners, regional and
international organizations.

17-10951 (E)

300617

*1710951*

S/PRST/2017/8

“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to undertake
within a year, and within existing resources, a comprehensive study of the role
of UNOCI in the settlement of the situation in Côte d’Ivoire since its
establishment, taking into account the contributions of political mediation , the
sanctions regime as well as other relevant factors as appropriate, that allowed
for the successful completion of UNOCI’s mandate. The Security Council
looks forward to the results of this study, including further lessons learned and
recommendations, and expresses its intention to consider options for taking
them into account in the context of its ongoing work to enhance the overall
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping.
“The Security Council recalls the primary responsibility of the
Government of Côte d’Ivoire for ensuring peace, stability and the protection of
civilians in Côte d’Ivoire. It welcomes the commitment of the Government of
Côte d’Ivoire to the stability in the region and to counter terrorism and violent
extremism, which can be conducive to terrorism. It also welcomes the
commitment of the Government of Côte d’Ivoire to fight against all forms of
transnational organized crime. It stresses the importance for Côte d’Ivoire’s
long-term stability of ensuring a peaceful, credible and transparent electoral
process in 2020.
“The Security Council stresses that there is important work ahead to
further advance peace and justice and to secure equitable prosperity for the
benefit of all Ivoirians. It underlines the importance of action by the
Government of Côte d’Ivoire to tackle the remaining challenges in this regard,
supported as appropriate by the United Nations Country Team and the
international community.
“The Security Council stresses the need for continued progress,
following UNOCI’s withdrawal, in the fight against impunity, the
advancement of national reconciliation and social cohesion, the full and equal
participation of women in government and public institutions, the reform of
the security sector, the promotion and protection of h uman rights, including
through the work conducted by the National Human Rights Commission, as
well as the management of refugee returns, statelessness, and land tenure.
“Taking note of recent incidents involving members of the security
forces as well as former combatants, the Security Council reaffirms in
particular the necessity to prioritize without delay and accelerate the complete
implementation of its national security sector reform strategy, in order to
further strengthen the professionalization and cohesion of the national security
services and to enhance confidence within and between the security forces and
the population. The Security Council also stresses the importance of
accelerating and consolidating efforts to develop and implement sustainabl e
reintegration opportunities for former Ivoirian combatants, as well as of
continuing efforts to improve the monitoring and management of weapons in
order to reduce the number of illicit weapons in circulation. The Security
Council underlines the crucial contribution of security sector reform to the
stability of the country as well as to continued progress in security, national
reconciliation and social cohesion.
“The Security Council notes that the Government of Côte d’Ivoire has
indicated that the United Nations will continue to be an important partner in
the next phase of the development of the country. The departure of UNOCI
does not mark the end of the support of the United Nations to sustaining peace
in Côte d’Ivoire. The Security Council therefore welcomes the ongoing
engagement of the Secretary-General and United Nations Country Team in
2/3

17-10951

S/PRST/2017/8

support of the efforts of the Government of Côte d’Ivoire as it seeks to
preserve and consolidate its peacebuilding gains and in order to promote
sustainable development, the rule of law, and the strengthening of human
rights protections and institutions, as well as tackle other remaining challenges
related to security and development. The Security Council recalls in this
regard the Transition plan presented by the Government of Côte d’Ivoire,
UNOCI, and the United Nations Country Team, which outlines program mes
aimed at contributing to tackle remaining challenges faced by the country. The
Security Council encourages the international community, including bilateral
and multilateral donors, to assist the activities of the Country Team, including
by considering providing funding to this transition plan.
“The Security Council reiterates its request in resolution 2284 that the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) to make
available its good offices, as necessary, to the Government of Côte d’Ivoire
and the United Nations Resident Coordinator.
“The Security Council commends the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the Mano River Union for
their efforts to consolidate peace and stability in Côte d’Ivoire and the
subregion, and encourages them to continue to support the Ivorian authorities
in addressing key challenges.
“The Security Council underscores the importance of continued support
to Côte d’Ivoire as it embarks on the next stage of its development, beyond
UNOCI, and welcomes the willingness of the United Nations and bilateral and
multilateral partners to continue, as requested by the Ivorian authorities, to
play a significant role in this regard.”

17-10951

3/3
