S/PV.7975

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7975th meeting

Friday, 16 June 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mrs. Carrión

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2017/478)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-17302 (E)
*1717302*

S/PV.7975

The situation in Mali

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2017/478)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Mali to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
African Integration and International Cooperation of
the Republic of Mali.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/478, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Annadif.
Mr. Annadif (spoke in French): It is always an
honour and a pleasure to address the Security Council as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Mali and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
This meeting takes place one year to the day after our
discussions last year (see S/PV.7719) on the renewal of
the MINUSMA mandate, which resulted in the adoption
of resolution 2295 (2016).
Last year at the same time, we were worried and
we wondered about the slow implementation of the
Agreement, including the establishment of the interim
authorities, the mixed patrols, the Conference for
National Harmony — in short, a number of important
aspects related to the interim period. Despite the regular
meetings of the Agreement Monitoring Committee,
2/9

16/06/2017

there has been a distinct lack of dialogue among the
signatory parties.
This meeting is being held on the eve of 20 June
2017, which is also the date of the second anniversary
of the signing of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation that emanated from the Algiers process.
Moreover, this meeting takes place on the eve of the end
of the interim period of that Agreement, but it can be
said that it is taking place against a truly calm backdrop
in comparison to that of last year.
As outlined in the report of the SecretaryGeneral before the Council (S/2017/478), the past few
months have seen significant tangible progress in the
implementation of the Agreement. Thanks to the good
offices of the international mediation team, MINUSMA
and, above all, thanks to the ongoing consultations
between the Malian parties themselves around the High
Representative of the President, we note — and should
welcome and be pleased that — first, the Conference
for National Harmony was held in satisfactory
conditions, and the charter for peace, unity and national
reconciliation is being developed.
Secondly, interim authorities were set up in the five
regions concerned, even if the pace of their work varies
from one region to another.
Thirdly, the various Operational Coordination
Mechanisms and mixed patrols are on track. At this
juncture, there is no longer a political deadlock, but
rather considerations of a technical nature.
Fourthly, the process of security sector reform,
which is a crucial part of the redesign of the Malian
army, and the process of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration are ongoing, even if the pace
remains slow.
Those are positive developments and they
complement the various numerous institutional and
political reforms, for which the Government deserves
credit. They will no doubt enable the progressive
redeployment of State authority, which will yield,
in a very concrete manner, peace dividends for the
populations of the regions concerned.
All those positive developments are at risk
of collapsing, however, due to the tensions that
unfortunately persist in the Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad and the Platform coalition of
armed groups, which have turned into a communitybased conflict, of which civilian populations are its
17-17302

16/06/2017

The situation in Mali

main victims. The Security Council should address a
stern warning to the military and political leaders of the
two movements in order to put an end once and for all to
the killings of the innocent and unarmed populations.
For its part, MINUSMA is sparing no effort to
protect those populations. It is also using its good
offices to halt this fratricidal conflict and ensure
reconciliation among the protagonists, in consultation,
of course, with the Malian authorities. Unfortunately,
those practices play into the hands of terrorists and
other extremists who are gaining ground, both in terms
of their modus operandi and in the sophistication of the
equipment they use. Worse, they are extending their
areas of operation and influence.
As Council members are aware, for some time
now, the central region has also become a source of
concern. As stated in the Secretary-General’s report,
the Government of the Republic of Mali has adopted
a multidimensional security strategy for the central
regions. We commend and support this promising
initiative, which is an important tool that MINUSMA,
working together with the international community,
intends to support in order to tackle the rampant
insecurity in the centre of the country, particularly in
Mopti and its surroundings.
In that spirit, MINUSMA seeks to strengthen
its presence in this region as part of an integrated
multidimensional approach in partnership with other
important stakeholders, such as the European Union.
The forthcoming deployment of the Rapid Reaction
Force is part of that arrangement. More important,
however, we must ensure that State authority is present
and strengthened in the central region.
Resolution 2295 (2016) assigned a robust mandate
to MINUSMA. Thanks to that mandate, we were able
to readjust our rules of engagement, which enabled us
to strengthen our patrols and pre-empt certain threats
while carrying out proactive and preventive operations
with a view to protecting civilian populations and
United Nations personnel. The other innovation
set out in resolution 2295 (2016) is the support that
MINUSMA must provide to the Malian defence and
security forces. While we are operating in a difficult
budgetary context, it is crucial that we flesh out such
support, as the ascendancy of the defence and security
forces depends upon it, as does the deployment of the
Malian administration.

S/PV.7975

The legitimate expectations expressed on both sides
for a strengthened role for MINUSMA in the light of
the changing political and security situation require us
to review our priorities. For example, the strengthening
of the passive and active security of MINUSMA
facilities and operations on the ground needs to be seen
as a sine qua non condition for the Mission to be able to
deliver on its responsibilities. To do so, we are currently
redoubling our mobilization efforts with contributing
countries while seeking innovative partnerships and
concepts with the aim of bridging operational gaps
such as the shortage of armoured personnel carriers,
inter alia.
In that regard, I solemnly thank the contributing
countries that, during the MINUSMA force generation
conference held on 22 and 23 May, pledged to deploy
uniformed personnel and essential equipment to ensure
security in the transfer of our units and to provide
support for our operational activities. We can never
emphasize enough the fact that a lack of a convoy
escort battalion and a shortage of attack and transport
helicopters are major handicaps.
Despite the those challenges, MINUSMA intends,
first, to scale up its support for the implementation of
the Agreement in accordance with the timelines and
benchmarks agreed with the Government; secondly, to
continue to expand its good offices role and carry out
the necessary negotiations with the signatory parties
involved in the implementation of the Agreement;
thirdly, to support international mediation efforts and
regional initiatives related to the implementation of the
Agreement, such as the initiatives of the Group of Five
for the Sahel; and, fourthly, to strengthen its partnership
with the Malian defence and security forces with a view
to building their operational capacities and ensuring
their highly anticipated and sought-after redeployment
throughout the country, as I mentioned earlier.
It would be advisable for the MINUSMA mandate,
which the Council will consider in the days to come,
to take into account those obligations, which are
necessary to support Malian men and women as they
seek to achieve lasting peace and stability. The men and
women of MINUSMA, on whose behalf I speak today,
are fully committed and will live up to the confidence
that the Council has placed in them.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Annadif for his briefing.

17-173023/9

S/PV.7975

The situation in Mali

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for
his comprehensive briefing. I would also like to thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali, Mr. Abdoulaye
Diop, for joining us in the Chamber today.
Uruguay recognizes the efforts of the Malian
Government to make progress in the peace process.
However, we are concerned about the recent violations of
the ceasefire. The parties must show a real and constant
will in implementing the Peace Agreement. We are also
concerned about allegations of human rights violations
by various actors, including the Malian armed forces,
armed groups and terrorist groups. In that regard, we
must emphasize the fact that respect for human rights by
all parties in the conflict is indispensable to achieving
lasting peace.
The humanitarian situation in Mali remains serious,
as the country faces, inter alia, issues of food insecurity,
lack of access to basic goods, including access to clean
water and sanitation, and an increase in the number of
internally displaced persons and refugees. Children
remain the most vulnerable, and the closure of many
schools has an impact on the future of 150,000, children
who are unable to attend classes and are exposed to
social conditions that result in them being recruited by
terrorist groups. In the light of such a difficult situation,
the funds available under the humanitarian response
plan are insufficient. In addition, the increase in the
number of attacks on humanitarian workers simply
undermines humanitarian assistance.
Uruguay echoes the recommendations put forward
at the Conference for National Harmony on the need
to address issues related to governance and security,
cultural diversity, inclusiveness in the political process
and socioeconomic conditions, and the need to fully
implement the Agreement. In that regard, we also
underscore the Government’s leadership role.
Threats to, and direct attacks on, Mission staff are
of concern. The safety of the members of peacekeeping
operations must be the focus of our attention, as that
makes it possible to discharge their mandate. I would
like to reiterate that attacks on Blue Helmets could
amount to war crimes, and perpetrators of such attacks
4/9

16/06/2017

will be held accountable. Because it operates in a
hostile environment, the Mission must be equipped
with the capacity it needs to protect its personnel
and to carry out its mandate. That is why we are also
concerned about the current shortages of military and
police personnel and of equipment. In that regard, it
should be underscored that the pledges made at the
force generation conference held on 22 and 23 May to
mobilize support for MINUSMA must be honoured.
In conclusion, I would like to commend all
MINUSMA staff, who, day after day, play a fundamental
role in the country, as well as to pay tribute to those
who were killed in the line of duty.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan warmly
welcomes His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Diop,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation
and African Integration of the Republic of Mali to
today’s briefing.
We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), Mr. Mahamat Annadif, for his
comprehensive briefing and acknowledge him and the
Mission’s personnel for their commitment and service
under such hazardous conditions.
We welcome the findings contained in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/478). My delegation
would like to make the following observations
and recommendations.
First, Kazakhstan appreciates the efforts of the
Malian Government and other signatory parties,
with the support of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, in implementing the June 2015
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We
believe that the installation of interim authorities in
Mali’s five northern regions will lead to the restoration
of Government authority in the north of the country.
While progress is noted, it is still fragile and needs
to be stabilized and made irreversible. The emergence
of new armed groups has undermined the peace process
and spread instability from the north to the centre of
the country. The pace of implementing the Agreement
needs to be accelerated so that the crisis in Mali does
not spill over to neighbouring countries. The Agreement
will succeed only if all stakeholders collaborate and
conform to the clearly formulated vision and process and
realistic timelines. It is critical to lay the foundations for
17-17302

16/06/2017

The situation in Mali

S/PV.7975

stable rule of law and just, independent and accountable
judicial and security institutions. It must also address
the grievances of communities excluded from the peace
agreement and its benefits. It is necessary to restore the
confidence of Malians in State institutions, which must
begin to provide essential services for all segments of
the population.

for its own national forces, regional and international
peacekeepers, civilians and humanitarian workers. We
join others in strongly condemning the violent attacks
perpetrated by terrorist groups against them. We salute
them for their bravery and unsurpassed commitment,
and honour those who have sacrificed their lives for the
cause of peace.

Secondly, elections and constitutional referendums
are part of Statebuilding and must be given full
attention. The nation’s aspirations for peace and
stability must be supported by the African Union and
the United Nations, especially in implementing the
outcomes of the Conference for National Harmony
and the drafting process of the charter for peace, unity
and national reconciliation. The revision of the new
Constitution should proceed in a robust yet inclusive
and consensual manner. The international community
has to come forward with funding for the elections and
constitutional referendum by supporting the electoral
process project managed by the United Nations
Development Programme. MINUSMA’s mandate
should include the provision of technical assistance
to reform the national and local electoral process, its
mechanisms and procedures. It is equally important
that ministerial nominations comply with the 30 per
cent quota for the representation of women, as was
stipulated on 18 December 2015.

In the light of the deteriorating security situation
in northern and central Mali and the escalation in
inter-ethnic violence, last year the Council reinforced
the MINUSMA mandate, backing it with the necessary
capabilities and up to 2,049 additional troops. However,
the relevant provisions of resolution 2295 (2016) have
not yet been implemented because of the gaps in
operational capabilities, which must be bridged if the
Mission is to effectively fulfil its mandate. We also
need more deterrence and predeployment preparedness
of contingents. At the same time, more predictable
military assets are necessary. We therefore welcome
commitments from troop- and police-contributing
countries to address current gaps made at the force
generation conference held in New York last month.

Thirdly, cooperation with regional actors must
be intensified to support Mali in overcoming its
vulnerabilities and embarking upon the path to stability.
The investments and efforts of the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
European Union and the Sahel countries need to be
augmented considerably to strengthen border security
and the capabilities of the Malian security forces,
especially in the areas of training and financial and
technical assistance. In order to fight the threats facing
Mali, including terrorism and transnational crime, the
Council should enhance partnership with the African
Union and the forces of Operation Barkhane, and
provide the necessary support to the Group of Five for
the Sahel joint force. At the same time, there can be
no durable peace without an effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, which
must be adequately funded so as to reintegrate excombatants and prevent their relapse into violence.
Fourthly, the capabilities of MINUSMA is a
key consideration in the light of its asymmetrical
standards. Mali is one of the most dangerous countries

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Bolivia commends and thanks the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, for his briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2017/478).
I would also like to warmly welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation and African
Integration of Mali, His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye
Diop, to today’s meeting.
Bolivia commends the efforts made by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali and
Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to promote
lasting peace and security in this brotherly country. We
also laud commend the cooperation among countries
that contribute to MINUSMA by sending military and
police contingents. We thank the staff of peacekeeping
operations, who risk their lives, and we pay tribute to
those who have died in the line of duty.
We are concerned about MINUSMA’s lack of
capacity and resources, which are required to enable it
to effectively and efficiently carry out its mandate in a
volatile and complex environment with asymmetrical
threats that threaten the political peace process, the

17-173025/9

S/PV.7975

The situation in Mali

members of the Mission and Mali’s civilian population.
We recognize that the challenges that MINUSMA is
facing have evolved since it first deployed, in 2013. It is
dealing not only with violence from armed groups but
with increasing threats from terrorist groups. According
to the Secretary-General’s latest report, since June 2016
there have been 105 attacks by violent extremists and
terrorists on the Malian defence and security forces, 76
on MINUSMA and 20 on French forces. It reports that
during the same period, eight peacekeepers and 131
members of the Malian forces have been killed, and 176
injured, in attacks. The numbers of asymmetric attacks
have grown and involve increasingly sophisticated
and complex methods of war, such as improvised
explosive devices, anti-personnel mines, mortars and
rockets, showing that MINUSMA needs to adjust if it
is to deal with such difficult challenges. Furthermore,
the humanitarian situation in the central and northern
regions of Mali has continued to deteriorate, with
3.8 million people at risk of food insecurity owing to the
drought and the constant violence. Around 1.2 million
people have been identified as having limited access
to water and basic services, and the number of people
who are internally displaced owing to insecurity has
increased from approximately 45,800 to about 59,000
persons.
Two years after the signing of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, we acknowledge the
progress that has been made in the work of building
stability through an inclusive political dialogue. The
Conference for National Harmony, held in Bamako
between 27 March and 2 April, was a clear example of
that, bringing together more than 1,000 representatives
of civil society, including women and young people, as
well as of political parties and armed groups.
We appreciate all the Government of Mali’s efforts
to take steps to stabilize the country, such as encouraging
former combatants to join the national armed forces,
designating interim administrations where the State
presence is weak, appointing a new Prime Minister,
creating a new and more inclusive cabinet, some
of whose members are women, and updating the
electoral rolls for as part of the preparations for future
presidential, district, regional and legislative elections.
Such efforts are consonant with the commendable
initiatives undertaken by regional organizations under
the leadership of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union.
6/9

16/06/2017

Among those, we would like to highlight the
strategic concept of operations for the joint force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), which
in accordance with the Nouakchott Process will be
deploying a joint force with the goal of tackling the
effects of terrorism and transnational organized crime
along border areas with full respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the countries
in the G-5 Sahel. We believe that the Security Council
should cooperate actively not only with MINUSMA but
with all regional and subregional initiatives aimed at
helping to stabilize Mali, by encouraging all the parties’
compliance with the agreements through mediation,
preventive diplomacy and similar measures recognized
by the Charter of the United Nations.
In conclusion, we encourage the parties involved,
and the international community as a whole, to continue
to give technical support and economic and humanitarian
cooperation aimed at arriving at a definitive peace
in Mali through a process of disarmament, dialogue,
reconciliation and reintegration.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
International Cooperation and African Integration
of Mali.
Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the Plurinational State of Bolivia’s stewardship of the
Security Council for the month of June, as well as to
take this opportunity to express my appreciation for
Uruguay’s admirable work in the previous month. I would
also like to reiterate the deep gratitude of the people
and the Government of Mali to the Security Council,
the Secretary-General, the countries and organizations
on the Agreement Monitoring Committee, led by
Algeria, the countries contributing troops to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and France’s Operation
Barkhane for the invaluable and continuing efforts and
sacrifices they have made to bring peace and stability
to my country.
I would also like to reiterate here the tribute
that the people and the Government of Mali have
paid to the memory of all the victims of the crisis
in our country — civilian and military, foreign and
Malian — who have fallen on the field of honour,
and with a special thought for MINUSMA’s Guinean
17-17302

16/06/2017

The situation in Mali

contingent, members of which were the most recent
victims of these atrocities only a few days ago. We offer
the wounded our best wishes for a speedy recovery.
The delegation of Mali takes note of the current
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/478) and would
like to thank our brother Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Mali and Head of MINUSMA, for his briefing and for
the excellent work he is doing on our behalf.
It has been almost two years since the Algeria
process saw the signing of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, and as that period comes
to an end, I welcome Secretary-General António
Guterres’s recognition of the leadership and personal
commitment of His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar
Keita, President and Head of State of the Republic of
Mali, to the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. Mali has come a long way,
and under the President’s leadership the Government
has worked extremely hard to achieve the significant
progress that has been made, with the cooperation of
all the signatories and the support of our bilateral and
multilateral partners, needless to say.
I will omit the long list of measures and concrete
actions taken by the Government of Mali in the context
of implementing the Peace Agreement, of which I think
the Council is well aware, partly thanks to the SecretaryGeneral’s coverage of those developments in the report.
In the past few months, as shown in the report’s annex
on the benchmarks for monitoring the implementation
of the Agreement, approved by the Government and
MINUSMA on 28 May, major progress has been made
on the peace process. As of today, interim authorities
and temporary colleges are functioning in five regions
in the North with the exception of Kidal, where technical
difficulties continue. With regard to the mixed patrols,
the Government of Mali, despite its limited resources,
is working to fully operationalize the Operational
Coordination Mechanism. It is also providing various
types of logistical support to the planned battalions,
including health services and even death grants for
victims’ families. The Government therefore took the
opportunity to hold the 18th meeting of the Agreement
Monitoring Committee in Bamako on 5 June in order to
brief its partners on the technical and logistical aspects
of operationalizing the Mechanism in Kidal as soon
as possible.

S/PV.7975

With regard to the follow-up to the recommendations
of the Conference for National Harmony, as you
emphasized just now, Mr. President, which took place
from 27 March to 2 April, I am pleased to inform the
Council that the preliminary drafts of the Charter for
Peace, Unity and National Reconciliation and the map
of Mali’s territory have been finalized by the Special
Commission established for the purpose.
With regard to the process of reviewing the
Constitution, I am pleased to inform the Council that
the National Assembly of Mali, following several days
of intensive, constructive debate, on 2 June adopted the
bill on that issue submitted by the Government. The text
that was adopted includes several major innovations
that bolster Malian democracy and take into account
the relevant provisions of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, in particular with regard to the
creation of a second parliamentary chamber, the senate.
The bill will be put to a referendum on 9 July. The
Government will make every effort to ensure that the
referendum is held under the best possible conditions.
The Government is also working to provide basic
social services to the people and to relaunch the local
economy where security conditions so allow.
Concerning the prospects for the implementation
of the Agreement, I can assure the Council that beyond
20 June, the second anniversary of the signing of the
Agreement, the interim authorities will continue to
work on the organization of the referendum and of local
and regional elections, in accordance with the timetable
established by the Government. The Government will
also continue its efforts in the framework of the process
of cantonment and disarmament; demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) efforts; reform of the security
sector; the effective operationalization of joint patrols;
and the provision of peace dividends to the populations
affected by the crisis.
We can therefore affirm that the peace process
in Mali is on a positive path as a result of the gradual
return of confidence among all Malian stakeholders.
However, these still-fragile achievements must not lose
make us sight of the multiple and very real challenges
facing the peace process in Mali. These challenges
include the insecurity resulting from the activities of
terrorist groups and issues related to the mobilization of
financial resources for the effective and comprehensive
implementation of the Agreement.

17-173027/9

S/PV.7975

The situation in Mali

In this regard, I reiterate the Malian Government’s
call on all partners to meet the commitments they
have made in support of the peace and development
process in Mali. In terms of the challenges facing the
country, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral mentioned the persistent tensions between
the signatory movements, the Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad and the Platform coalition of
armed groups, which are creating conditions that are
not conducive to the harmonious implementation of the
Agreement. The Government is not being passive in
this respect; the high representative of the President of
the Republic is deploying his good offices in an attempt
find common ground and ease tensions on the ground,
with the support of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
One year after the adoption of resolution 2295
(2016), of 29 June 2016, which calls on MINUSMA
to adopt a more proactive stance and gives it a robust
mandate, we cannot but note that the major innovations
contained in the resolution have not yet been translated
into facts on the ground. Despite the improvements
that have been noted on the ground, as a whole the
MINUSMA posture has remained fairly static and
defensive, which has facilitated freedom of movement
for terrorist and extremist groups. They have made the
most of this in order to better organize themselves and
multiply attacks against the civilian population, the
Malian defence and security forces and foreign forces.
It is important, in considering the renewal of
MINUSMA’s mandate, for the capacity of the Mission
to mobilize to be strengthened and for patrols to be
intensified. It is also important for the Mission, as we
stated repeatedly and as everyone agrees, to be provided
with the material, financial and human resources
necessary to strengthen its operational capacity so as to
enable it fully and effectively to discharge its mandate.
The conclusions of the MINUSMA force-generation
conference held here on 22 and 23 May, and here we
wish to commend the Secretary-General, allow us to
have hope. I should like also to welcome the pledges of
contributions made by several countries, and I hope that
these pledges will materialize as quickly as possible.
It is equally important to strengthen the
indispensable cooperation between MINUSMA and
the Malian defence and security forces. This is a key to
success and the prospects of emerging from the crisis.
In particular, on behalf of the Government of Mali,
8/9

16/06/2017

I would like to emphasize the necessity and urgency
of supporting the Malian defence and security forces
in their daily fight against terrorism on the ground,
without waiting for the conclusion of the process of
their reconstitution and with the necessary logistics, as
has been done elsewhere.
The Government of Mali would also like to see
the issue of the return of the Administration and of
the defence and security forces to Kidal at the core
of the new mandate of MINUSMA, as well as the
effectiveness of the processes of cantonment, DDR and
security-sector reform.
The security situation in Mali and in the Sahel
continues to deteriorate in a worrisome manner. The
situation is marked by the persistence and proliferation
of terrorist attacks, which constitute the main obstacle
to the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali.
Faced with this situation, the Heads of State of the
States members of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) decided on 6 February last to create a joint force
to fight terrorism, transnational organized crime and
trafficking in human beings. The creation of this force
is the fruit of the common will of the leaders of our
subregion to work jointly and pool their means in order
to respond to cross-border challenges, inter alia.
On behalf of the States members of the G-5 Sahel, I
should like to express the deep concerns of President of
Mali, Acting Chairman of the G-5 Sahel, concerning the
difficulties that the Security Council is encountering
in adopting a draft resolution on the immediate
deployment of the joint force, news of which had given
rise to a great deal of hope among the peoples of the
Sahel region. The adoption of such a draft would send
a strong and unequivocal signal from the international
community to terrorist groups and traffickers of all
kinds and make clear its unanimous support for the
efforts of the region, which is facing a situation that,
as we all are aware, threatens international peace and
security and therefore falls wthin the purview of the
Security Council.
It should be recalled that the creation of the concept
of operations of the force took place in the framework
of a participatory process involving all our regional and
international partners in the area of security. We have
also planned operational coordination mechanisms for
the interventions of all forces present in the region. I
can assure the Council that the operations of the joint
17-17302

16/06/2017

The situation in Mali

force will respect gender, as was recalled earlier, and
human rights and will promote humanitarian access to
populations in need.
As of now, General Didier Dacko has been
appointed Commander of the G-5 Sahel joint force
and is working to establish its headquarters. We are
awaiting only authorization in the form of a Security
Council resolution for its operationalization.
Here with me today is Mr. Mohamed Najim,
Permanent Secretary of the G-5 Sahel, who travelled
here to New York with us in order to help bring this
important regional initiative, in which the Security
Council is to participate, to fruition.
With regard to the human rights situation
mentioned in the report under consideration, the
Government of Mali notes that the Mali defence and
security forces have, unfortunately, been accused of
alleged human rights violations, in a context of counterterrorism efforts and asymmetric attacks involving the
civilian population.
In this regard, I would point out that the majority of
the violations documented and attributed to the Malian
defence and security forces were committed in areas
where judicial and investigative services are absent
owing to insecurity. We also have a different approach
to identifying human rights abuses, as determined
by the Human Rights Division of MINUSMA. Quite
often, victims or civil parties do not file a complaint,
and there is a lack of corroborating testimony and
investigative units in the areas where such violations
have been committed. Therefore, despite the goodwill
of the Government, prevailing conditions make legal
prosecution of those cases difficult.
Nevertheless, the Chief of the General Staff
of the armed forces of Mali has an international
humanitarian law and human rights division that is
willing to collaborate with the Human Rights Division
of MINUSMA. In any event, Council members may
rest assured that all reported or documented cases of
violations are systematically investigated and, where
appropriate, punished, in accordance with existing
law. Mali, which has ratified virtually all international
human rights legal instruments, remains fully
committed to defending and promoting human rights.

S/PV.7975

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
commitment of the Government of Mali and the
President of the Republic to continuing and expediting
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, negotiated in Algiers. I call,
on the one hand, for strengthening the capacity and
capabilities of MINUSMA to enable it to carry out
its mission effectively and, on the other, for enhanced
cooperation between MINUSMA and the Malian
defence and security forces in order to help Mali restore
authority throughout its territory, which is critical to
the sustainable security and stability of our country.
I call on the Security Council to adopt, without
delay, the resolution authorizing the deployment of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) joint force in
order to help protect our populations and our common
space from the dangers of terrorism and thus, protect
the rest of the world from a real threat to regional and
international peace and security. I would also like to
note that peace in Mali and stability in the Sahel must be
considered in a comprehensive manner by the Security
Council, in the context of an overall package that rests
upon four mutually reinforcing key pillars that will
ensure the effectiveness and success of our joint efforts.
The first pillar continues to be the resolve of the
Government of Mali to accelerate the implementation
of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
in the framework of the political process agreed to and
supported by the international community. The second
pillar is the stabilization of MINUSMA in the context of
a strengthened mandate. The third pillar is the support
of the French Operation Barkhane in the fight against
terrorism. The fourth pillar is the operationalization
of the G-5 Sahel joint force to manage the regional
dimension of the crisis.
It is essential that the Security Council
simultaneously take action on those four mutually
reinforcing pillars. We must consider those four aspects
together in the framework of a sustainable response if
we are to have a lasting impact.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

17-173029/9
