A /73/PV.50*

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

50th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 11 December 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Ten-Pow
(Guyana), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 78 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/73/68
and A/73/368)
Reports on the work of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole on the Regular Process
for Global Reporting and Assessment of the
State of the Marine Environment, including
Socioeconomic Aspects (A/73/74 and А/73/373)
Report on the work of the United Nations Openended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans
and the Law of the Sеа at its nineteenth meeting
(A/73/124)
Draft resolution (A/73/L.35)
(b) Sustainable fisheries, including through the
1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating
to the Conservation and Management of

Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks, and related instruments
Draft resolution (А/73/L.41)
Ms. Hamilton (Australia): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of Australia.
We are pleased to associate ourselves with the
statement delivered earlier by the representative of
Nauru on behalf of members of the Pacific Islands
Forum (see A/73/PV.49).
We thank the facilitators from Singapore and
Norway for leading our consultations on this year’s texts
for the annual omnibus draft resolutions on oceans and
the law of the sea (A/73/L.35) and sustainable fisheries
(A/73/L.41). Australia is pleased to sponsor both, noting
our particular interest, as a Pacific Islands Forum
nation and a significant coastal State, in the protection
and sustainable use of the ocean and its resources.
Australia is clear about its priorities internationally
and within its own region, the Indo-Pacific. We
encourage the protection and sustainable use of
natural resources, including fisheries. We place strong
emphasis on preserving the health of ocean and marine
ecosystems, given the importance of oceans to regional
and economic security and the livelihoods of our
neighbours. We are committed to promoting freedom of
trade and safeguarding freedom of navigation. We want
the rights of all States to be respected. We strongly
advocate for the peaceful resolution of disputes in
accordance with international law. The United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) sets out

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-43206 (E)

*1843206*
*

Reissued for technical reasons 19 August 2021.

A/73/PV.50

clear rules for all of those objectives. We welcome
the General Assembly’s continued affirmation that
UNCLOS provides the legal framework within which
all activities in the oceans and seas must be carried out.
It is of fundamental strategic importance as the basis
for national, regional and global action and cooperation
on ocean matters.
Australia continues to strongly support efforts to
develop an implementing agreement under UNCLOS
on the conservation and sustainable use of marine
biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction.
That serves to strengthen the UNCLOS framework.
We welcome the progress achieved to date and look
forward to continued constructive sessions in 2019 of
the intergovernmental conference on an international
legally binding instrument under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction.
Australia is really pleased that this year’s ocean
omnibus draft resolution highlights the first-ever
conciliation process under UNCLOS. That historic
process has resolved a long-running boundary dispute
between Australia and Timor-Leste. It provides an
excellent example of how UNCLOS can reinforce
stability and enable countries to resolve their differences
through the rule of law. Following the conciliation,
Australia and Timor-Leste signed a treaty on 6 March in
New York establishing permanent maritime boundaries.
The treaty delivers certainty for our two countries and
provides for the joint development and management
of our shared resources. It is an example of the rulesbased international order in action. We encourage other
States to make use of international dispute resolution
processes when disagreements arise and to respect the
outcome of such processes.
We also commend the General Assembly’s close
consideration of issues that are vital to the security and
future of Pacific island States, particularly sea-level
rise, which poses significant development, economic
and environmental challenges for affected States and
regions. It also raises important and urgent questions
in international law. We are therefore very pleased that
this year’s ocean omnibus draft resolution references
the decision by the International Law Commission
to include the topic of sea-level rise in relation to
international law in its programme of work. We, along
with the Pacific Islands Forum, call on the General
2/16

11/12/2018

Assembly to remain focused and to take action on that
important matter.
Mr. Dang Dinh Quy (Viet Nam): At the outset,
we would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive reports (A/73/68 and A/73/368) under
this agenda item. We would also like to thank Ms. Natalie
Morris-Sharma of Singapore and Mr. Andreas Kravik
of Norway for their tremendous efforts in coordinating
the informal consultations on the draft resolutions
on oceans and the law of the sea (A/73/L.35) and
sustainable fisheries (A/73/L.41), respectively.
We express our deep appreciation to the General
Assembly and its subsidiary organs for their efforts in
the work on oceans and the law of the sea this year.
We welcome the success of the nineteenth meeting of
the United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative
Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea and the
twenty-eighth Meeting of the States Parties to the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
We appreciate the role of the bodies established by
the Convention, including the International Seabed
Authority and the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf in maintaining and consolidating
good order and the rule of law at sea. We attach
special significance to the fundamental role of the
International Tribunal on the Law of the Sea and other
dispute-settlement mechanisms in the interpretation
and application of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).
We welcome the open discussion and the
progress that was made at the first session of the
intergovernmental conference on an international
legally binding instrument under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Seas on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction. We share the view
that biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction
should be considered the common heritage of
humankind and that the benefits resulting from their
use and exploitation should be equitably shared among
States. We would like to emphasize the importance of
capacity-building and the transfer of modern maritime
technology for our shared goals of conserving and
sustainably using maritime resources. Going forward,
we support ensuring that the process of preparing
an international legally binding instrument under
UNCLOS on the conservation and sustainable use of
marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
18-43206

11/12/2018

A/73/PV.50

jurisdiction makes the transition towards text-based
negotiations as soon as possible.

need to protect the social security and livelihoods of
coastal populations.

Viet Nam was one of the first countries to sign
and ratify UNCLOS and has always adhered to
its provisions, respecting the legitimate rights and
interests of other nations and actively participating
in activities within the framework of the Convention.
We emphasize its universal and unifying nature,
which provides a comprehensive and sound legal
framework for all activities carried out in the seas and
oceans. UNCLOS has created a solid foundation for
the maintenance of peace, stability and security and
the promotion of sustainable economic development,
including the conservation and sustainable use of
maritime resources. We are of the view that all States
should fully comply with UNCLOS in order to promote
the peaceful and sustainable use of seas and oceans,
including the peaceful settlement of disputes, thereby
strengthening the rules-based order at sea. We welcome
the successful completion of the first compulsory
conciliation under annex V to the Convention, which
resulted in a treaty between Australia and Timor-Leste
establishing their maritime boundaries in the Timor
Sea, and which encourages States to resort to peaceful
means, including conciliation, to settle disputes.

As a coastal State of the East Sea, also known as
the South China Sea, Viet Nam hosts critical sea lanes
for global trade and transportation communication.
Viet Nam is fully aware that the maintenance of peace
and stability, maritime security and safety and freedom
of navigation in the East Sea is a common concern
and interest of the region and the world as a whole. In
the context of the complex developments in the East
Sea, we call on all the parties concerned to show selfrestraint and refrain from unilateral acts that could
further complicate or escalate the disputes, including
the expansion and militarization of occupied features;
to settle disputes by peaceful means, in accordance with
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations and UNCLOS; and fully respect diplomatic
and legal processes, implement the Declaration on
the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea in its
entirety and expedite the conclusion of an effective and
substantive code of conduct.

As a country that is very vulnerable to climate
change, sea-level rise and extreme weather events, and
which also suffers from the adverse impact of maritime
pollution and the depletion of marine resources, Viet
Nam strongly supports the international community’s
efforts to promote the conservation and sustainable
use of the oceans, seas and maritime resources. Our
Government strongly supports the full implementation
of the targets of Sustainable Development Goal 14, on
the conservation and sustainable use of oceans, seas
and maritime resources, and is fully commitmentitted
to the fight against illegal, unreported and unregulated
(IUU) fishing. Our current efforts to finalize internal
procedures to become party to the United Nations Fish
Stocks Agreement and the Agreement on Port State
Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal,
Unreported and Unregulated Fishing of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations are a
clear manifestation of that endeavour. At the same time,
we hold that measures to fight IUU fishing should take
into account the specific circumstances of countries
where fisheries are mainly small-scale, in order to
ensure a balance between the goal of the conservation
and sustainable development of fisheries and the

I would like to take this opportunity to once
again affirm our full support and commitment to the
objectives, purposes and universal principles enshrined
in UNCLOS. We urge all countries to respect and
fulfil their obligations to ensure peace, stability and
the sustainable development of oceans and seas for the
benefit of present and future generations.
Mr. Musikhin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Our country has always welcomed States’
productive cooperation on issues relating to the
world’s oceans, which has been made possible thanks
to the establishment of a robust legal foundation. Our
delegation therefore supports the Assembly’s draft
resolutions on the law of the sea (A/73/L.35) and
sustainable fisheries (A/73/L.41).
The annual omnibus resolution on oceans and the
law of the sea stresses the universal and unified nature
of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea and affirms that the Convention establishes a
legal framework for all activities in the world’s oceans
and has strategic significance as the basis for national,
regional and global action and cooperation in the
maritime sector. It is important to protect its integrity.
We must ensure its inviolability as the foundation for the
maritime legal regime established by the Convention.
My delegation is in favour of the effective
application of the existing legal instruments that have

18-432063/16

A/73/PV.50

been adopted based on the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea, and we support the coordinated
efforts of global, regional and sectoral bodies. We want
to particularly point out the successful cooperation
under the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of
the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks
and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and the network of
regional fisheries management organizations created on
the basis of that Agreement. The practical application
of the 1995 Agreement has proved it to be a reliable
instrument for regulating fisheries issues in areas
beyond national jurisdiction that takes into account a
balance of the interests of sustainable fisheries and the
conservation of the marine environment. We urge States
to work together to establish new regional fisheries
management organizations and improve existing ones,
and invite others to participate in them.
Special attention should be paid to issues relating
to the conservation and sustainable use of marine
biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction. The
outcomes of the first session of the intergovernmental
conference on this issue testified to the fact that
there continue to be widely differing positions on the
subject. We urge delegations to maintain a balanced
and positive approach that will enable us to arrive at a
strictly consensus solution.
The Convention bodies — the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, the Commission on the
Limits of the Continental Shelf and the International
Seabed Authority — continue to play a vital role, and
we believe that it is important to provide them with
adequate resources. We welcome the decision by States
to give the members of the Commission the option of
joining the main United Nations health insurance plan
used at Headquarters.
I turn now to the statement by the delegation
of Ukraine (see A/73/PV.49), which was once again
all about propaganda for its position in our bilateral
arbitrage suit. For our part, we do not plan to comment
on ongoing legal or arbitrage proceedings in the General
Assembly, a political body of the United Nations. It
is clear that the Ukrainian delegation has a domestic
agenda and is spreading lies and various sorts of legal,
political and economic fairy tales in the Assembly. Let
me explain how things stand in reality.
4/16

11/12/2018

The Crimean bridge was designed so as not to
prevent the passage of vessels. The maximum height
above sea level allowed for vessels passing under it
is 35 metres, which ensures that the vast majority of
ships drawing less than eight metres can pass through.
The two main ports on the Sea of Azov, Berdyansk and
Mariupol, basically cannot accommodate ships with a
draught larger than that. As a rule, border inspections
take place when ships are at anchor while waiting their
turn for pilotage and in most cases take no longer than
three hours. They are not discriminatory. From 1 April
to 31 October, our border control officers in Sea of
Azov waters inspected 1,492 vessels, of which 31 sailed
under the Ukrainian flag, 53 under the Russian flag and
1,408 under flags of third countries. As these numbers
show, commercial traffic through the Strait is going full
steam ahead and will continue to do so. Incidentally, the
Sea of Azov border inspections had to be strengthened
owing to the necessity of ensuring the security of
citizens and strategic infrastructure in connection with
constant threats from Ukrainian radicals, including
officials. Previously attempted or prevented acts of
sabotage or terrorism — including one in which powerline supports in the Kherson district were undermined
in 2015 with the aim of cutting off electricity to Crimea,
and one in which a cutter was detained on its way to
sabotage the Crimean bridge’s supports — testify to
the appropriateness of such inspections.
With regard to the recent incident, on 25 November
Ukrainian naval vessels were moving towards the Kerch
Strait through Russian territorial waters in the Black
Sea, seriously violating the rules of peaceful passage.
The appropriate notifications had not been provided,
and the ships failed to respond to radioed call signs or to
obey requests from the Russian border guards’ boat. It
is notable that two Ukrainian naval vessels that passed
through the Kerch Strait in September observed all of
these formalities. It is therefore clear that the Ukrainian
ships’ disregard for those formalities on 25 November
was a deliberate and manifest violation of laws and
rules that the authorities in Kyiv are perfectly familiar
with. Incidentally, at the time when the Ukrainian
ships committed this provocative act there were 166
civilian vessels in the area of the Kerch Strait, meaning
that their risky manoeuvres created a real threat to
civilian safety.
The statistics and facts clearly underline that Russia
ensures the full security of ships passing through the
Kerch Strait, thereby enabling the future development
18-43206

11/12/2018

of commercial and other links with the ports of the Sea
of Azov. As far as Crimea is concerned, as a sovereign
coastal State Russia is exercising its sovereign rights
and asserting its jurisdiction in the waters around
Crimea, in accordance with international law.
Mr. Nyanid (Cameroon) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes this opportunity to contribute
to the debate on the issue of ocean management. As
we know, the oceans play a key role in regulating the
world’s climate. They also play a role in maintaining
social and economic balance, are a vital source of animal
protein, contain vast quantities of precious metals
and energy resources, provide direct employment for
millions of people in fisheries and aquaculture and
for even more through indirect employment in searelated sectors. They are also of political and military
strategic significance.
According to the data we have, the oceans alone
represent an added value of $1.5 billion, or 2.5 per cent
of global added value. All of those benefits and assets
could be threatened if these spaces continue to be the
victims of the harmful consequences of human activity.
We should also point out that overfishing, illegal
fishing, pollution, greenhouse-gas emissions and the
development of coastal areas also pose a serious threat
to the oceans’ existence. It has also been established that
elevated underwater sonar levels have a whole range
of repercussions on marine life of all kinds, including
mammals, fish and invertebrates, and can do physical
damage, disrupt communication among animals and
drive them from their preferred feeding grounds, which
in turn can affect their reproduction and survival rates.
While we generally know very little about the longterm consequences of anthropogenic underwater noise
on marine flora and fauna, its long-term cumulative
effects on biodiversity and its socioeconomic impact
are matters of growing concern.
We were very pleased, however, to see both
in resolution 72/73 of 5 December 2017 and in the
conclusions of the nineteenth meeting of the Informal
Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea
an acknowledgement of the importance of our oceans
and the need to protect them and their biodiversity,
which must be supported by effective measures to
protect them. Raising awareness is an important
element of such measures. In that regard, World Oceans
Day, established at the 1992 United Nations Conference
on Environment and Development and celebrated
every year on 8 June, is an opportunity to create an

A/73/PV.50

understanding of how oceans fit into sustainable
development and are help to balance our ecosystem. It
is also urgent that we continue to conduct research into
anthropogenic underwater noise in order to eliminate
uncertainties about its genesis and its socioeconomic
effects on coastal States and their populations,
including in the area of food security, as well as to take
its cumulative effects into account. And in order to
ensure that no one is left behind, it is crucial to build
capacity and transfer knowledge and technology with
the aim of bridging gaps and lack of understanding in
this area.
Beyond its symbolism, my country welcomes
the protection afforded by the 1982 United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea and other international
instruments relevant to this issue, and we reiterate our
call for strengthening the protection and conservation
of the marine environment for future generations.
In that regard, we welcomed the holding from 5 to
9 June 2017 of the United Nations Oceans Conference,
aimed, among other things, at reversing the steep
decline in ocean health and fostering progress in the
implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14
by 2030.
Cameroon also welcomes the holding of the first
session of the intergovernmental conference to develop
a legally binding instrument under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction. For my country, it is
important to build on the gains of the first session, which
lay the foundation for a new governance instrument for
the high seas that meets twenty-first century threats
to oceans.
The blue economy is of paramount importance to
Africa. According to the International Energy Agency,
by 2020 the annual economic value of energy-related
maritime activities will have reached approximately
$3 billion per year. Oceans can provide up to 400 per
cent of the global demand for renewable energy. Out
of 54 African States, 38 are coastal and more than
90 per cent of African imports and exports enter and
exit by sea. Territorial waters under the jurisdiction
of coastal States cover 13 million square kilometres,
with a continental shelf of nearly 6.5 million square
kilometres, including exclusive economic zones. In
other words, the marine environment and ocean-related
activities could allow Africa to occupy a prominent
place in global geopolitics. The strategic dimension

18-432065/16

A/73/PV.50

of the blue economy is essential to African States and
my delegation welcomes its inclusion in Agenda 2063
of the African Union and the subsequent drafting
by the United Nations Economic Commission for
Africa, in March 2016, of Africa’s Blue Economy: A
policy handbook.
For its part, Cameroon has undertaken to develop
and supervise certain sea-related activities. It has
established the Institute of Fisheries and Aquatic
Sciences, which is an example of future sustainable
development. With regard to the regulatory framework,
my country adopted law 96/12 of 5 August 1996, which
ensures the protection of Cameroon’s waters by banning
all marine debris or waste, and law 94/01 of 21 January
1994, on the Forest Code, which regulates forests,
fauna and fisheries, to facilitate the implementation of
policies under Agenda 21, on the sustainable use and
conservation of marine living resources under national
jurisdiction.
As they are essential to life and the survival of our
planet, it is urgent now more than ever to protect better
oceans and coastal areas by facilitating international
cooperation, strengthening their legal protection code
and supporting research in those areas.
The Acting President: I now call on His Excellency
Mr. Jin-Hyun Paik, President of the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea.
Mr. Jin-Hyun Paik (International Tribunal for
the Law of the Sea): It is an honour for me to address
the General Assembly this year on behalf of the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea during the
Assembly’s consideration of the agenda item, “Oceans
and the law of the sea”.
Before advising the Assembly on the work of the
Tribunal, it is with great regret that I must inform
members of the passing of Judge and former President
of the Tribunal, P. Chandrasekhara Rao, on 11 October.
Judge Chandrasekhara Rao was a member of the
Tribunal from 1996 to 2017 and its President from
1999 to 2002. Between 2000 and 2009, he served as
the President of the Special Chamber constituted to
deal with the case concerning the conservation and
sustainable exploitation of swordfish stocks in the
South-Eastern Pacific Ocean. On behalf of the Tribunal,
I wish to pay tribute to Judge Chandrasekhara Rao for
his contribution to the work of the Tribunal and the
development of international law of the sea.
6/16

11/12/2018

Permit me to turn now to the judicial work of the
Tribunal. In September this year, the Tribunal held
hearings on the merits in the M/V “Norstar” Case
(Panama v. Italy). I wish to recall that, in that case,
proceedings were instituted on 17 December 2015 by
an application filed by Panama against Italy in a dispute
concerning the arrest and detention of the vessel M/V
“Norstar”, an oil tanker flying the Panamanian flag.
Preliminary objections were raised by Italy on 11 March
2016 and the Tribunal delivered its judgment on the
preliminary objections on 4 November 2016.
In the period under review, the parties submitted
their written pleadings in respect of the merits of
the case and the Tribunal held hearings from 10 to
15 September. The Tribunal is now deliberating the
case and plans to deliver its judgment in the spring of
2019. In that regard, allow me to mention that disputes
arising from the arrest of vessels have already been
brought before the Tribunal in cases on merits, mainly
in connection with the claims for damages resulting
from alleged illegal arrests and detention.
The Tribunal has awarded reparations in two such
cases, namely, the M/V “Saiga” Case (Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines v. Guinea) and the M/V “Virginia
G” Case (Panama v. Guinea-Bissau). The current
case — M/V “Norstar” — also raises issues related to
the alleged unlawful arrest and detention of a vessel and
claims for reparations. The Assembly will understand
that, since it is sub judice, I cannot comment on the
case at present. I should mention, however, that two
other proceedings are available to States parties to the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea in
cases where a vessel is arrested and detained. I wish to
refer to prompt release proceedings under article 292
of the Convention, whereby the flag State of a vessel
detained for fisheries offences in an exclusive economic
zone or for pollution offences may seek the release of
the vessel and its crew upon the posting of reasonable
bond. A request for the release of the detained vessel,
as a provisional measure under article 290 of the
Convention, may also be an option when the urgency
of the situation so requires. I wish to add that cases
submitted to the Tribunal so far involve wide-ranging
subjects encompassing, but not limited to maritime
boundary delimitation disputes, law of fisheries,
the exploitation of the area and the preservation and
protection of the marine environment.
This year’s draft resolution on oceans and the law
of the sea
18-43206

11/12/2018

“[e]ncourages States Parties to the Convention
that have not yet done so to consider making a
written declaration, choosing from the means
set out in article 287 of the Convention for the
settlement of disputes concerning the interpretation
or application of the Convention” (A/73/L.35,
para. 59).
In that respect, I note that, so far, 52 States have
made such written declarations and 40 have chosen
the Tribunal as the means or one of the means for the
settlement of disputes concerning the interpretation or
application of the Convention. That said, I wish to recall
that, even in the absence of declarations made under
article 287 of the Convention, the Tribunal is competent
to deal with any dispute submitted to it on the basis
of an agreement between the parties concerned. The
Tribunal is also competent to deal with urgent cases
in two instances: first, proceedings for the prescription
of provisional measures pending the constitution of
an arbitral tribunal under article 290, paragraph 5,
of the Convention; and secondly, application for the
prompt release of vessels and crews under article 292
of the Convention.
For such urgent proceedings, the Tribunal renders
its decision within a period of approximately one
month. I should add that in the light of the experience
gained by the Tribunal in handling urgent proceedings,
there is no reason to doubt that it could deal with a case
on the merits within a relatively short period of time,
in particular if the parties were to indicate that they
expected an expeditious solution to their dispute.
In that context, I may observe that the rules of the
Tribunal contain provisions that may be used to shorten
the time spent dealing with a case, if the circumstances
so require. For example, under article 109 of the rules
of the Tribunal, in proceedings before special chambers
of the Tribunal formed pursuant to article 15 of the
Statute, parties may, with the Chamber’s consent, agree
to dispense with oral proceedings. Likewise, pursuant
to articles 117 to 121 of the rules of the Tribunal, oral
proceedings are not required in some disputes brought
before the Seabed Disputes Chamber. In advisory
proceedings, if the request for an advisory opinion
states that the question necessitates an urgent answer,
the Seabed Disputes Chamber shall take all appropriate
steps to accelerate the procedure. The Chamber or its
President, if the Chamber is not sitting, shall decide
whether or not oral proceedings shall be held.

A/73/PV.50

Allow me to say a few words about the current
negotiations in the intergovernmental conference on
an international legally binding instrument under
the United Nations Convention on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction. I wish to draw the
attention of the States Members of the United Nations
to the importance of incorporating a robust dispute
settlement mechanism in the future instrument, as
such a mechanism would ensure compliance with
it. In that regard, consideration could be given to the
possibility of incorporating Part 15 of the Convention,
on dispute settlement, in the new instrument, following
the example of other agreements that have been
concluded to implement provisions of the Convention.
It might also be useful to consider the possibility of
requesting an advisory opinion from the Tribunal in
the new instrument. In that connection, the Assembly
may recall that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction comprises all
matters specifically provided for in any agreement that
confers jurisdiction on the Tribunal.
With respect to organizational matters, I wish to
inform the General Assembly that during the current
year, the Tribunal has held two administrative sessions:
the forty-fifth session, from 12 to 23 March, and the
forty-sixth session, from 17 to 28 September. Those
sessions were devoted to legal and judicial matters, as
well as organizational and other administrative matters.
On 25 September, the Tribunal adopted a decision
concerning its own procedure. It decided to amend article
60, paragraph 2, and article 61, paragraph 3, of its rules,
relating to the adoption by the Tribunal of a decision
authorizing a second round of written pleadings. Article
60, paragraph 2, refers to the procedure when a case
is submitted to the Tribunal by way of an application,
while article 61, paragraph 3, refers to the procedure
to be followed when a case is submitted by way of a
special agreement. Under the amended provisions,
the President of the Tribunal may authorize a second
round of written pleadings if the Tribunal is not sitting.
Prior to the amendment, articles 60 and 61 stipulated
that only the Tribunal should give authorization. The
amendment was adopted in the interest of the expedient
and cost-effective administration of justice.
An efficient system for the peaceful settlement of
disputes requires that comprehensive information on
the role of the Tribunal be provided to Government
officials, who in their respective administrations are
responsible for dealing with law of the sea matters.

18-432067/16

A/73/PV.50

Likewise, it is important to transmit information and
knowledge to the younger generation in order to ensure
that lawyers and officials, early in their career, are
made aware of the tools available to States with a view
to the peaceful settlement of international disputes.
In that respect, I would like to draw the Assembly’s
attention to the capacity-building programmes on the
peaceful settlement of disputes under the Convention
offered by the Tribunal.
On 2 and 3 May, the Tribunal, in collaboration
with the Government of the Republic of Cabo Verde,
organized a regional workshop in Mindelo, Cabo
Verde, on the topic of the role of the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea in the settlement of
disputes related to the law of the sea. The workshop
was the thirteenth in a series held in different regions
of the world to provide experts from various States
with practical information on dispute settlement
procedures before the Tribunal. Representatives from
eight Western and Central African States attended the
workshop, and the subregional fisheries commission
also sent a representative. I take this opportunity to
extend our sincere gratitude to Government of the
Republic of Cabo Verde, the Korea Maritime Institute
and the China Institute of International Studies for their
invaluable support in the organization of that event.
A further aspect of the Tribunal’s capacitybuilding activities is its internship programme, which
annually gives 20 students from around the world the
opportunity to gain a deeper understanding of the work
and functions of the Tribunal. Special trust funds have
been established — with assistance from the Korea
International Cooperation Agency, the Korea Maritime
Institute and the China Institute of International
Studies — to provide financial support to applicants
from developing countries.
Furthermore, a nine-month capacity-building and
training programme on dispute settlement under
the Convention, organized in cooperation with the
Nippon Foundation, has been offered since 2007
for the benefit of young governmental officials and
researchers. Six fellows are participating in the current
twelfth cycle of the programme. They are nationals of
the following countries: Argentina, Benin, Comoros,
Papua New Guinea, Singapore and Ukraine. I wish to
take this opportunity to express my sincere gratitude
to the Nippon Foundation for its commitment to
the programme.
8/16

11/12/2018

I would like to add that the twelfth summer
academy on promoting ocean governance and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, organized by the
International Foundation for the Law of the Sea, was
held at the premises of the Tribunal in Hamburg from
22 July to 17 August. A total of 39 participants from 30
countries attended lectures and workshops dealing with
law of the sea and maritime law. I would like to express
my deep gratitude to the aforementioned institutions
for their support.
Before concluding, let me express my sincere
appreciation to the Secretary-General, the Legal Counsel
and the Director of the Division for Ocean Affairs and
the Law of the Sea for the unfailing cooperation and
support they have always offered the Tribunal.
The Acting President: I now call on His
Excellency Mr. Michael Lodge, Secretary-General of
the International Seabed Authority.
Mr. Lodge (International Seabed Authority): Let
me begin by commending the General Assembly for
the several references made to the International Seabed
Authority and the regime for the Area throughout draft
resolution A/73/L.35, which is before us. Allow me
also to express my appreciation to the Legal Counsel
of the United Nations and colleagues in the Division
for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea for their
support during the past year. We enjoy a close and
collaborative working relationship, and I have been
delighted to welcome the participation of colleagues
from the Division in four of the Authority’s workshops
this year. I am particularly grateful to the Assembly for
having reaffirmed the centrality of the role played by
the Authority, under the framework of the Convention.
I wish to highlight four specific matters identified in
the draft resolution.
First, I commend the General Assembly for
welcoming the improvement in the level of attendance
at the twenty-fourth session of the Assembly of the
Authority this year. It is an encouraging sign of
renewed commitment on the part of the members of
the Authority and also a beneficial consequence of the
revised schedule of meetings endorsed last year by the
Assembly. I hope that this momentum can be sustained.
Secondly, linked to the improvement in attendance
is the fact that a voluntary trust fund has been
established to facilitate the participation of members of
the Council of the Authority from developing States.
I wish to thank all those who have contributed to that
18-43206

11/12/2018

fund and welcome the references in the draft resolution
to the need for further sustained contributions.
Thirdly, I am pleased to see that the General
Assembly, for the second year in a row, has recognized the
Authority’s fundamental role in collecting and sharing
data and information on the deep seabed. I particularly
welcome the references in the draft resolution to the
value of cooperation between the Authority and other
relevant organizations under the umbrella of the Seabed
2030 project. Being a main partner in that Project will
allow us to make a significant contribution in the
context of the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science
for Sustainable Development. We are also pleased that
ocean science and the United Nations Decade of Ocean
Science will be the theme of the United Nations Openended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and
the Law of the Sea in 2019. We look forward to making
a substantial contribution to that process.
Fourthly, I appreciate the fact that the draft resolution
expresses serious concerns about the number of States
parties in arrears of their assessed contributions to the
Authority. That is indeed a serious problem and I wish
to urge all those in arrears, in particular those States
whose exercise of voting rights will be suspended as a
result, to fulfil their obligations without delay.
Since my last address to the General Assembly
(see A/72/PV.64), much has been achieved by the
members of the Authority. The Council has been
making important progress on the elaboration of the
Mining Code, including measures for the protection of
the marine environment, as well as financial terms of
contracts for mineral exploitation. Following the latest
meeting of the Council in July, 42 written submissions
have been received on the draft exploitation regulations.
At its next session, in February 2019, the Council
will consider the key policy issues arising from those
submissions, with a view to providing clear direction
to the Legal and Technical Commission as it works to
finalize the draft.
The next meeting of the Council will also be
preceded by a two-day open-ended informal working
group, chaired by the President of the Council, to
discuss the economic model for deep-seabed mining,
which will form the basis for the financial terms of
contracts. In that way, the Council is working hard to
achieve the target it had set for itself to finalize the
draft regulations by 2020 and to set the framework for
the sustainable use of deep-seabed mineral resources

A/73/PV.50

for the long term. It is of the utmost importance that
all States parties participate in that process, which
represents a unique opportunity to get it right.
In getting it right, a particular focus for the
Authority, which is welcomed in operative paragraph
69 of the draft resolution, is the development of
regional environmental management plans in areas
where exploration activities are taking place. I wish to
express my sincere appreciation to the Governments
of China and Poland for hosting important scientific
workshops during 2018, which significantly advanced
that work. I look forward to progressing this work
further during 2019, including by strengthening the
capacity of the secretariat in order to better support the
work programme set by the Council.
The Authority’s role in the environmental
management of the Area is of particular relevance to
the work of the intergovernmental conference on an
international legally binding instrument. The Authority
attaches great importance to the work of the conference
and stands ready to support it and its President in its
tasks. That was illustrated by the fact that the Authority
made five statements during the first substantive
session of the conference in September and organized
three side events. At the conference, we had the
opportunity to comment on the relationship between
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
and the mandate of the intergovernmental conference.
We pointed out that the Convention requires the marine
environment in its entirety to be protected, not just
parts of it. We must be careful, therefore, that the
results of our discussions do not further fragment the
law of the sea or conflict with the comprehensive and
holistic approach reflected in the Convention.
In relation to the Area and its resources, it is
important to fully respect the rights of States that are
to be exercised only in accordance with Part XI of the
Convention, the 1994 Agreement relating to Part XI of
the Convention and the Authority’s rules, regulations
and procedures. Additional measures that duplicate,
overlap or conflict with the measures taken pursuant
to Part XI and the 1994 Agreement run the risk of
undermining the careful balance of competencies
established in the Convention.
Although not referred to in the draft resolution,
significant efforts have been invested by the Authority
in contributing to the delivery of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, in particular Sustainable

18-432069/16

A/73/PV.50

Development Goal 14, and the development of the
blue economy. That includes our engagement through
the community of ocean action on the implementation
of international law, as reflected in the Convention,
which I have the honour to co-facilitate with the Legal
Counsel of the United Nations. It also includes the many
different activities being undertaken to implement our
seven voluntary commitments, in partnership with
member States, international organizations and other
stakeholders. Here, I wish to reiterate my sincere
congratulations to the Government of Kenya, as well as
the Governments of Canada and Japan, on the successful
organization of the Sustainable Blue Economy
Conference in Nairobi last month. The Conference
served to underline that the best way to realize the
benefits of the blue economy, while conserving our
oceans for future generations, is through the legal
regime set out in the Convention.
Finally, I wish to take this opportunity to remind
the Assembly that 2019 will mark the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the entry into force of the Convention
and the establishment of the Authority. Throughout
next year, the Authority will organize a series of
special commemorative events, and I look forward to
the full and active participation of all States parties in
those events, many of which will be held in Kingston,
Jamaica, our seat and host country, as well as to the
presence of our sister organizations.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 78 and its
sub-items (a) and (b).
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions A/73/L.35 and A/73/L.41. We turn first to
draft resolution A/73/L.35, entitled “Oceans and the
law of the sea”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat
to make an oral statement.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This oral statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraphs 54 and 55 of draft
resolution A/73/L.35, the General Assembly would
note that the twenty-eighth Meeting of States Parties,
convened by the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 72/73, is to be resumed on 15 January 2019;
request the Secretary-General to provide full conference
10/16

11/12/2018

services, including documentation as required; and
request the Secretary-General to convene the twentyninth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention
from 17 to 19 June 2019, with full conference services,
including documentation as required.
It is anticipated that the request contained in
paragraphs 54 and 55 for documentation related to the
conference services for the Meeting of States Parties
would constitute an addition to the documentation
workload of the Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management for three pre-session
documents, totalling 2,200 words and one post-session
document with 3,500 words, in six languages, in 2019.
However, resource requirements for documentation
services in the amount of $19,500 in 2019 would be met
from within existing resources. Accordingly, should
the General Assembly adopt draft resolution A/73/L.35,
no additional requirements would arise under the
programme budget for the biennium 2018-2019.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat to announce additional
sponsors.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/73/L.35, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania, the
Bahamas, Barbados, Bulgaria, Canada, Denmark,
Greece, Guinea, Latvia, Morocco, the Philippines,
Saint Lucia, Senegal, Sri Lanka, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the United States of America
and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina,
Brazil,
Brunei
Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile,
China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
18-43206

11/12/2018

Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia,
Lebanon,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Viet Nam
Against:
Turkey
Abstaining:
Colombia, El Salvador, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)
Draft resolution A/73/L.35 was adopted by 121
votes to 1, with 3 abstentions (resolution 73/124).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Liechtenstein
and Tunisia informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: We shall now turn to draft
resolution A/73/L.41, entitled “Sustainable fisheries,
including through the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks, and related instruments”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat
to make an oral statement.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This oral statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraphs 203, 204 and 205
of draft resolution A/73/L.41, the General Assembly

A/73/PV.50

would recall the decision to conduct in 2020 a further
review of the actions taken by States and regional
fisheries management organizations and arrangements
in response to paragraphs 113, 117 and 119 to 124 of
resolution 64/72; paragraphs 121, 126, 129, 130 and 132
to 134 of resolution 66/68; and paragraphs 156, 171, 175,
177 to 188 and 219 of resolution 71/123, with a view
to ensuring effective implementation of the measures
therein to making further recommendations where
necessary, and decide to precede that review with a
two-day workshop.
The Assembly would request the SecretaryGeneral to convene, with full conference services,
without prejudice to future arrangements a two-day
workshop in 2020 in order to discuss implementation
of paragraphs 113, 117 and 119 to 124 of resolution
64/72; paragraphs 121, 126, 129, 130 and 132 to 134 of
resolution 66/68; and paragraphs 156, 171, 175, 177 to
188 and 219 of resolution 71/123, and to invite States,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and other relevant specialized agencies, funds
and programmes, subregional and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements, other
fisheries bodies, other relevant intergovernmental
bodies and relevant non-governmental organizations
and relevant stakeholders, in accordance with United
Nations practice, to attend the workshop.
The Assembly would also request the SecretaryGeneral to prepare a report similar in scope, length
and detail to his report to the General Assembly at its
seventy-fourth session, in cooperation with the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and
with the assistance of an expert consultant to be hired
by the Division to provide information and analysis on
relevant technical and scientific issues to be covered
in the report, for consideration by the Assembly at
its seventy-fifth session, on the action taken by State
and regional fisheries management organizations and
arrangements in response to paragraphs 113, 117 and
119 to 124 of resolution 64/72; paragraphs 121, 126, 129,
130 and 132 to 134 of resolution 66/68; and paragraphs
156, 171, 175, 177 to 188 and 219 of resolution 71/123,
and invite States and regional fisheries management
organizations and arrangements to consider making
such information publicly available.
Turning to the request contained in paragraphs
203 and 204 of the draft resolution, it is envisaged
that meeting services would be required for a two-day
workshop in 2020, consisting of four meetings — one in

18-4320611/16

A/73/PV.50

the morning and one in the afternoon each day — with
interpretation in all six languages, and also requiring a
webcast of the meetings. The meetings would constitute
an addition to the workload of the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management, which
would entail additional requirements in 2020 in the
amount of $23,800. The Office of Legal Affairs would
require an additional amount of $900 for the provision
of webcast services for 2020.
The request for documentation contained in
paragraph 205 of the draft resolution would constitute
an addition to the documentation workload of the
Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management of one pre-session document of 17,000
words in all six languages in 2020 and one post-session
document of 4,500 words in all six languages in 2020.
Those would entail total additional requirements in the
amount of $65,400 for documentation services in 2020.
The request for documentation contained in
paragraph 205 of the draft resolution would also entail
the hiring of additional consultancy services for the
Office of Legal Affairs in 2020. That would entail
additional requirements in the amount of $15,000
for consultancy services in 2020 under the Office of
legal Affairs.
Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution
A/73/L.41 would not give rise to any budgetary
implications under the programme budget for the
biennium 2018 to 2019. The adoption of the draft
resolution would result in additional resource
requirements in the amount of $89,200 under section 2,
“General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
Affairs and Conference Management”, and $15,900
under section 6, “Legal Affairs”, to be included in the
proposed programme budget for 2020.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat to announce additional
sponsors.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/73/L.41, and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors: Albania, the Bahamas, Belgium, Belize,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Denmark, Fiji, Finland, Greece,
Guinea, Indonesia, Jamaica, Kiribati, Latvia, Maldives,
Montenegro, Palau, Panama, the Philippines, Saint
12/16

11/12/2018

Lucia, Samoa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Thailand, the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Ukraine.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.41?
Draft resolution A/73/L.41 was adopted (resolution
73/125).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the vote, I remind delegations
that explanations of vote about are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): Argentina joined the consensus on resolution
73/125, on sustainable fisheries. We wish to once again
stress that no recommendations in the resolution can be
interpreted as signifying that the provisions contained
in the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and related
instruments can be considered to be obligatory by those
States that have yet to explicitly express their agreement.
The resolution that we have just adopted
contains paragraphs related to the implementation
of the recommendations of the Review Conference
on the Agreement. Argentina reiterates that those
recommendations cannot be considered to be
enforceable, even as recommendations for States
that are not parties to the Agreement. Argentina
also cautions that existing international law does not
empower regional fisheries management organizations
or their member States to adopt measures of any kind
against vessels whose flag States are not members of
those organizations or party to those arrangements, or
have not explicitly consented to such measures being
applicable to vessels flying their flags. Nothing in the
General Assembly’s resolutions, including those we
just adopted, can be interpreted as running contrary to
that conclusion.
Furthermore, I should like to recall once again that
the implementation of conservation measures, scientific
research or any other activity recommended in General
Assembly resolutions — in particular resolution 61/105
and its subsequent resolutions — has the current
international law of the sea as an unquestionable
legal framework, as reflected in the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, including paragraph
18-43206

11/12/2018

3 of article 77, which must be strictly adhered to.
Compliance with those resolutions cannot used as a
false justification for ignoring or denying the rights
established in the Convention. There is nothing
in the General Assembly’s resolutions that would
allow the sovereign rights of coastal States over their
continental shelves or the exercise of jurisdiction over
their continental shelves under international law to
be abridged.
Paragraph 189 of the resolution we have just
adopted contains a very relevant reminder of that
concept, which is reflected in resolution 64/72 and
its subsequent resolutions. In that context, and as
in previous sessions, paragraph 190 recognizes the
adoption by coastal States, including Argentina, of
measures regarding the impacts of bottom fishing on
vulnerable marine ecosystems across the entirety of
their continental shelf, as well as their efforts to ensure
that they are enforced.
Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank you, Sir, for allowing me to take the
floor in explanation of vote following the adoption of
resolution 73/124, on oceans and the law of the sea, and
thank Singapore for its work as facilitator.
The Republic of El Salvador is aware of the
importance of the oceans, particularly of their
sustainable use within the framework of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, which is essential
to ensuring food security for all in an orderly fashion.
My country also understands that gaps continue to
exist in such areas as sustainable fishing, transport,
conservation and the sustainable use of marine
biodiversity, among other issues, in which we have
seen great strides of exceptional importance for the
international community, but in which much remains
to be done.
As El Salvador is not a State party to the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS),
we believe that the relevant provisions, agreements and
resolutions agreed among States parties or that emanate
from the General Assembly should take the norms of
general international law into account. In that regard,
such provisions, agreements or resolutions do not create
obligations for non-State parties without their consent.
Over the years, El Salvador has made repeated appeals
to the General Assembly to make the contents of this
annual resolution comprehensive and inclusive of
every Member State’s views, and to avoid making it an

A/73/PV.50

exercise in negotiations that would be more appropriate
within the framework of the Meetings of States Parties
to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea. Such a limited vision of the subject prevented my
delegation from supporting resolution 73/124.
Nevertheless, as El Salvador is aware of the
importance of holding multifaceted discussions on
the oceans within a variety of frameworks, including
that of the Sustainable Development Goals, and as
testament to my country’s resolve to work once again
towards fostering a universal vision to address the
issue, El Salvador decided to abstain in the voting.
Our abstention also reflects the recognition of the
inclusion of elements relative to marine ecosystems and
environmental conservation within the text, as well as
El Salvador’s advocacy for a legally binding instrument
on the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity
in areas beyond national jurisdiction, in accordance
with the provisions of resolution 72/249, in particular
paragraphs 8 and 10.
El Salvador calls on all States to pursue their work
on issues related to the use, conservation and protection
of the oceans and seas with the goal of ensuring
the quality of life for future generations, with the
cooperation of all countries, be it in bilateral, regional
or universal formats. That would allow us to strengthen
international peace and security and friendly relations
among all nations, in accordance with the principles of
justice and equal rights and the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Yakut (Turkey): Turkey requested a recorded
vote and voted against resolution 73/124, entitled
“Oceans and the law of the sea”, under sub-item (a) of
agenda item 78.
Turkey agrees with the general content of the
resolution in principle and believes that it is particularly
important, as it recognizes the important contribution
of sustainable development and the management
of the resources and uses of the oceans and seas for
the achievement of the international development
goals contained in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We therefore appreciate the efforts of the
coordinator, the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law
of the Sea and Member States to finalize the resolution.
However, owing to the nature of references made
to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea (UNCLOS) in the resolution, Turkey felt obliged to
call for a recorded vote on the resolution. Turkey is not

18-4320613/16

A/73/PV.50

11/12/2018

party to UNCLOS and is of the opinion that UNCLOS
is not universal and does not have a unified character.
We also believe that it is not the only legal framework
that regulates all activities in the oceans and seas. We
welcome efforts to reach a consensus on this important
resolution and expect all parties to be more constructive
and flexible in order to take all non-parties on board
in future negotiations. Turkey, for its part, is ready
to engage constructively with all parties to achieve
consensus. Until then, the UNCLOS language in the
resolution should not set a precedent for other United
Nations resolutions.

Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks, as their norms are not applicable to my
country either under customary law or international
custom, except for those that the Venezuelan State has
expressly recognized or will recognize in the future by
incorporating them into its domestic legislation. The
reasons that have prevented the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela from becoming party to those instruments
remain unchanged.

Having said that, we would also like to recall that
the reasons that have prevented Turkey from becoming
party to UNCLOS remain valid. Turkey supports
international efforts to establish a regime of the seas
that is based on the principle of equity and is acceptable
to all States. However, in our opinion, the Convention
does not provide sufficient safeguards for particular
geographical situations and, as a consequence, does
not take into consideration conflicting interests and
sensitivities resulting from special circumstances.
Furthermore, the Convention does not allow States to
register reservations to its articles. Therefore, although
we agree with the Convention in its general intent and
with most of its provisions, we are unable to become
party to it owing to those prominent shortcomings.

The Venezuelan State believes that UNCLOS does
not enjoy universal participation, unlike many other
multilateral instruments. Similarly, we have reiterated
our position within various international forums that
the Convention must not be considered the only legal
framework governing all activities carried out in the
oceans and seas, given the fact that there are other
international instruments in this sphere that, together
with the Convention, make up the body of law known
as the law of the sea. Those include the 1958 Geneva
Convention on the Territorial Sea and Contiguous Zone,
the Convention on the High Seas, the Convention on the
Continental Shelf and the Convention on Fishing and
Conservation of Living Resources of the High Seas, all
of which have been ratified by Venezuela.

Turkey joined the consensus on resolution 73/125,
on sustainable fisheries, as Turkey is fully committed
to the conservation, management and sustainable use of
marine living resources and attaches great importance
to regional cooperation to that end. However, as it is not
party to UNCLOS, Turkey disassociates itself from the
references made in that resolution to the Convention.
Those references should therefore not be interpreted
as a change in the legal position of Turkey with regard
to UNCLOS.

UNCLOS codifies certain norms of customary
international law that have been incorporated into
the Venezuelan domestic legal system either through
the ratification of the Geneva Conventions of 1958 or
through domestic legislation. The agenda item “Oceans
and the law of the sea” is a priority in the policies of
Venezuela, which has complied with its international
obligations under the law of the sea, while advocating
for its integral development from a standpoint of equity
and stressing the fact that all negotiations related to
that right must reflect criteria and principles linked
to the right to sustainable development of the marine
environment and its resources for future generations.
Our country has also cooperated with efforts aimed at
promoting coordination on issues related to the oceans
and the law of the sea, in accordance with international
law, and has participated constructively in all relevant
consultations on the subject.

Ms. Fernándes Júarez (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We express our
appreciation to Singapore and Norway for having
facilitated the negotiations on the texts of resolutions
73/124 and 73/125, respectively. We also thank the
Director of the Division of Ocean Affairs and the
Law of the Sea and her team for their support for
the delegations.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is not a
signatory to the 1982 United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) or to the Agreement for the
14/16

With regard to resolution 73/124, entitled “Oceans
and the law of the sea”, we believe that it has positive
aspects. We would caution, however, that it contains
elements that led Venezuela to express reservations
18-43206

11/12/2018

about the outcome document of the 2012 United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(resolution 66/288, annex) and about target 14.c under
Sustainable Development Goal 14 of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. We believe that future
updates of the terms of the Convention should be
considered, given the fact that there are new situations
for which the current approach is inadequate and
which has affected the development of a regime that
should address the most important contemporary issues
related to the oceans and seas in a balanced, equitable
and inclusive manner.
Although our country is not party to the 1995
sustainable fisheries agreement, the fisheries and
aquaculture sector is a priority in our national
development plans, which include the goals of promoting
fisheries development through the modernization of our
fleets and maritime and river fisheries infrastructure.
Venezuela reiterates its commitment to sustainable
fisheries through the application of the principles
of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and Chapter 17 of Agenda 21, approved by
the United Nations Conference on the Environment
and Development of 1992. Accordingly, our country is
party to a number of various international instruments
that advocate for the preservation and organization
of fisheries.
Similarly, our national development plan is
complemented by a broad set of regulations allowing
us to rely on programmes aimed at achieving the
conservation, protection and management of marine
biological resources, while promoting their responsible
and sustainable use, including, inter alia, the relevant
biological, economic, food security, social, cultural,
environmental and commercial aspects. Venezuelan law
on fisheries prohibits bottom trawling and establishes a
sanctions regime for the failure to respect conservation
and management measures.
For the sake of consensus, our delegation joined in
the adoption of resolution 73/125. However, Venezuela
expresses reservations with regard to its content, as it
is not a State party to the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea or to the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks. For the same reasons, the Bolivarian Republic of

A/73/PV.50

Venezuela abstained in the voting on resolution 73/124,
concerning which it also expresses its reservations.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
Two delegations have asked to speak in exercise of
the right of reply. May I remind Member States that
statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to
five minutes for the second intervention, and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Yaremenko (Ukraine): I would like to exercise
my right of reply in connection with the statement
delivered earlier by the delegation of the Russian
Federation. I thought that, at the very beginning, I
would proceed bullet point by bullet point in explaining
the untruth that was shared by that delegation here in
this Hall. But I think that I will try to save our time and
recall that, unfortunately, we have to acknowledge that
the delegation of the Russian Federation has chosen the
path of spreading falsehoods and untruths within the
United Nations.
We have seen many times how the Russian Federation
manipulates facts and attacks through the use of social
networks and, in some cases, cyberattacks. We remind
the Assembly of the case of Malaysian Airlines flight
MH-17, which was downed by a Russian anti-aircraft
missile in Ukraine in 2014, For many years, we have
seen the Russian position evolve vis-à-vis that issue.
We have also recently seen the situation that developed
in the Skripal case. All those cases are very telling.
It would be perfectly reasonable to ask me why I am
recalling all of this right now, because it is not really
connected to the issue of maritime law, which we have
been discussing today. Unfortunately, I am doing so
because as a result of all the actions I have mentioned,
the words and the statement of the Russian delegation
are worthless and mean nothing. That undermines
international law, and I want to emphasize that that is
why any agreement signed by the Russian delegation
is worthless. Needless to say, I urge all delegations
to consider that fact, because right now Ukraine is
under attack by the Russian Federation. But while we
are suffering at that country’s hands today, none of us
knows who might be suffering at its hands tomorrow.
So I would once again like to state that Ukraine is
acting in full respect for international law, using only
peaceful means. Our case in the International Tribunal

18-4320615/16

A/73/PV.50

for the Law of the Sea is an example of how we use
international law to resolve bilateral issues.
Mr. Musikhin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): To be honest, we were startled by the statement
made by the representative of Ukraine. He said almost
nothing about the agenda item we discussed today and
clearly simply had nothing to say. I will therefore outline
and sum up what the Russian representative said, and
I hope the Ukrainian representative will understand it.
In international and domestic bodies of water
regulated under international maritime law, and in
bodies of water regulated through bilateral agreements,
specific legal rules exist for passage through straits, and
the Kerch Strait is no exception. If Ukraine abides by
those laws and rules on the safe passage of vessels and
by the regulations on maritime traffic, its naval ships
and other commercial vessels can pass through freely.
If it does not abide by the laws and rules regarding
vessels’ safe passage and by the regulations on maritime
traffic, its ships will be detained and those responsible
brought to justice. That is their choice. There are no
other options. That is basically what we wanted to say.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 78?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 78 and its sub-item (a).

16/16

11/12/2018

Programme of work
The Acting President: Before concluding, I would
like to make the following announcements concerning
the work of the plenary. The consideration of agenda
item 41, “The situation in the occupied territories of
Azerbaijan”, originally scheduled to be taken up on
17 December, will be postponed until further notice.
Also, the draft resolution entitled “Effects of atomic
radiation”, recommended by the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee, the Fourth Committee, in
its report contained in document A/73/521, and adopted
at the forty-eighth plenary meeting on 7 December
2018, had programme budget implications, contained in
document A/C.4/73/L.13, as mentioned in paragraph six
of that report. Pursuant to rule 153 of the Assembly’s rules
of procedure, no draft resolution for which expenditures
are anticipated by the Secretary-General shall be voted
on by the General Assembly until the administrative
and budgetary committee, the Fifth Committee, has had
an opportunity to state the effect of the proposal on the
budget estimates of the United Nations. The President
of the General Assembly therefore intends to reopen
agenda item 52, “Effects of atomic radiation”, in order
to again put the draft resolution to the consideration
of the Assembly, including through a recorded vote on
its operative paragraph 21 (e), when the report of the
Fifth Committee is available. No resolution number
will be assigned to the draft resolution until then. For
that reason, the summary of the forty-eighth plenary
meeting in the Journal of the United Nations does not
include a reference to agenda item 52 or the report of
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
issued as A/73/521.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

18-43206
