United Nations

S/PV.5705 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-second year

5705th meeting
Monday, 25 June 2007, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Gucht . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Du Xiacong
Mrs. Nzounza Lekaka
Mr. Cruau
Mr. Appreku
Mr. Budiman
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Arias
Mr. Gallardo
Mr. Al-Sulaiti
Mr. Kravchenko
Mr. Harmanovsky
Mr. Crowley
Ms. Bennett
Mr. Hook

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Letter dated 6 June 2007 from the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General on natural resources and
conflict (S/2007/334)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

07-39374 (E)

*0739374*

S/PV.5705 (Resumption 1)

The meeting was suspended at 1.50 p.m. and
resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Brazil, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I wish to extend our
warmest welcome to Your Excellency Karel De Gucht,
Foreign Minister of Belgium, as President of the
Council, and to acknowledge Belgium’s initiative to
convene an open debate to examine the sensitive issue
of the interrelationship between natural resources and
conflict.
The social and economic consequences of
extreme events related to access to and disputes over
natural resources may arguably have an impact on
international security. Cases abound throughout history
in which access to and exploitation of natural resources
were at the root of armed disputes. Yet perhaps a much
higher number of cases in the history of the use of
natural resources have not ended in conflict.
Competition over scarce resources and security of
supply can indeed be key factors of a particular
conflict. Nevertheless, utmost caution should be
exercised in establishing firm causal links between
natural resources, including energy, and the risk of
conflict.
The determination as to whether there is such a
direct link remains quite a risky challenge in any
specific case. In our view, the roots of conflicts are not
as a rule traceable to a single cause. Disputes are
usually loaded with political connotations, which might
impair objective analysis. In line with that, my
delegation is convinced that there is a more relevant,
stronger link between natural resources and
development, as compared to security.
The Security Council’s primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, as
set out in the United Nations Charter, should not be
invoked in general, abstract terms. The Charter
foresees that issues relating to economic and social
development, as is the case with natural resources,
including energy, fall within the purview of the
functions and powers of the General Assembly and of
the Economic and Social Council.
Brazil believes that Security Council resolution
1625 (2005), regarding its role in conflict prevention,
and resolution 1653 (2006), on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, should not be

2

interpreted in an expansive manner, as that would
undermine the roles and responsibilities of the other
principal organs of the United Nations. Encroachment
in areas pertaining to the area of competence of other
United Nations bodies risks not only distorting the
application of the Charter-based purposes and
principles of the United Nations, but also reinforcing
the tendency to mistrust the intentions of the Security
Council.
We remain convinced that the global nature of the
use of natural resources and its multiple dimensions
recommend that any relevant international debate on
the issue first take place at the forum of universal
representation, which is the General Assembly, and
then at the Economic and Social Council and their
relevant subsidiary bodies, including the Commission
on Sustainable Development, the United Nations
Environment Programme, the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and other
international specialized forums.
The exploitation of natural resources falls within
the purview of sovereign States, which in carrying it
out will certainly be mindful of the United Nations
Charter, international agreements and international law.
In no way should normative decisions eventually taken
in bodies of a restricted composition result in new,
undue constraints to the global commodity market.
To sum up, the possible linkage between the
exploitation of natural resources and conflicts should
be examined by the Security Council on a case-by-case
basis and inasmuch as it may be relevant to a particular
decision. In such cases, the Security Council has
established specific mechanisms, such as those
encompassed in the sanctions committees and the
mandates of peacekeeping operations.
Brazil recognizes that the strategic character of
natural resources requires stronger and more effective
cooperative frameworks, including through regional
political mechanisms that recognize their importance
for developing countries in general. Therefore, our
delegation advocates the need to improve the synergy
of the United Nations system in that area. In line with
that, in addressing the root causes of conflicts we stress
the importance of deepening the cooperation among the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council, as set out in paragraph 1.b of
Article 13 and Article 65 of the Charter.

07-39374

S/PV.5705 (Resumption 1)

The President: I
representative of India.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Sen (India): Let me begin by welcoming you,
Sir, and by expressing appreciation for the Belgian
presidency of the Security Council in the current
month. India appreciates the opportunity afforded to
Member States to participate in today’s timely
discussion on a subject of vital interest for all of us.
The concept paper circulated by the Permanent Mission
of Belgium earlier this month afforded us a most useful
starting point for the discussion.
The issue is important because so many
developing countries are crucially dependent on natural
resources; for instance, a third of Africa’s export
income is from natural resources. At the same time,
those natural resources often cause and prolong
conflict, leading to growth that is sometimes lower and
poverty that is sometimes higher than in naturalresource-poor countries. As in a Greek tragedy, the
saviour is also the damned. That is the nature of the
natural resource curse. Conflicts hold back
development, but a certain kind of development also
leads to conflict.
Globalization sharpens inequality and regional
imbalances, often stimulating natural-resource-rich
regions of a country to try to break away. Similarly,
deflationary policies and the elimination of subsidies
encouraged by the International Monetary Fund (IMF),
as well as trade liberalization encouraged by the World
Trade Organization, have substantially reduced rural
purchasing power and tipped the scales of the natural
resource curse into conflict. Rotberg and Easterly have
both shown that five resource-rich countries in conflict
were, during the preceding 10 years, more than 65 per
cent of the time — and in the case of Sierra Leone, 83
per cent — under an IMF programme.
In any treatment of the linkage between natural
resources and conflict, the full and permanent
sovereignty of each State over its natural resources is a
key principle that is immutable. While conflict
prevention through better management of the
exploitation of resources is theoretically an idea worth
considering, it is in practical terms fraught with legal
and operational complexities. We are therefore of the
view that the best method of preventing conflict prior
to its outbreak lies in more comprehensively
addressing the problems of inequality and economic
deprivation. Creative solutions are needed to the crisis

07-39374

of expectations and the disparities in economic
development. Those cannot be divorced from
international economic governance — making
globalization fair, making the Doha Round truly
development-oriented, and comprehensively reforming
the IMF.
With regard to resources prolonging conflict, it
appears that the international community is arriving
through trial and error at a useful approach, whose
contours are only now becoming visible. A judicious
mixture of sanctions to prevent the illegal exploitation
of natural resources and certification schemes, such as
the Kimberley Process, has begun to yield some
results. In the instance of rough diamonds, that
approach appears to have been successful because it
approaches the problem at the level of extraction and
from the standpoint of processing and trading. This is
also perhaps because such an approach is inclusive
enough to visualize a role for the entire international
community, including civil society. The Kimberley
Process also has merit in its approach to the trade in
diamonds by creating a certification scheme that
validates and regulates the production of rough
diamonds. Last, but not least, such a mechanism avoids
the pitfall of treating the issue of resources fuelling
conflict as a matter purely related to peace and
security. As a result, major diamond trading and
processing nations such as India have engaged
constructively and actively with the Kimberley
Process.
Apart from that, we find some useful suggestions
in the concept paper, such as authorizing a role for
United Nations mission and United Nations
peacekeeping forces in conflict-torn countries.
However, such a mandate would need to be very
carefully drawn up, both to limit their role to a
supporting one, at best, to prevent other forms of
potential misuse, and to ensure that neither the United
Nations mission nor the peacekeeping forces are
diverted from their core responsibilities. Questions of
capacity, training and accountability will need to be
addressed at the stage of planning such a mandate.
Therefore, we would urge that evolving a consensus on
those aspects be an exercise carried out with the
widest-possible consultations, including with troopcontributing countries.
Lastly, there is the aspect of creating a postconflict consensus on the use of natural resources in
the process of peace consolidation. To evolve

3

S/PV.5705 (Resumption 1)

recommendations and approaches on that aspect, we
could perhaps formally task the Peacebuilding
Commission, as a mechanism established by all States
precisely for such purposes, with that responsibility. It
should suffice, therefore, to underline the fact that
effective and consensual exploitation of natural
resources not only brings tangible benefits to all
segments of society, but also provides the intangible
benefit of creating a useful and desirable habit of
cooperation among former foes in a post-conflict
society.

The same natural resources that bring about
happiness and wealth to certain people and groups of
people — namely, warlords, arms merchants and those
who illegally exploit resources, both domestic and
foreign operators — to the great detriment of States,
unfortunately also contribute to insecurity and the
unhappiness of populations, who are entitled to
resources that should be assets to their own
development and fulfilment. The question therefore
arises of whether natural resources are a blessing or a
curse for those countries.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

This situation is the result of several factors. In
order to remedy the situation, there is a need for
collective national, regional and international will to
adopt approaches appropriate to each situation and that
distinguish between the pre-conflict, conflict and postconflict phases. During the pre-conflict period,
extending State authority throughout the whole of a
country’s territory, respect for human rights,
transparent management, equitable distribution of
natural resources, good governance and the exercise of
democracy are all essential to preventing natural
resources from becoming the cause of conflict.

Mr. Ekanza Ezokola (Democratic Republic of
the Congo) (spoke in French): First of all, allow me to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this public
debate on an issue whose importance and multifaceted
implications and its impact upon international peace
and security warrant steady and particular attention by
the Security Council, as well as by the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. I
would like in particular to express the gratitude of my
delegation to the Belgian presidency of the Council for
underscoring the link between natural resources and
conflict.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Tunisia on behalf of
the African Group.
The link between natural resources and conflict is
well known. We of course know of the existence of
blood diamonds, but there also exists blood gold, blood
cobalt, blood coltan, blood copper and blood
cassiterite, to mention only a few examples. In other
words, natural resources have been used to finance
armed movements. That has led to bloody conflicts and
their attendant tragedy and the sombre scenario of
cruelty and destruction.
Peace and security are threatened in various
developing countries due to the fact that those
countries possess abundant natural resources, which
give rise to greed and both domestic and external
predation. The illegal exploitation of resources is
therefore both a cause of conflict and a factor that
exacerbates existing conflicts. The report of the
Secretary-General contained in document S/1998/318,
which describes the various elements of conflicts, is
eloquent on this issue.

4

During a conflict, the approach must involve
preventing the entrenchment and spread of the conflict.
In order to do so, we must prevent aggressor countries
and armed groups from gaining access to and
exploiting natural resources. In that regard, we
welcome certain decisions taken by the Council, such
as, the sending of peacekeeping missions, the
establishment of sanctions regimes, the imposition of
various embargoes and, of course, its support for the
Kimberley Process for diamonds, which began in 2000.
Processes similar to the Kimberley Process for
resources other than diamonds should also be
considered, including for resources that are largely
exploited illegally and those which account for a high
degree of funding for conflicts. That should be done by
identifying and categorizing those resources by zones
of conflict.
With regard to the post-conflict period, the
approach should entail preventing a relapse into
conflict. It is therefore important to assist countries in
post-conflict
situations,
especially
developing
countries in Africa, to rebuild their destroyed
infrastructure, to build local capacity in all areas and to
take the steps I just described for the pre-conflict
situation. We therefore call upon the international
financial institutions to ease the criteria and conditions

07-39374

S/PV.5705 (Resumption 1)

for the granting of assistance to countries emerging
from conflict, in order that we do not discourage the
legitimate hopes of populations to live better lives once
a conflict has come to an end.
We welcome the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission. We call upon the
international community to help to consolidate the
gains of regained peace. We ask our development
partners to truly work in a sincere and constructive
partnership with those countries in the exploitation of
natural resources in the interest of all parties.
In conclusion, we call on everyone to rehabilitate
natural resources in those countries so that they can
play a positive role in development. That role could
serve to raise the collective standard of living and to
benefit the common social good.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Ritter (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein warmly
welcomes the initiative of the Belgian presidency to
hold an open debate of the Security Council on the
topic before us today. We are also grateful to your
delegation, Mr. President, for providing us with a
succinct and substantive concept paper (S/2007/334,
annex) to that end. This is an important initiative on a
matter that has not been given sufficient attention in
the past, and we hope that your initiative constitutes
the first step in the ongoing involvement of the United
Nations system in this regard. Given the early stage of
the debate, consideration of this topic in other United
Nations forums could also be useful, provided that
there is the necessary coordination.
The way in which the exploitation of natural
resources and the financing of conflict parties is
interlinked, particularly with regard to the role played
by non-State actors, is well documented. Natural
resources can significantly influence conflict
dynamics. They can be both one of the factors
contributing to the outbreak of violent conflicts and a
reason for prolonging them.
As far as conflict prevention is concerned, we
agree that the governance of natural resources is of
crucial importance. In that respect, it is worth recalling
that common article 1, paragraph 2, of the two human
rights Covenants of 1966 is relevant in that regard and
should be taken into account in all endeavours to
establish regimes dealing with the governance of

07-39374

natural resources. Within the United Nations system,
the Kimberley Process is the best-known of such
initiatives, since it was launched in response to
situations on the agenda of the Security Council. There
have been other very important initiatives dealing with
the subject, as outlined in the presidency’s concept
paper. Their endorsement by the General Assembly, or
perhaps by the Council itself, would certainly enhance
their relevance and effectiveness.
The Council may want to give particular attention
to situations where the exploitation of a natural
resource is an essential element of the national
economy and may present the risk of great revenues
being generated through the trafficking of natural
resources and illicit commodities in a conflict
environment. Of no lesser importance are situations
where a natural resource is indispensable to cover the
basic needs of a population or populations involved.
That is of particular relevance in connection with
water, an increasingly scarce resource for which there
is already competition by consumers in several parts of
the world. Access to water already plays a role in
various current conflict situations. Efforts by the
Council to solve them must take this aspect into
account.
As outlined in the presidency’s concept paper, the
Council’s action in the past has been focused mainly on
the role of natural resources once a conflict has broken
out, usually in the form of armed conflict. Sanctions
imposed by the Council with regard to certain
commodities have contributed to conflict resolution in
Angola, Liberia and Sierra Leone. Experience shows
that such sanctions need to be tailored to the
circumstances of each individual case and to have
clearly identified objectives, specified measures for
implementation by Member States and conditions for
their suspension or lifting.
In fine-tuning future action against the
background of past experience, the Council can
continue to take effective measures in that respect. But
we also believe that future discussions would benefit
from an enhanced emphasis on aspects of prevention
and early identification of situations where natural
resources could contribute to the outbreak of a conflict.
The debate can thus be framed in the context of
relevant General Assembly resolutions as well as
Council resolution 1625 (2005), adopted during the
2005 World Summit. Very useful work could be carried
out within the United Nations system by establishing

5

S/PV.5705 (Resumption 1)

principles on the governance of natural resources,
supporting existing initiatives and ensuring that the
relevance of natural resources is taken into account in
political efforts aimed at conflict prevention.

and after the colonial era. The exploitation of natural
resources is, at times, the cause of conflict; indeed, it is
often the very objective of war. The profits of
exploitation also fuel and sustain conflicts.

The role played by natural resources in postconflict environments is also essential. When combined
with good governance, the exploitation of natural
resources can have a stabilizing effect by generating
economic growth and thus alleviating poverty. But it
can also become a subject of transnational organized
crime and thereby play a part in causing war-torn
societies to relapse into conflict. It is therefore crucial
that the Security Council support international and
regional efforts to promote assistance to post-conflict
countries that are rich in natural resources. The Council
should in particular explore a possible stronger role for
the Peacebuilding Commission in this respect and
promote increased activities of other United Nations
agencies and programmes, such as the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime.

The creation of the United Nations coincided
with and contributed to the era of decolonization and
independence for many of its present Member States. It
soon became apparent to these nascent States that their
political independence would not be complete without
the exercise of full sovereignty and control over their
natural resources. Yet illegal and externally
orchestrated exploitation of natural resources in the
developing world continues in old and new forms,
especially in Africa. It has been said that Africa is rich,
but its people are poor. It is no accident, therefore, that
so many conflicts continue to afflict that great
continent.

We hope that this debate will result in a
presidential statement that gives guidance for further
discussion. The next stage of discussion would
certainly benefit from a comprehensive report of the
Secretary-General on the existing activities and
capacities within the system and on the possibility of
strengthening the civil component of peacekeeping
missions in the area of good governance on natural
resources management in all its aspects. In addition,
such a report could elaborate on the possible
relationships between specific resources and certain
kinds of conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Mr. Minister, I would like
to congratulate you and Ambassador Verbeke, as well
as the Belgian delegation, on your skilful guidance of
the Council’s work during this month. Let me also
express our appreciation to Ambassador Khalilzad and
the United States delegation for a successful
presidency of the Council last month.
We welcome Belgium’s initiative in organizing
this open debate on natural resources and conflict. The
presidency’s paper (S/2007/334, annex) offers an
excellent analysis of the link between natural resources
and conflict. This is an issue of special significance for
developing countries, many of which have suffered
from the exploitation of their natural resources during

6

The Security Council has expressed its concern
about this issue in the past. The report of the Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo — Kassem report
(S/2003/1027) — presented an excellent analysis of the
continuing exploitation of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Security
Council’s presidential statement of 19 November 2003
(S/PRST/2003/21) condemned that exploitation. In
varying degrees, the analysis of the Kassem report
could be applied to past and current events in several
other resource-rich African and other developing
countries. More specific initiatives have been
undertaken — significantly outside the United Nations —
including the Kimberley Process and the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development
Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises. Absence of
specific United Nations action signals perhaps the
difficulty encountered in the past in reaching
agreement on meaningful measures within the Security
Council and other United Nations bodies.
This reluctance was manifest in November 2003,
when the Pakistan delegation in the Security Council
circulated a draft resolution on the illegal exploitation
of natural resources and arms trafficking in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The eventual
decisions of the Council did not act on some central
recommendations of the Kassem Panel, which was
discontinued. The current debate in the Council offers
an opportunity to initiate a broader and more
comprehensive approach to the issue, covering the

07-39374

S/PV.5705 (Resumption 1)

whole range of conflicts and the different actions
required at three stages — before, during and after a
conflict. While the Security Council should undertake
action within its competence and relating to the issues
on its agenda, comprehensive action by the other
competent organs — the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission — will also be needed.
The Pakistan delegation would strongly
recommend that the Security Council establish a new
task force of experts to study the exploitation of natural
resources in the context of the numerous conflict
situations on its agenda, especially the complex crises
in Africa. The Security Council’s approach of utilizing
sanctions to control arms trafficking and natural
resource exploitation has proved, unfortunately, to be
too narrow and, at times, inappropriate in responding
to various situations. More extensive measures,
including border controls and wider monitoring, are
required. Peacekeeping forces could be provided with
the mandate and capacity for the monitoring and
interdiction of illegal exploitation, transportation and
trade in natural resources.
However, it is vital to address not only the supply
but also the demand for natural resources. It is the
demand for resources, mostly from the advanced
countries, and the financing provided for exploitation
and marketing of natural resources which make
possible the vicious circle of commerce and conflict.
The Security Council or, if this is not possible,
the General Assembly could adopt certain norms and
recommendations for national laws and regulations that
would help to prevent the illegal exploitation of natural
resources and its contribution to conflicts. The Pakistan
delegation would suggest the following, among other
elements: an undertaking by all States to prevent the
financing, directly or indirectly, of the illegal
exploitation of natural resources; the adoption by
States of national laws that would criminalize the
wilful provision or collection, by any means, directly
or indirectly, of funds by their nationals, or in their
territories, for the illegal exploitation of natural
resources; action by States to freeze funds and other
financial assets or economic resources of persons or
entities which are identified as having participated in
the illegal exploitation of such resources; the
establishment and maintenance of lists by the United
Nations of individuals, entities and enterprises
designated as being associated with the illegal

07-39374

exploitation of natural resources; and an undertaking
by Governments to take effective action against all
those individuals, groups, entities and enterprises
involved in the illegal exploitation of natural resources.
Beyond action by the Security Council, the
United Nations and the international community can
contribute to ending illegal exploitation by promoting
national processing of natural resources and national
control over the various stages of the value-addition
and commercial process. For example, it is worth
examining to what extent the diamond trade in Sierra
Leone brings benefits to the Government and the
people of the country. Their share of the proceeds from
diamond exploitation and trade should be just and
equitable. Specific mechanisms should be developed
for each specific natural resource, or group of
resources — gold, diamonds, minerals, forests and
oil — to enhance the national share in the legitimate
exploitation and trade of such resources.
The Peacebuilding Commission can play a vital
role in capacity-building in the post-conflict situations
that are referred to it. The Economic and Social
Council and the General Assembly should promote
similar measures to prevent the outbreak of conflicts
by maximizing the benefits of natural resource
exploitation for the countries that own them.
It is natural that the Security Council should be
focused on the conflict situations in Africa. Yet the
international community will, very soon, need to focus
on the equitable exploitation and use of two other vital
resources: oil and water.
Energy resources already are part of the strategic
calculations of the major Powers, almost all of whom
are major importers of fossil fuels. Oil in particular has
been the object and the cause of major conflicts.
Energy security is most desirable, not the least for
developing countries. The United Nations needs to play
a more active role to advance this objective in ways
that are equitable for all consumers and producers. But
energy security should not emerge as a new casus belli
for the use of force or external aggression or
intervention.
Similarly, in a world with an expanding
population, spreading deserts and melting glaciers,
access to water — which is often shared — is likely to
emerge as an existential issue for many nations and
peoples. It could become the cause of a host of
disputes and conflicts. It is time for the international

7

S/PV.5705 (Resumption 1)

community to construct an international regime that
ensures equitable access to and availability of water for
all peoples and all States.
The President: (spoke in French): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Benin, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zinsou
(Benin) took the seat reserved for him at the side
of the Council Chamber.
(spoke in English)
I now give the floor to the representative of
Norway.
Mr. Løvald (Norway): History has shown us that
resources can become a curse rather than a blessing for
many countries. Wars are caused and conflicts are
fuelled by illegal exploitation and irresponsible
management of resources. This means that the issue of
natural resources and conflict is highly relevant to the
Security Council, and we welcome today’s debate.
Managing natural resources such as diamonds,
minerals, oil, natural gas and timber in a fragile State
with a poor population is a difficult task. The illicit
extraction of resources can be enormously profitable
for militant groups and international criminal
networks, and weak Governments often fall victim to
these groups and their ambitions for power and
influence.
The battle for control over mineral wealth is a
problem that reaches far beyond national borders. It
affects regional stability and international security. We,
the Members of the United Nations, have not
sufficiently addressed this issue and its implications for
peace processes around the world.
We must recognize that the battle for natural
resources is a key part of our peace efforts. This means
that our peacekeepers must have clear directives and
resources to respond accordingly. Today, only a few
peacekeeping operations on the ground have the robust

8

mandate and capacity necessary to investigate, monitor
and arrest those responsible for illicit exploitation of
and trafficking in resources. The Council should seek
to address this issue as a matter of priority when
drafting future mandates.
Improved governance is crucial for better
management of natural resources. This means checks
and balances, anti-corruption programmes and proper
legislation, as well as external financial support and
sustained political will by host Governments.
We believe the peacebuilding architecture created
by the Peacebuilding Commission, the Fund and the
Support Office is a particularly relevant tool here as an
important step towards more sustained and coherent
international efforts in post-conflict situations.
Governments of resource-rich countries bear the
ultimate responsibility for translating those resources
into a blessing for their people. But the international
community has a responsibility to support fragile
States through mediation, peacekeeping, emergency
assistance and technical support. We also have a
responsibility to ensure that foreign companies
extracting natural resources from developing countries
comply with international rules and pay attention to the
needs of the local population.
We have recently seen the emergence of
voluntary tools that could be important safeguards,
such as the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme
and the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
(EITI). The EITI aims to defeat the “resource curse” of
poverty, corruption and conflict through transparency
and accountability. This requires sound governance
systems and sufficient capacity to administer and
monitor the extractive industries sector.
Norway is host to the international secretariat for
the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative and
supports the Initiative politically and financially. We
welcome the implementation efforts taking place in
more than 20 countries and call for additional partners
to join this Initiative.
The Norwegian Oil for Development initiative is
another example. This initiative assists developing
countries in managing petroleum resources in a way
that generates economic growth, increases living
standards and promotes environmental sustainability.
Finally, Norway is also part of a group of
countries,
corporations
and
non-governmental

07-39374

S/PV.5705 (Resumption 1)

organizations that have initiated another approach that
is relevant for our debate here today. These are the
Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights.
These Principles aim to balance the need for safety and
respect for human rights in conflict zones and other
challenging environments where extractive companies
operate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Benin.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes your presence, Sir, as Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Belgium, at this public meeting of
the Security Council, to which it attaches particular
importance. I wish also to congratulate you warmly on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council and
on having taken the initiative to hold this open debate
on the link between natural resources and conflict. The
reality of that link has been clearly demonstrated by
most of the speakers who have preceded me. I endorse
the statements made this morning by the representative
of Tunisia on behalf of the African Group and by the
representative of Congo, whose views on the matter I
fully share.
Natural resources are an essential factor for the
prosperity of States. The course of human history has
been constantly influenced by the quest to control
natural resources, which are an important driving force
in international relations. Globalization has encouraged
the illegal exploitation of natural resources, in all its
forms, both in the context of actions by non-State
armed groups and as part of the informal economy, as
is the case of panning for gold. The illegal exploitation
of natural resources leads to the deterioration of the
environment. It promotes international organized
crime, in particular the trafficking of children who are
used as labour in quarries. Annually, it deprives
African economies of billions of dollars, money that is
used to finance, depending on the circumstances,
illegal trafficking of arms or the influence peddling and
corruption that undermine State structures and
jeopardize their ability to function.
From the standpoint of the principles and
purposes of the Charter, it is fortunate that the link
between natural resources and conflict is fully taken
into account in the activities assigned to the Security
Council as part of its mandated responsibilities. It is
crucial that the Council be able to resolutely fight the
illegal exploitation of natural resources, as it set about

07-39374

doing in resolution 1625 (2005) on conflict prevention,
in particular in Africa. In order to do that, it must
continue to make appropriate use of the powers
conferred upon it by the Charter whenever situations
emerge that could pose a threat to international peace
and security with respect to natural resources.
Beyond the management of specific situations, it
is incumbent upon the Security Council to consider
systemic measures that could be taken to fight
practices that are harmful to the maintenance of
international peace and security as it relates to natural
resources. Within that framework, the Security Council
could commission studies on the trafficking of natural
resources and high-value commodities that could or do
contribute to the outbreak, escalation or continuation of
conflict. Such studies could be aimed at identifying the
mechanisms by which such trafficking develops and
measures that could be recommended to States — both
nationally and within the framework of multilateral
cooperation — taking into account all of the relevant
actors.
In managing certain armed conflicts linked to the
control of natural resources, the Security Council has
often made use of sanctions, in particular embargoes
targeting the products in question. It is clear that the
effectiveness of such measures depends on compliance
and on their consistent application by all States.
However, when an internal conflict is caused by the
monopolization of natural resources by a minority,
sanctions may not be the only valid option. If the
circumstances so require, such measures need to be
imposed as long as necessary in order to be able to
establish legitimate mechanisms for exploiting
resources, so that the countries involved can mobilize
their domestic resources to finance reconstruction and
development.
That concern should be taken into account in
defining the mandates of peacekeeping operations, so
that the international community possess the means to
use its authority to contribute to replacing an economy
of war, spawned by conflict, with an economy of
peace. That means that assistance to countries
emerging from conflict to establish solid and
sustainable national institutions must be supported by
assistance towards national ownership of the natural
resources that are in dispute, and towards their
transparent management. In the final analysis, that is a
key aspect of the rule of law and good governance.

9

S/PV.5705 (Resumption 1)

Consolidating the mechanisms established to that
end will ensure the lasting stabilization of countries.
The equitable distribution of income is key in that
regard. The Security Council needs to support the
parties to a conflict in defining the standards for
peaceful relations between them — ensuring respect
for the United Nations Charter and the general
principles of international law — and to ensure that all
parties comply with agreements reached.
In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the
proposal made this morning by the President of the
Economic and Social Council to establish a forum
between the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council on the link between natural resources
and conflict. My delegation believes that that proposal
could form part of the institutionalization of conflict
prevention within the United Nations, something which
my country is urging.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers on my list.
Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.
“The Security Council recalls the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and in
particular the Security Council's primary
responsibility
for
the
maintenance
of
international peace and security. In this respect,
the Security Council recognizes the role that
natural resources can play in armed conflict and
post-conflict situations.
“The Security Council reaffirms that every
State has the full and inherent sovereign right to
control and exploit its own natural resources in
accordance with the Charter and the principles of
international law.
“The Security Council stresses that natural
resources are a crucial factor in contributing to
long-term economic growth and sustainable
development.
“The Security Council recalls resolution
1625 (2005) whereby the Council adopted the
declaration on strengthening the effectiveness of
the Security Council's role in conflict prevention,
particularly in Africa, in which it reaffirmed its
determination to take action against illegal
exploitation and trafficking of natural resources

10

and high-value commodities in areas where it
contributes to the outbreak, escalation or
continuation of armed conflict.
“Moreover, the Security Council notes that,
in specific armed conflict situations, the
exploitation, trafficking and illicit trade of natural
resources have played a role in areas where they
have contributed to the outbreak, escalation or
continuation of armed conflict. The Security
Council, through its various resolutions, has
taken measures on this issue, more specifically to
prevent illegal exploitation of natural resources,
especially diamonds and timber, from fuelling
armed conflicts and to encourage transparent and
lawful management of natural resources,
including the clarification of the responsibility of
management of natural resources, and has
established sanctions committees and groups and
panels of experts to oversee the implementation
of those measures.
“The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of improving the work of and
strengthening the contributions made by existing
sanctions committees and the various expert
groups and panels established by the Council in
dealing with the impact of illegal exploitation of
natural resources on conflicts in the countries
under its consideration. The Security Council also
recalls the work done by the Security Council
Informal Working Group on General Issues of
Sanctions (2006) and refers in this regard to its
report (S/2006/997).
“The Security Council recognizes that
United Nations missions and peacekeeping
operations
deployed
in
resource-endowed
countries experiencing armed conflict could play
a role in helping the Governments concerned,
with full respect for their sovereignty over their
natural resources, to prevent the illegal
exploitation of those resources from further
fuelling the conflict. The Security Council
underlines the importance of taking this
dimension of conflict into account, where
appropriate, in the mandates of United Nations
and regional peacekeeping operations, within
their capabilities, including by making provision
for assisting Governments, upon their request, in
preventing the illegal exploitation of natural
resources by the parties to the conflict, in

07-39374

S/PV.5705 (Resumption 1)

particular, where appropriate, by developing
adequate observation and policing capacities to
that end.
“The Security Council recognizes, in
conflict and post-conflict situations, the
importance
of
cooperation,
in
shared
responsibility, among source, transit and
destination countries in preventing and combating
trafficking, illicit trade and illegal exploitation of
natural resources. The Security Council also
emphasizes the important contribution of
commodity monitoring and certification schemes
such as the Kimberley Process.
“The Security Council acknowledges the
crucial role that the Peacebuilding Commission,
together with other United Nations and nonUnited Nations actors, can play in post-conflict
situations in assisting Governments, upon their
request, in ensuring that natural resources become
an engine for sustainable development. In this
regard, the Security Council recognizes the role
of voluntary initiatives aimed at improving
revenue transparency such as the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI). The
Security Council also stresses that the use,
disposal and management of natural resources is
a multifaceted and cross-sector issue that
involves various United Nations organizations. In
this regard, the Security Council acknowledges
the valuable contribution of various United
Nations organizations in promoting lawful,
transparent and sustainable management and
exploitation of natural resources.
“The Security Council recognizes the need
for the private sector to contribute to the good
governance and avoidance of illegal exploitation
of natural resources in countries in conflict. In
this regard, the Council also notes the important
contribution voluntary principles and standards
play in encouraging multinational enterprises to
adopt a responsible business conduct such as
provided for by the Organization for Economic
Cooperation
and
Development
(OECD)
Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and the
OECD Risk Awareness Tool for Multinational
Enterprises in Weak Governance Zones and the
United Nations Global Compact.

07-39374

“The Security Council stresses the
important role, in the context of security sector
reform in the post-conflict environment, of
transparent and effective national security and
customs structures for the effective control and
management of natural resources by preventing
the illegal access to and the trade and exploitation
of those resources.
“The Security Council emphasizes that, in
countries emerging from conflict, lawful,
transparent and sustainable management — at
local, national and international levels — and
exploitation of natural resources is a critical
factor in maintaining stability and in preventing a
relapse into conflict. The Council recalls in this
respect that it has welcomed country-specific
initiatives such as the Governance and Economic
Management Assistance Program (GEMAP) in
Liberia — resolution 1626 (2005) — and related
efforts such as the Liberia Forest Initiative.
“The Security Council reiterates the
important role of regional organizations in the
prevention, management and resolution of
conflicts in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations as well as its
relevant resolutions 1625 (2005) and 1631
(2005), S/PRST/2006/39 and S/PRST/2007/7. In
this regard, the Security Council recognizes, in
armed conflict and post-conflict situations, the
need for a more coordinated approach by the
United Nations, regional organizations and
Governments concerned, in particular the
empowerment of Governments in post-conflict
situations to better manage their resources.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the
Security
Council
under
the
symbol
S/PRST/2007/22.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.

11
