A/RES/66/64

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
13 December 2011

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 104

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 2 December 2011
[on the report of the First Committee (A/66/418)]

66/64.

Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty

The General Assembly,
Reiterating that the cessation of nuclear-weapon test explosions or any other
nuclear explosions constitutes an effective nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation
measure, and convinced that this is a meaningful step in the realization of a systematic
process for achieving nuclear disarmament,
Recalling that the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, adopted by its
resolution 50/245 of 10 September 1996, was opened for signature on 24 September
1996,
Stressing that a universal and effectively verifiable Treaty constitutes a
fundamental instrument in the field of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation and
that, after more than fifteen years, its entry into force is more urgent than ever before,
Encouraged by the signing of the Treaty by one hundred and eighty-two
States, including forty-one of the forty-four whose ratification is needed for its entry
into force, and welcoming the ratification of the Treaty by one hundred and
fifty-five States, including thirty-five of the forty-four whose ratification is needed
for its entry into force, among which there are three nuclear-weapon States,
Recalling its resolution 65/91 of 8 December 2010,
Welcoming the adoption by consensus of the conclusions and recommendations
for follow-on actions of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 1 which, inter alia, reaffirmed the vital
importance of the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty as
a core element of the international nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation
regime and included specific actions to be taken in support of the entry into force of
the Treaty,

_______________
1

2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final
Document, vol. I (NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), part I, Conclusions and recommendations for follow-on
actions.

11-46266

*1046266*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/64

Welcoming also the Joint Ministerial Statement on the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, adopted at the ministerial meeting held in New York on
23 September 2010, 2
Recalling the Final Declaration adopted by the seventh Conference on
Facilitating the Entry into Force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, held
in New York on 23 September 2011, 3 convened pursuant to article XIV of the Treaty,
and noting the improved prospects for ratification in several Annex 2 countries,
Stresses the vital importance and urgency of signature and ratification,
1.
without delay and without conditions, in order to achieve the earliest entry into
force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty; 4
2.
Welcomes the contributions by the States signatories to the work of the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization,
in particular its efforts to ensure that the verification regime of the Treaty will be
capable of meeting the verification requirements of the Treaty upon its entry into
force, in accordance with article IV of the Treaty;
Underlines the need to maintain momentum towards completion of all
3.
elements of the verification regime;
Urges all States not to carry out nuclear-weapon test explosions or any
4.
other nuclear explosions, to maintain their moratoriums in this regard and to refrain
from acts that would defeat the object and purpose of the Treaty, while stressing that
these measures do not have the same permanent and legally binding effect as the
entry into force of the Treaty;
Recalls Security Council resolutions 1718 (2006) of 14 October 2006 and
5.
1874 (2009) of 12 June 2009, emphasizes the importance of their implementation,
and reaffirms its firm support for the Six-Party Talks;
Urges all States that have not yet signed the Treaty, in particular those
6.
whose ratification is needed for its entry into force, to sign and ratify it as soon as
possible;
Urges all States that have signed but not yet ratified the Treaty, in
7.
particular those whose ratification is needed for its entry into force, to accelerate their
ratification processes with a view to ensuring their earliest successful conclusion;
Welcomes, since its previous resolution on the subject, the ratification of
8.
the Treaty by Ghana and Guinea as a significant step towards the early entry into
force of the Treaty;
Also welcomes the recent expressions by a number of the remaining
9.
States whose ratification is needed for the Treaty to enter into force of their
intention to pursue and complete the ratification process;
10. Urges all States to remain seized of the issue at the highest political level
and, where in a position to do so, to promote adherence to the Treaty through
bilateral and joint outreach, seminars and other means;
_______________
2

A/65/675, annex.
See CTBT-Art.XIV/2011/6.
4
See resolution 50/245.
3

2

A/RES/66/64

11. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Preparatory
Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, to
prepare a report on the efforts of States that have ratified the Treaty towards its
universalization and possibilities for providing assistance on ratification procedures
to States that so request it, and to submit such a report to the General Assembly at
its sixty-seventh session;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-seventh session
the item entitled “Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty”.
71st plenary meeting
2 December 2011

3
