A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/47/11
4 March 1993

Forty-seventh session
Agenda item 21
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/47/L.13 and Add.l)]
47 /11.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of American States

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 45/10 of 25 October 1990 relating to the
promotion of cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of
American States,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of American States, 1/
Taking into account the report of the Secretary-General entitled
"An Agenda for Peace" 1/ and the related consultations within the United
Nations and with regional organizations on this subject,
Recalling that the purposes of the United Nations are, inter alia, to
achieve international cooperation in solving international problems of an
economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character and in promoting and
encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, and to be a
centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of these
common ends,
Bearing in mind that the Charter of the United Nations provides for the
existence of regional arrangements and agencies for dealing with such matters
relating to the maintenance of international peace and security as are
appropriate for regional action, and whose activities are consistent with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations,

1/

A/47/498.

1/

A/47/277-S/24111.

93-12874

I • ••

A/RES/47/11
Page 2

Recalling also that the Charter of the Organization of American States
reaffirms these purposes and principles, and provides that that organization
is a regional agency under the terms of the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting with satisfaction that the first general meeting held between the
representatives of the United Nations system and of the Organization of
American States was held at United Nations Headquarters from 15 to
17 May 1991, and was inaugurated by the Secretaries-General of the two
organizations,
Welcoming the meeting of the two Secretaries-General during the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development, held in Rio de Janeiro in
June 1992,
Bearing in mind the adoption by the General Assembly of the Organization
of American States on 23 May 1992 of resolution AG/RES.1199 (XXII-O/92), also
on cooperation between the Organization of American States and the United
Nations,
Recalling its resolution 46/7 of 11 October 1991 on the situation of
democracy and human rights in Haiti and taking into account the letter dated
15 July 1992 in which the Secretary-General informed the President of the
Security Council of an exchange of correspondence with the President of Haiti
and the Secretary-General of the Organization of American States, and of his
decision to accept the offer for the participation of United Nations officials
in the mission of the Secretary-General of the Organization of American States
to Haiti, J/
Aware that the effective consolidation of a new international order
requires regional action in harmony with that of the United Nations,
1.
Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General on cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of American States, as well as his efforts to strengthen that
cooperation;
2.
Welcomes the offer of the Chairman of the Permanent Council of the
Organization of American States to the President of the Security Council
concerning the readiness of the Organization of American States to cooperate
with the United Nations in its efforts to improve collective measures for the
prevention and solution of international conflicts;
3.
Expresses its satisfaction at the close cooperation between the
two organizations in the verification of the electoral process in Nicaragua
from August 1989 to February 1990 and recognizes the effectiveness of that
cooperation;
4.
Recognizes the importance of the participation of the
International Support and Verification Commission in the demobilization of the
irregular forces of the Nicaraguan resistance and takes note with satisfaction
of the fundamental role of the United Nations Observer Group in Central
America in the military aspects of the process and of the activities of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in the operational area;

JI

S/24340.

I • ••

A/RES/47 /11

Page 3

5.
Welcomes the continued participation of the Organization of
American States in the Support Committee and the Policies and Projects
Committee of the Special Plan of Economic Cooperation for Central America,!/
established by General Assembly resolution 42/231 of 12 May 1988 and extended
by General Assembly resolution 45/231 of 21 December 1990;
6.
Requests both Secretaries-General, or their representatives, to
continue their consultations with a view to signing in 1993 an agreement for
cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of American
States;
7.
Approves the conclusions and recommendations of the first general
meeting between the representatives of the two organizations held in
May 1991 ~/ and urges the relevant authorities of both organizations to take
the necessary steps to implement those recommendations and promote further
cooperation;
8.
Recommends that a second general meeting between representatives
of the United Nations system and of the Organization of American States be
held in 1993 to review and appraise progress, and that inter-agency sectoral
and focal point meetings be held on areas of priority or mutually agreed
issues;
9.
Takes note of the participation of senior officials of the United
Nations in the mission of the Secretary-General of the Organization of
American States to Haiti in August 1992;
10.
Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the
Secretary-General in the promotion of cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization of American States and expresses the hope that he will
continue to strengthen the mechanisms for cooperation between the two
organizations;
11.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its forty-ninth session a report on the implementation of the present
resolution;
12.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-ninth
session the item entitled "Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of American States".
51st plenary meeting
29 October 1992

!/

A/42/949, annex.

~/

A/47/498/Add.1, sect. V.
