A/62/PV.62

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-second session

62

nd plenary meeting
Thursday, 6 December 2007, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kerim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Beck (Palau),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Reports of the Sixth Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will consider today the reports of the Sixth Committee
on agenda items 78 to 86, 108, 121, 129, 137, 157 to
160, 162, 165 and 166.
I request the Rapporteur of the Sixth Committee,
Mr. Adam Mulawarman Tugio of Indonesia, to
introduce in one intervention the reports of the Sixth
Committee that are before the General Assembly.
Mr. Tugio (Indonesia), Rapporteur of the Sixth
Committee: Today, I have the honour to present the
reports of the Sixth Committee on its work during the
sixty-second session of the General Assembly. The
Assembly allocated to the Committee 18 substantive
and 3 procedural agenda items, organized under three
headings corresponding to the priorities of the
Organization, namely, “Promotion of justice and
international law”, “Drug control, crime prevention
and combating international terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations” and “Organizational, administrative
and other matters”. I propose to introduce to the
Assembly the reports of the Sixth Committee on the
various items falling under each of those three
headings.
I shall first turn to the first heading, “Promotion
of justice and international law”, under which the Sixth

Committee considered nine items and adopted 10 draft
resolutions.
The report on agenda item 78, “Responsibility of
States for internationally wrongful acts”, is contained
in document A/62/446, and the draft resolution
recommended to the General Assembly for adoption is
reproduced in paragraph 7 thereof.
The report on agenda item 79, “United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law”, is contained in document A/62/447, and the draft
resolution recommended to the General Assembly for
adoption is reproduced in paragraph 7 thereof.
The report on agenda item 80, “Criminal
accountability of United Nations officials and experts
on mission”, is contained in document A/62/448, and
the draft resolution recommended to the General
Assembly for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 12
thereof.
The report on agenda item 81, “Report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fortieth session”, is contained in
document A/62/449. The Sixth Committee recommended
two draft resolutions for adoption by the General
Assembly, which are both reproduced in paragraph 10
of document A/62/449.
The report on agenda item 82, “Report of the
International Law Commission on the work of its fiftyninth session”, is contained in document A/62/450, and
the draft resolution recommended to the General

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

07-62920 (E)

*0762920*

A/62/PV.62

Assembly for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 8
thereof.
The report on agenda item 83, “Diplomatic
protection”, is contained in document A/62/451, and the
draft resolution recommended to the General Assembly
for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 7 thereof.
The report on agenda item 84, “Consideration of
prevention of transboundary harm from hazardous
activities and allocation of loss in the case of such
harm”, is contained in document A/62/452, and the
draft resolution recommended to the General Assembly
for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 7 thereof.
The report on agenda item 85, “Report of the
Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the
Organization”, is contained in document A/62/453, and
the draft resolution recommended to the General
Assembly for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 9
thereof.
Finally, the report on agenda item 86, “The rule
of law at the national and international levels”, is
contained in document A/62/454, and the draft
resolution recommended to the General Assembly for
adoption is reproduced in paragraph 8 thereof.
The Sixth Committee adopted the 10 draft
resolutions without a vote, and it is my hope that the
General Assembly will be in a position to do the same.
Allow me to note that, should the General Assembly
adopt the draft resolution relating to the rule of law at
the national and international levels, it would, inter
alia, request the Secretary-General to provide details
on the staffing and other requirements for the rule of
law unit in his Executive Office without delay to the
General Assembly for its consideration during the
current session in accordance with the existing
procedures.
I shall now turn to the second heading, “Drug
control, crime prevention and combating international
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations”. The
Sixth Committee considered agenda item 108,
“Measures to eliminate international terrorism”, under
that heading. The relevant report is contained in
document A/62/455, and the draft resolution
recommended to the General Assembly for adoption is
reproduced in paragraph 11 thereof.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and it is my hope that the General

2

Assembly will be in a position to do the same. Let me
point out that, should the General Assembly adopt the
draft resolution on measures to eliminate international
terrorism, it would, inter alia, request the Ad Hoc
Committee established pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 51/210 to report to the General Assembly
during the current session in the event of the
completion of the draft comprehensive convention on
international terrorism. As in the past, it is envisaged
that the item in question will remain open in the
agenda of the General Assembly.
Under the third and final heading, “Organizational,
administrative and other matters”, the Sixth Committee
considered eight substantive and three procedural items.
First, the Sixth Committee considered agenda
item 137, “Administration of justice at the United
Nations”. The relevant report is contained in document
A/62/458, and the draft decision recommended to the
General Assembly for adoption is reproduced in
paragraph 11 thereof.
Secondly, the Sixth Committee considered
agenda item 157, “Report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country”. The relevant report
is contained in document A/62/459, and the draft
decision recommended to the General Assembly for
adoption is reproduced in paragraph 8 thereof.
Thirdly, the Sixth Committee considered six
requests for observer status in the General Assembly. It
recommended that the General Assembly grant
observer status to the following: the Regional Centre
on Small Arms and Light Weapons in the Great Lakes
Region and the Horn of Africa; the Italian-Latin
American Institute; the Energy Charter Conference; the
Eurasian Development Bank; the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in Asia;
and the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the
Gulf. The relevant reports for each of the requests are
found in documents A/62/460, A/62/461, A/62/462,
A/62/463, A/62/522 and A/62/523, respectively, and
the relevant draft resolutions are reproduced in
paragraph 7 thereof.
The draft resolutions and the draft decision under
this cluster of items were also adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote, and it is my hope that the
General Assembly will be in a position to do the same.
It is worth noting that, should the General Assembly
adopt the draft decision on the administration of justice
at the United Nations, there is an understanding within

07-62920

A/62/PV.62

the Sixth Committee that, in order to expedite the work
of the item, the Chair of the Ad Hoc Committee on the
Administration of Justice at the United Nations will,
during the current session of the Assembly, inform the
Chairman of the Fifth Committee, through the
President of the General Assembly, of the results of the
work of the Ad Hoc Committee. That is intended to
assist the Fifth Committee in making further progress
on the item when it meets next year.
Finally, under this cluster, the Sixth Committee
considered three procedural items: item 121,
“Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly”;
item 129, “Programme planning”; and item 5, “Election
of the officers of the Main Committees”. The report
under agenda item 121, containing the provisional
programme of work of the Sixth Committee at the
sixty-third session, is contained in document A/62/456.
The draft decision by which the General Assembly
would take note of the provisional programme of work
is reproduced in paragraph 7 of the report. The report
on agenda item 129 is reproduced in document
A/62/457 and no further action is recommended for the
General Assembly to take. Furthermore, there is no
report in respect of agenda item 5.
Consistent with previous practice, the election of
the officers of the Sixth Committee for the sixty-third
session will be taken up at a later stage in the course of
the current session.
Respect for international law remains key in the
conduct of international relations in the contemporary
world community. International law is the foundation
on which the Charter of the United Nations is firmly
based. It is needless to emphasize the role of the Sixth
Committee in assisting the General Assembly in the
progressive development of international law and its
codification. Promotion of justice and international
law, drug control, crime prevention and combating
international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and organizational, administrative and
other matters are essential priorities of the United
Nations. In the draft resolutions and decisions that the
Sixth Committee has adopted at the current session, it
has sought to enhance the role of the Organization in
achieving those priority areas, particularly in respect of
the 12 substantive agenda items that were allocated to
it by the General Assembly. The six requests for
observer status in the General Assembly can only
reaffirm the universality that this Organization
represents.

07-62920

This concludes my introduction of the reports of
the Sixth Committee. Let me take this opportunity to
express my gratitude to the Chairman of the Sixth
Committee, His Excellency Ambassador Alexei
Tulbure, for his hard work and for the commendable
leadership he provided to the Committee throughout
this session. I also wish to thank the other members of
the Bureau, Mr. Jerzy Makarowski, Mr. Álvaro
Sandoval and Mrs. Stella Kerubo Orina for their kind
cooperation and support. Finally, my sincere gratitude
and appreciation are due also to all representatives and
colleagues for their invaluable contributions to the
success of the session. I would be remiss if I failed also
to express my appreciation to the Secretariat and the
interpreters for their kind cooperation in facilitating the
success of the Sixth Committee.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
reports of the Sixth Committee, which are before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Sixth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that,
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee”.
May I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Sixth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Sixth Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. I should
therefore hope that we may proceed to adopt without a

3

A/62/PV.62

vote those recommendations that were adopted without
a vote in the Sixth Committee.
Agenda item 78
Responsibility of States for internationally
wrongful acts
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/446)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/61).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 78?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 79
United Nations Programme of Assistance in the
Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/447)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I consider
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/62).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 79?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 80
Criminal accountability of United Nations officials
and experts on mission
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/448)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 12 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/63).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 80?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 81
Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law on the work of its
fortieth session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/449)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I and II.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its fortieth session”. The Sixth
Committee adopted draft resolution I without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 62/64).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Fiftieth anniversary of the Convention on the
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral
Awards, done at New York on 10 June 1958”. The
Sixth Committee adopted draft resolution II without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 62/65).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 81?
It was so decided.

4

07-62920

A/62/PV.62

Agenda item 82
Report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its fifty-ninth session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/450)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/66).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 82?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 83
Diplomatic protection
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/451)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/67).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 83?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 84
Consideration of prevention of transboundary harm
from hazardous activities and allocation of loss in the
case of such harm
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/452)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth

07-62920

Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/68).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 84?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 85
Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the
Role of the Organization
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/453)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/69).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 85?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 86
The rule of law at the national and international levels
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/454)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/70).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 86.

5

A/62/PV.62

Agenda item 108
Measures to eliminate international terrorism
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/455)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report.
I give the floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Adsett (Canada): As colleagues know, when
the draft resolution on measures to eliminate
international terrorism was adopted in the Sixth
Committee, the representative of Uganda took the floor
after its adoption to propose that another
organization — the East African Community — be
added to the list of organizations in the twenty-first
preambular paragraph. I subsequently received a
written request from the representative of Kenya to
make that addition.
On 26 November, I sent an e-mail and faxes to all
missions proposing that the East African Community
be added and indicating that I would make that
proposal in plenary unless any delegation objected by
3 December 2007.
I have received no objection to the proposal, and
it is my understanding that delegations agree to the
addition of the East African Community in the twentyfirst preambular paragraph. I would therefore propose
that the draft resolution be amended with that addition
and that it be adopted, as it was in the Sixth
Committee, without a vote.
The Acting President: The representative of
Canada has submitted an oral amendment to the draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 11 of its report. In accordance with rule 90
of the rules of procedure, the Assembly shall first take
a decision on the amendment submitted by the
representative of Canada. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt the oral amendment
submitted by the representative of Canada?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Since the oral amendment
submitted by the representative of Canada has been
adopted, we will now proceed to the draft resolution, as
orally amended.
The General Assembly will now take a decision
on the draft resolution, as orally amended. The Sixth

6

Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft resolution, as orally amended, without a vote?
The draft resolution, as orally amended, was
adopted (resolution 62/71).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 108.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/456)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft decision recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take action on
the draft decision. The Sixth Committee adopted it.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 121.
Agenda item 129 (continued)
Programme planning
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/457)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Sixth Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 129.
Agenda item 137
Administration of justice at the United Nations
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/458)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft decision recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report. We will now
take action on the draft decision. The Sixth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.

07-62920

A/62/PV.62

The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 137.
Agenda item 157
Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/459)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/72).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 157?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 158
Observer status for the Regional Centre on Small
Arms and Light Weapons in the Great Lakes Region
and the Horn of Africa in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/460)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/73).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 158?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 159
Observer status for the Italian-Latin American
Institute in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/461)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/74).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 159?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 160
Observer status for the Energy Charter Conference
in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/462)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/75).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 160?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 162
Observer status for the Eurasian Development Bank
in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/463)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth

07-62920

7

A/62/PV.62

Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/76).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 162?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 165
Observer status for the Conference on Interaction
and Confidence-building Measures in Asia in the
General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/522)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/77).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 165?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 166
Observer status for the Cooperation Council for the
Arab States of the Gulf in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/523)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/78).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 166?

The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded its consideration of all of the
reports of the Sixth Committee.
Agenda item 120
Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations
The Acting President: It is my understanding
that there is no request to consider this item at the
present session. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to defer consideration of this item to
the sixty-third session and to include it in the
provisional agenda of the sixty-third session?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: This concludes our
consideration of agenda item 120.
Agenda item 163
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Eurasian Economic Community
Draft resolution (A/62/L.14)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tajikistan to introduce draft
resolution A/62/L.14.
Mr. Aslov (Tajikistan) (spoke in Russian): On
behalf of the member States of the Eurasian Economic
Community — the Republic of Belarus, the Republic
of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, the Russian
Federation, the Republic of Tajikistan and the Republic
of Uzbekistan — and the following sponsors Armenia,
Philippines, Thailand and Turkmenistan, I would like
to introduce draft resolution A/62/L.14, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Eurasian Economic Community”.
The Eurasian Economic Community —
EURASEC — was established in accordance with the
treaty signed on 10 October 2000 by the Presidents of
the Republic of Belarus, the Republic of Kazakhstan,
the Kyrgyz Republic, the Russian Federation and the
Republic of Tajikistan. The Republic of Uzbekistan
joined the Community in 2006, when the former
Organization of Central Asian Cooperation merged
with EURASEC. The Republic of Armenia, the
Republic of Moldova and Ukraine have the status of
observer States in EURASEC.

It was so decided.

8

07-62920

A/62/PV.62

The treaty on the establishment of EURASEC
affirms the commitment of the member States of the
Community to the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the generally recognized principles
and norms of international law.

In conclusion, I wish to express my gratitude to
all those delegations that have participated in the three
informal consultations and made their valuable
contributions. I am convinced that the introduced draft
resolution will be adopted by consensus.

EURASEC has had observer status in the General
Assembly since 2003, and it closely cooperates with
the United Nations system in most of the basic areas of
its activities, such as trade and economic development;
the establishment of a customs union; energy;
transport; agriculture and agro-industry; the regulation
of migration, banking and finance; communication;
education;
health
care
and
pharmaceutics;
environmental protection and natural disasters risk
reduction. Its main partners are the Economic
Commission for Europe, the Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP).

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation supports the
statement made by Tajikistan as the president of the
Eurasian Economic Community. The 2005 World
Summit Outcome consolidated our understanding of
the indivisible nature of peace, security and
development. The outcome document also asserted that
the formation of the collective approaches, which are
needed to overcome modern threats and challenges,
require the constant strengthening of cooperation
between the United Nations and the regional and
subregional organizations, based on the firm
foundation of the United Nations Charter.

In order to strengthen the institutional framework
of this interaction, EURASEC and UNDP signed a
memorandum of understanding in September 2006. On
25 January 2007, the agreement on cooperation
between the Inter-Parliamentary Assembly of
EURASEC and the Economic Commission for Europe
was signed.

Currently more than 50 per cent of world trade is
carried out within the context of regional trade
agreements. The effective work of global mechanisms
for regulating trade is inconceivable without regional
integration, the success of which has a direct impact on
the economic prosperity of a whole number of regions
in the world. Russia actively concludes and uses
regional trade agreements and develops multilateral
institutions for regional economic integration aimed at
mutual liberalization of trade relations.

Thus, as of today, favourable conditions have
been created for mutually advantageous cooperation
between the United Nations and EURASEC.
Meanwhile, it is becoming obvious that, in order to
enhance practical cooperation and coordination to
address our common objectives in social and economic
fields, particularly a timely achievement of the
Millennium
Development
Goals
and
other
internationally agreed goals, it is essential to place the
relationship
between
the
Eurasian
Economic
Community and the United Nations on a more
systematic basis. That is the purpose of the draft
resolution that is being introduced today.
The resolution also notes that strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Community contributes to the promotion of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations and it
invites other organizations, programmes and funds of
the United Nations system, as well as international
financial institutions, to cooperate and develop direct
contacts with the Eurasian Economic Community with
the purpose of undertaking joint implementation of
programmes to achieve their goals.

07-62920

Among the most successful regional mechanisms
is the Eurasian Economic Community. In the brief
period since its establishment in October 2000, just
seven years ago, it has become a capable, dynamically
developing and effective association with a welldeveloped institutional and legal basis. The Community
has thus confirmed its usefulness and maturity.
Moreover, the Community has become an integral
element within the broad architecture of multilateral
cooperation on the Eurasian continent for ensuring
strong development, stability, peace and security. In
that context, we wish to emphasize that the treaty on
the establishment of the Community asserts the
commitment of member States to the principles of the
United Nations Charter, as well as the generally
recognized principles and norms of international law.
The framework of the Eurasian Economic
Community makes it an important partner with the
United Nations in our region and establishes the need
for dynamic development of cooperation between the

9

A/62/PV.62

two. In 2003 the Community was granted observer
status in the General Assembly and firm links were
established with the Economic Commission for
Europe, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia
and the Pacific and the United Nations Development
Programme. At the same time, the current level and
format for interaction between the United Nations and
the Community does not fully match the potential in
region. We feel convinced that the time has come for
the two to work on a more systematic basis so as to
strengthen the effectiveness of their cooperation and
enhance their synergistic effect in meeting their
common goals in the socio-economic sphere, especially
concerning the timely achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals and other internationally agreed
goals in the region.
We also wish to emphasize our interest in
ensuring that the question of cooperation between the
United Nations and the Community is included in the
next report of the Secretary-General, which will be
submitted to the next session of the General Assembly.
For all of those reasons, the draft resolution was
introduced by the delegations of Community member
States and is being developed further in consultation
with other United Nations Member States. We also
wish to express our gratitude to all of those delegations
that became sponsors of the draft resolution on that
question.
We also wish to thank colleagues from other
delegations who have actively participated in
consultations for their constructive and positive
approach in working on the draft resolution.
Mr. Shautsou (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
There is no doubt that the expansion of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in various fields has helped
to achieve the goals of the Organization. The draft
resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and the Eurasian Economic Community is aimed to
enhance the effectiveness of the work of both
organizations in helping the member States of the
Community to resolve the most topical problems of
socio-economic and cultural development. The
Eurasian Economic Community, is first and foremost,
an organization for economic and social cooperation
for a number of countries in the post-Soviet period, in
areas such as energy, transportation, finance, health,
education and environmental protection. We feel that
the adoption of the draft resolution on cooperation

10

between the two organizations will give an impetus to
strengthening direct contacts between the Eurasian
community and United Nations agencies in the joint
implementation of projects in the socio-economic
sphere.
The opportunities for interaction between the two
are numerous. I will note only two. The issue of access
to sources of energy is growing increasingly acute,
especially for countries of the Eurasian Community.
We feel that cooperation between the Community, the
United Nations Environment Programme and the
United Nations Development Programme holds future
promise for better access to available sources of energy
for the countries of the Eurasian Economic
Community. We feel that an important area of
cooperation is also United Nations assistance with the
full integration of the member States of the Eurasian
Economic Community — countries with economies in
transition — into the world economy and their entry
into the World Trade Organization (WTO). We hope
this cooperation between the Eurasian Economic
Community, the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development and other United Nations agencies
will help to ensure the rapid inclusion of those States in
the WTO.
We wish to express our gratitude to all States
participating in consultations that supported the
sponsors of the draft resolution.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 58/84 of 9 December
2003, I now call on the observer for the Eurasian
Economic Community.
Mr. Mansurov (Eurasian Economic Community)
(spoke in Russian): Allow me to express, on behalf of
the leaders of the State members of the Eurasian
Economic Community (EURASEC), our hope for the
consensus adoption of the draft resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Eurasian
Economic Community. Four years ago, the Community
was granted observer status in the United Nations
General Assembly. In the framework of our interaction
with the United Nations system, the United Nations
Economic Commission for Europe, the Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific and the
United Nations Development Programme have become
the main partners of the Eurasian Economic
Community. Memoranda of understanding were signed
with them in 2006 and 2007. Joint events devoted to

07-62920

A/62/PV.62

important issues of mutual interest are regularly held
with those organizations and there are exchanges of
experience and contacts with experts at different levels.
Issues of central importance in the cooperation
have been the rational and efficient use of fuel and
energy resources, the development of international
transportation infrastructure and environmental issues.
In particular, we draw the attention of the international
community to the problem of cleaning up deposits of
uranium tailings in Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan and the
Semipalatinsk launching pad in Kazakhstan, as well as
dealing with the Aral Sea problem. Those problems
continue to be relevant.
Among the most important areas of the
Community’s cooperation with the United Nations is
the implementation of the Almaty Programme of
Action for landlocked countries, of transport
development programmes and of programmes to
increase the effectiveness of transit traffic between
Europe and Asia. All the Community’s activities are
based on the principles of the United Nations Charter
and other generally accepted norms of international
law. I wish to stress again the adherence of the
Community and its member States to those principles.
In the post-Soviet era, the main focus is
undoubtedly on integrative cooperation within the
framework of the Community, which is emerging as an
important institution for regional interaction and a
substantial element in the establishment of an effective
system for ensuring stability in the region and
expanding economic cooperation.
During the seven years of the Community’s
existence, all its member States have enjoyed steady
growth in their gross domestic product, about 7 per
cent per year, and their industrial and agricultural
output, as well as rising wages and pensions. The
Community has also helped to ensure stability in the
region. During this period, commodity turnover among
the States of the Community has more than doubled,
amounting to more than $75 million in 2006 and
around $90 million in 2007. National currency
exchange rates have stabilized, and the inflation rate
has declined. All of that clearly shows that the
integration efforts undertaken within the framework of
the Community have been effective.
We have focused consistently on the problem of
overcoming poverty, on issues related to migration and
energy and water resources management and on

07-62920

strengthening the Community’s transport capacity. A
number of programmes aimed at strengthening the
social infrastructure have been adopted within the
framework of the Community so as to ensure dignified
living conditions for the 206 million people living in
its member States. In particular, we have carried out a
successful programme entitled “Ten Easy Steps for
Ordinary People” and have taken important decisions
to enhance interpersonal communication and provide
opportunities to receive education and medical
assistance anywhere in the Community and to travel
without a visa to any of its member States. The
structure of the Community is being strengthened,
along with its treaty and legal foundation.
Furthermore, the Community continues to
expand. For example, in 2006 Uzbekistan joined the
Community as a full-fledged member. The Organization
of Central Asian Cooperation became integrated into
the Community, and the Eurasian Development Bank
was established.
At the October meeting of the Community’s
Inter-State Council, the heads of member States signed
important documents on the establishment of a single
customs territory and a customs union for Belarus,
Kazakhstan and Russia. In that regard, it was agreed
that the Community’s three other States, Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, would accede to the
customs union as soon as their economies were
prepared for such a step.
We believe that priority areas for our future
cooperation could include issues related to sustainable
economic development, the environment, energy and
water supplies and the development of science and
technology, transport infrastructure, transit capacity
and the labour market and a competitive private sector.
We are prepared to discuss all those issues in greater
detail with the relevant United Nations agencies and to
share with them our proposals on each issue so that we
can take the interaction between the United Nations
and the Community to a qualitatively new and systemic
level.
We believe that that is precisely the goal of the
draft resolution to be adopted today. We are convinced
that the draft resolution to be adopted today will
contribute to strengthening of joint efforts to
strengthen interaction in Eurasia, will contribute to
socio-economic development of our members and to

11

A/62/PV.62

the well-being of our people and to the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals.
New opportunities and prospects are opening up
in terms of expanding our partnership circle and
deepening our cooperation with international
organizations. The Eurasian Economic Community, for
its part, is prepared to engage in fruitful and mutually
beneficial cooperation with all interested States and
international organizations.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/62/L.14. I should like to announce that,
since the introduction of the draft resolution, Mongolia
has become a sponsor.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/62/L.14?
Draft resolution
(resolution 62/79).

A/62/L.14

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 163?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 114 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(h) Appointment of members of the Joint
Inspection Unit
Note by the President of the General Assembly
(A/62/549)
The Acting President: As indicated in document
A/62/549, as a result of the resignation of Mr. Juan
Luis Larrabure of Peru, the General Assembly is
required, at its sixty-second session, to appoint a
person to serve as a member of the Joint Inspection
Unit for a full term of office. By decision 62/402 of
8 October 2007, the Assembly decided that the term of
office of the person appointed to fill that vacancy
would begin on 1 January 2008 and expire on
31 December 2012, in order to align the term of office
with that of other inspectors.
In accordance with the procedures described in
article 3, paragraph 1, of the statute of the Joint

12

Inspection Unit and having consulted the regional
group concerned, the President requested Peru to
propose a candidate to replace Mr. Larrabure.
The candidate, in accordance with Assembly
resolution 59/267 of 23 December 2004, should have
experience in at least one of the following fields:
oversight, audit, inspection, investigation, evaluation,
finance, project evaluation, programme evaluation,
human resources management, management, public
administration,
monitoring
and/or
programme
performance, as well as knowledge of the United
Nations system and its role in international relations.
As also indicated in document A/62/549, as a
result of the consultations held in accordance with
article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit, including consultations with the
President of the Economic and Social Council and with
the Secretary-General in his capacity as Chairman of
the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination, I submit to the Assembly the candidature
of Mr. Enrique Román-Morey of Peru for appointment
as a member of the Joint Inspection Unit for a five-year
term of office beginning on 1 January 2008 and
expiring on 31 December 2012.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to appoint that candidate?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded its consideration of sub-item (h) of
agenda item 114.
Agenda item 63
Advancement of women
Report of the Third Committee (A/62/433
(Part 1))
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, may I take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
report of the Third Committee that is before the
Assembly today?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Before we begin to take
action on the recommendations contained in the report
of the Third Committee, I should like to advise
representatives that we are going to proceed to take a

07-62920

A/62/PV.62

decision in the same manner as was done in the Third
Committee.
I now give the floor to the representative of Cuba
to speak on a point of order.

“Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments”, in the agenda of the current
session under heading I, which is “Organizational,
administrative and other matters”? I see no objection.
It was so decided.

Mrs. Vargas Walter (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Our delegation would like an explanation, if possible,
as to why this item is being considered today, because
we understood that the item would be taken up on
18 December. Could you give us some information on
that, Mr. President?

The Acting President: Given the nature of the
item, may I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to consider sub-item (j) of agenda item 114
directly in plenary meeting? I see no objection.

The Acting President: I am advised that this was
done at the request of the Secretary of the Third
Committee.

Agenda item 114 (continued)

The Assembly will now take action on the draft
decision, recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report. The Third Committee adopted
the draft decision, entitled “Term of office of the
members of the Consultative Committee on the United
Nations Development Fund for Women”, without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 63.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Members have just
adopted the decision concerning the term of office of
the members of the Consultative Committee on the
United Nations Development Fund for Women. In
subparagraph (b), the Assembly decided to include the
item entitled “Appointment of the members of the
Consultative Committee on the United Nations
Development Fund for Women” in the agenda of the
current session. If there is no objection, may I take it
that it is the wish of the Assembly to include this item
as sub-item (j) of agenda item 114, that is,

07-62920

It was so decided.

Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(g) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Conferences
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 52nd plenary meeting, on 15 November 2007, the
General Assembly took note of the appointment by its
President of Austria, China, Japan, Kenya, Tunisia and
the United States of America as members of the
Committee on Conferences for a period of three years,
beginning on 1 January 2008.
Members will further recall that there remains
one seat to be filled from among the Latin American
and the Caribbean States. After consultations with the
Chairman of the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States, the President of the General
Assembly has appointed Argentina as a member of the
Committee on Conferences for a period of three years
beginning on 1 January 2008. May I take it that the
Assembly takes note of this appointment?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has concluded its consideration of sub-item (g) of
agenda item 114.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 114.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

13
