320

General Assembly-Forty-flnh Session

the payment of income tax reimbursements to their
staff members and to report on efforts taken in this re­
gard to the General Assembly at its forty-sixth session;
17. Requests the Board of Auditors to ensure regu­
lar audit coverage of all extrabudgetary expenditures,
including the various trust funds managed by the Sec­
retary-General or the executive heads of United Na­
tions organizations and programmes;
18. Requests the Commissioner-General of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East to report to the General As­
sembly at its forty-sixth session on the measures taken
by the Agency to rectify the shortcomings identified by
the audit of the Area Staff Provident Fund;
19. Invites the governing bodies of organizations
and programmes for which audited financial statements
have been considered by the General Assembly to en­
sure that full consideration is given to the reports of the
Board of Auditors and the Advisory Committee and the
comments made thereon in the Fifth Committee with a
view to taking appropriate remedial measures;
20. Requests the executive heads of the United Na­
tions organizations and programmes to ensure that ex­
penditures do not exceed the level of funds provided
under allotments, in accordance with the financial
rules, and to enforce existing disciplinary measures with
a view to enhancing accountability and budgetary dis­
cipline;
21. Requests the Board of Auditors and the Advi­
sory Committee to continue to cover, in their review of
organizations and programmes, including peace-keep­
ing operations, the areas relating to the efficiency and
effectiveness of the financial procedures and controls,
the accounting system and related administrative and
management aspects in accordance with regulation 12.5
of the Financial Regulations of the United Nations and
to recommend measures, as appropriate, to strengthen
financial and management controls and to standardize
the financial reporting of the organizations;
22. Recommends that all future reports of the
Board of Auditors continue to include separate sections
that contain a summary of recommendations for correc­
tive action to be taken by the United Nations organiza­
tions and programmes concerned, with an indication of
relative urgency and a timetable for remedial action;
23. Encourages the Board of Auditors to carry out
its audits in a comprehensive manner in response to
paragraph 13 of General Assembly resolution 44/183;
24. Welcomes the review of the Board of Auditors
of the liquidity positions of United Nations organiza­
tions, and requests the Board to conduct a further re­
view, bearing in mind that the information should be
presented in a standardized format;
25. Recommends that the Board of Auditors con­
tinue to submit to the General Assembly a concise doc­
ument summarizing its principal findings, conclusions
and recommendations of common interest, classified by
audit area and, where appropriate, identifying the au­
dited organization.

72nd plenary meeting
21 December 1990

45/236. Current financial crisis and financial emer­
gency of the United Nations
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and, in particular, Article 17
thereof,
Recalling also its resolutions 41/213 of 19 December
1986, 42/211 and 42/212 of 21 December 1987, 43/215
of 21 December 1988 and 44/195 A of 21 December
1989,
Deeply concerned that the current financial crisis
threatens the financial solvency, stability and work of
the Organization,
Noting the significant efforts made by Member States
to pay their assessed contributions in full or to reduce
the level of their outstanding contributions,
Rea/finning the need for a durable, reliable and last­
ing financial foundation for the Organization, in accor­
dance with the Charter,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the current financial crisis of the United Nations, 16 the
related report of the Advisory Committee on Adminis­
trative and Budgetary Questions 17 and the views ex­
pressed by Member States in the Fifth Committee on
this subject, 18
1. Reiterates the legal obligation of all Member
States, under the Charter of the United Nations, to fi­
nance the expenses of the Organization as apportioned
by the General Assembly;
2. Requests all Member States to pay their outstand­
ing and current assessed contributions in full and in a
timely manner in accordance with regulation 5.4 of the
Financial Regulations of the United Nations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
monitor the financial situation of the United Nations
and to keep the President of the General Assembly and
the chairmen of the regional groups informed so as to
facilitate consideration by Member States if the situa­
tion so requires;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to communi­
cate to all Member States the latest information on the
current financial crisis facing the Organization and to
submit a report giving his best projections of the finan­
cial situation of the Organization to the General As­
sembly at its forty-sixth session by 15 November 1991,
followed by additional and more up-to-date informa­
tion as soon as possible.
72nd plenary meeting
21 December 1990
B

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 42/216 A of 21 December
1987, 43/220 of 21 December 1988, 44/195 B of 21 De­
cember 1989 and all previous related resolutions,
16

N45/830.

17 N45/860.

•. 18 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-fifth Session,
ftf1h Commmec, 47th to 49th meetings, and corrigendum.

321

VIII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Flnh Committee

Noting the increased importance of the role of the
Organization in peace-keeping and, in this regard, re­
calling paragraph 8 of its resolution 4Sns of 11 Decem­
ber 1990,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-Gen­
eral on the analysis of the financial situation of the
United Nations, 19 and the related report of the Advi­
sory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, 17
Noting the improvement in the level of the short-term
deficit of the Organization, which it is estimated will be
reduced to 260.7 million United States dollars as at 31
December 1990,
Concerned at the precarious financial situation of all
peace-keeping operations and noting that troop-con­
tributing Member States, including the developing
country troop contributors of past and present peace­
keeping operations, have borne most of the burden of
the deficit,
Noting with concern the long delays in payment and
the partial and non-payment of assessed contributions
to past and current peace-keeping operations,
Reiterating earlier appeals to Member States, without
prejudice to their position of principle, to make volun­
tary contributions to the Special Account referred to in
annex VI to the report of the Secretary-General on the
analysis of the financial situation of the United Nations,
Considering the views expressed by Member States in
the Fifth Committee during the forty-fifth session,18
1. Urges all Member States to meet their financial
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations by
paying promptly and in full all assessed contributions,
including advances to the Working Capital Fund and
assessments relating to peace-keeping operations;
2. Expresses its appreciation to all Member States
that pay their assessed contributions in full in accor­
dance with regulation 5.4 of the Financial Regulations
of the United Nations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in addition to
sending official communications to the permanent rep­
resentatives of Member States, to approach, as and
when appropriate, the Governments of Member States
for the purpose of encouraging the expeditious pay­
ment in full of all outstanding assessed contributions to
all peace-keeping operations, as well as seeking further
voluntary contributions for peace-keeping operations;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to include in
his report on the financial emergency of the United Na­
tions, on a regular basis, a detailed analysis of the fi­
nancial situation of the Organization, including reim­
bursements owed to Member States for their
participation in peace-keeping operations;
5. Takes note of the proposal of the Secretary-Gen­
eral for an increase in the level of the Working Capital
Fund20 and the observations of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in this re­
gard 17 and decides to revert to this matter, if necessary,
at the forty-sixth session;
19 NC.5/45/17.
20 Ibid., para. 32.

6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a re­
port on the financial emergency of the United Nations
to the General Assembly each year by 10 October, in­
cluding therein the results of his efforts in implementa­
tion of paragraph 3 of the present resolution.
72nd plenary meeting
21 December 1990
45/237. Joint Inspection Unit
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31/192 of 22 December 1976,
41/213 of 19 December 1986 and 42/218 of 21 Decem­
ber 1987 and other recent relevant resolutions,
Having considered the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit on its activities during the period 1 July 1989 to 30
June 1990,21 the work programme of the Unit for 1990
and the nucleus of its work programme for 1991-1992 22
and the report of the Secretary-General on the im­
plementation of the recommendations of the Unit, 23
Expressing its appreciation to the Joint Inspection
Unit for the reform measures it has introduced to im­
prove further its working methods and the quality of its
work,
Reiterating the importance of a detailed and timely
consideration of the reports of the Joint Inspection
Unit, particularly by Member States and the organiza­
tions concerned,
Urging the executive heads and governing bodies of
participating organizations of the Joint Inspection Unit
to take full advantage of the resources of the Unit and
to give due attention to its reports and recommenda­
tions,
l. Takes note of the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit2 1 and of its work programme for 199022 and of the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the recommendations of the Unit; 23
2. Encourages the Joint Inspection Unit to continue
to take into account the following measures in order to
enhance further the usefulness of its reports to the gov­
erning bodies of the participating organizations:
(a) To take a more selective approach in drawing
up its work programme to give greater attention to
management, budgetary and administrative issues, in­
cluding those identified by the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions in its report
on the administrative and budgetary co-ordination of
the United Nations with the specialized agencies and
the International Atomic Energy Agency, and by the
Board of Auditors in its audit opinions and reports, as
well as those areas of the United Nations system under­
going reform;
(b) To make every possible effort to issue its reports
well in advance of the meetings of the governing bodies
of its participating organizations, in particular the Gen­
eral Assembly, and of the relevant subsidiary bodies, to
ensure that the comments of the Secretary-General and
21 Official Records of t he tie11cral Assembly, Forty-fift h Scssio11, Sup­
plement No. 34 (N45/34).
22 N45/l17, annex.
23 N45/441.
