S/PV.7626

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7626th meeting

Thursday, 18 February 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ramírez Carreño . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of))

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-04256 (E)
*1604256*

S/PV.7626

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

were on the rise as both continued to sign agreements
with international oil and gas companies.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992)
and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009).
I am honoured to have convened today’s Security
Council briefing on the activities of the Somalia and
Eritrea Sanctions Committee. My statement today will
focus on recent developments and the latest findings
of the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group. Today’s
briefing is being conducted in accordance with
sub-paragraph 11 (g) of resolution 1844 (2008).
With respect to the arms embargo imposed on
Somalia, since the beginning of this year, the Committee
has received one notification under paragraph 10 (g) of
resolution 2111 (2013). The Committee has also received
two notifications in accordance with paragraph 11 (a) of
resolution 2011 (2013).
At its informal consultations on 9 October 2015, the
Committee reviewed the final reports of the Somalia
and Eritrea Monitoring Group, and discussed their
recommendations. The Monitoring Group reported
that international interest in the rich marine resources
and minerals of Somalia had grown. That interest,
however, had not yet been accompanied by adequate
efforts to manage these resources. The Monitoring
Group considered that this constituted a potential
threat to peace, security and stability in Somalia. With
respect to the mineral resources sector in Somalia, the
Monitoring Group said that tensions between the Federal
Government of Somalia and regional administrations
2/14

18/02/2016

With regard to the threat posed by Al-Shabaab
to Somalia and the region, the Group reported that it
persisted despite the fact that several of its leaders had
been killed. Al-Shabaab took advantage of the fact that
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the
Somali National Army and allied forces are at the limit
of their capacities, making their bases increasingly
vulnerable to possible attacks. The Monitoring Group
also found that Al-Shabaab is seeking to maintain
communications with Yemen and Al-Qaida in the
Arabian Peninsula. The Monitoring Group reported
that the Federal Government of Somalia and provisional
regional administrations had trouble controlling the
territories liberated from Al-Shabaab, which has led
to the resurgence of tensions and conflicts among
communities.
With regard to humanitarian access, the Monitoring
Group reported that it remained extremely fragile,
especially in areas where Al-Shabaab had established
blockades of humanitarian supplies and trade by
arresting and killing civilians and destroying their
property. Foreign and domestic forces active in Somalia
continued to attack civilians, either as a deliberate tactic
of war or through the disproportionate use of force.
With respect to charcoal, the Monitoring Group
reported that the implementation of its ban had improved
since Al-Shabaab was displaced from locations where
it is shipped for export. However, because the use
of forged documents is widespread among carriers,
Somali charcoal continued to be exported. In that
regard, the Monitoring Group suggested that the Somali
authorities, Member States, AMISOM and troopcontributing countries seek to better coordinate their
efforts to ensure the existence of a comprehensive and
efficient mechanism against the illegal trade in Somali
charcoal.
The Monitoring Group noted the substantive
progress made by the Federal Government with regard
to the quality and timeliness of its notifications to
the Committee concerning imported weapons. At the
same time, the Group expressed concern about the
lack of precision of the information provided on the
composition and arrangement of the security forces. In
this regard, the Committee decided to address a note
verbale to all Member States, asking them to support
the comprehensive security sector reform programme
16-04256

18/02/2016

The situation in Somalia

announced by the Office of the President of the Federal
Government of Somalia on 9 September 2015, in order
to ensure the timely delivery of technical and financial
assistance to the security sector.
Let me now turn to the Monitoring Group’s
report on Eritrea. The Group found no evidence that
the Government of Eritrea had provided support to
Al-Shabaab. However, it reported that Eritrea was
supporting armed groups in Ethiopia, in contravention
of paragraph 16 of resolution 1907 (2009). The Group
reported that it had spoken with the Eritrean Government
on several occasions, but that the authorities of that
country had shown little willingness to cooperate.
The Group also noted the lack of progress in resolving
the border dispute between Djibouti and Eritrea. The
Committee hopes that the Qatari mediation efforts will
contribute to resolving this matter.
The outbreak of the crisis in Yemen was a new
development. The Group received unconfirmed reports
of the presence of Eritrean soldiers in Yemen, fighting
alongside the Arab coalition. If these reports are
confirmed, the Group has said that this participation
could constitute a violation of paragraph 6 of the
same resolution. After the Council adopted resolution
2244 (2015), the Secretary-General appointed to the
Monitoring Group eight experts knowledgeable in
weapons, armed groups, finance, humanitarian affairs,
maritime affairs and transportation, natural resources
and regional issues.
Between 11 and 15 January, eight experts of the
Monitoring Group, visiting New York to participate
in an orientation programme and the planning of its
mandate, held bilateral meetings with key delegations,
including myself as Chairman of the Sanctions
Committee on Somalia and Eritrea, as well as the
Permanent Representative of Eritrea. In the first update
in writing that the Committee received this year, the
Monitoring Group stated that it continued to work with
the diplomatic community, the United Nations system
in Nairobi and key stakeholders in the Horn of Africa
in order to actively identify new areas of research and
to expand the network of contacts in order to fulfil
its new mandate. It is expected that, on 22 April, the
coordinator of the Monitoring Group shall provide the
Committee with the mid-term update on the Group’s
investigations and activities that the Council has
requested with a view to having the final report ready
on 15 October 2016.

S/PV.7626

The Committee is currently considering a draft
guidance note for implementing resolutions in order
to provide guidance and operational recommendations
to Member States, the Somali Government and other
relevant institutions to implement the measures of the
arms embargo more efficiently. The draft guidance
note summarizes existing restrictions imposed by
the arms embargo on Somalia and Eritrea, describes
exemptions to the measures, and clarifies problems
that have been encountered by Member States and the
Somali Government, in particular in applying the arms
embargo. The Committee is expected to approve the
draft guidance note and make it public in early March.
The Committee has expressed its interest in assessing
the changes in the security situation in the Horn of
Africa with a view to increasing the effectiveness of
the current sanctions regime in Somalia and Eritrea.
Finally, I would like to thank Council members
for entrusting me again with the chairmanship of this
important Committee. I will continue doing everything
in my power to guide the work of the Committee in a
balanced and fair manner. I am confident that, through
its work, the Committee will make a significant
contribution to the Council’s efforts to achieve lasting
peace and stability in Somalia, Eritrea and the Horn of
Africa.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the other members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this briefing. It is well timed, following
our discussion of sanctions last week.
As this is our first opportunity to do so in the
Chamber, I should like to begin by expressing my
condolences and those of the United Kingdom to the
family of Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali and to our Egyptian
colleagues following the death of the former SecretaryGeneral on Tuesday. He was an influential leader of the
United Nations, presiding over the Organization during
one of its most challenging times.
One such challenge was, of course, Somalia. He
was tireless in his efforts to bring peace and stability to
that war-torn country, both by convening the ceasefire
talks in 1992 and through the subsequent deployments
of the United Nations Operation in Somalia. I am sure
he would have been heartened by the great progress
made in that country over recent years.

16-042563/14

S/PV.7626

The situation in Somalia

If we are to sustain that progress in Somalia this
year, the continued engagement of the Council will be
vital. The elections in the autumn are a crucial litmus
test for the welcome developments over the past four
years. But, as the attempted bombing of the Somali
airliner this month showed, real challenges remain. The
Council needs to be as attentive as ever. The work of the
Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group is a vital tool.
The Group is essential to keeping the Council informed
about what is happening on the ground. Let me set out
two ways to achieve that this year.
First, it is a sad inevitability that there will be
some individuals and entities inside and outside the
Government and political institutions who will seek
to spoil the political process to serve their own ends.
This is exactly the sort of information the Monitoring
Group needs to bring to our attention. We then need
to show that, as a Council, we are prepared to act. The
Somali people deserve a transparent and representative
Government. We owe it to them to help make this a
reality.
Secondly, turning to the military side, we must not
underestimate Al-Shabaab. They are down, but they
are far from out, which means that it is more important
than ever for Somalia to develop a credible and effective
security force that can tackle the threat it faces. Again,
the Monitoring Group has a key role to play by ensuring
that the Somali Government is fulfilling the terms of
the arms embargo suspension. This must include the
Government marking, registering and storing weapons
properly, and taking steps to build a truly national
army, rather than a series of regional militia.
It is important to underline the need for a frank
and constructive relationship between the Monitoring
Group and the Government of Somalia. This has
improved in recent years. Inevitably, with elections
approaching, the political temperature will increase. It
is imperative in the months ahead that the relationship
remain constructive, even if both parties do not agree.
The maturity with which the Government of Somalia
approaches its relationship with the Monitoring Group
will be an important indicator of how far the country
has moved in recent years.
Sadly, Eritrea’s relationship with the Monitoring
Group is not nearly as constructive. In fact, it remains
unacceptable. The Group has a Chapter VII mandate
from the Council. As we heard so clearly in the open
debate on Monday (S/PV.7621), the powers invested by
4/14

18/02/2016

the Charter through Chapter VII are not to be taken
lightly, and certainly not to be ignored. Eritrea must
cooperate with the Group and admit it into Eritrea. It
is frankly outrageous that this has not happened for
the past three years. So the ball is in Eritrea’s court. It
can admit the Monitoring Group, have a constructive
relationship with the Group and allow the Council to
have an informed debate on the propriety of sanctions,
or it can continue to choose isolation, with all that
entails. I hope that, with a new Monitoring Group now
in place, Eritrea will see cooperation as the correct
response.
In Somalia and Eritrea, we see two contrasting
responses to wholly legitimate requests from the
Council. On the one side, engagement with the
Monitoring Group has supported progress that was
once thought unimaginable. On the other, continued
stalling and inaction have left Eritrea in isolation.
In discussing both countries today in open session, I
hope we can bring renewed focus to that contrast and
encourage Eritrea to change its approach. As we do
so, it is imperative that we give our full support to the
work of the Monitoring Group. They need it in the year
ahead.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): As this is the first meeting
on the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992)
and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, my
delegation would like to start by congratulating you,
Sir, on your work as Chair of that Committee. Let me
also commend the work carried out by the Somalia and
Eritrea Monitoring Group.
For Somalia, this is a crucial year for the
implementation of Vision 2016. Japan welcomes the
recent inclusive Somali-led discussion on an electoral
model, and the decision announced by the Federal
Government of Somalia at the end of January. It is now
important for all parties of Somalia to set aside their
remaining differences, engage constructively in the
political process without delay, and agree on the details
so that this decision may be implemented in time for
the elections to be carried out by September. In that
connection, proper management of public finances
in the run-up to the elections is crucial. We must not
allow spoiler networks to manipulate the course of
events through financial bribes or threats. The Security
Council should be ready, if necessary, to consider
listing individuals engaged in any acts that threaten
the peace and reconciliation process in Somalia for
targeted measures.
16-04256

18/02/2016

The situation in Somalia

Al-Shabaab remains a major threat. Japan strongly
condemns the terrorist attacks that took place recently,
and we express our sincere condolences and heartfelt
sympathies to the victims and their families. We pay
tribute to the African Union Military Observer Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National Army
for their work under harsh conditions on the ground.
In order to prevent Al-Shabaab from taking further
advantage, we believe that it is crucial that offensive
operations against Al-Shabaab by AMISOM, the
Somali National Army and the police be carried out
in an even more closely coordinated manner. We look
forward to the troop-contributing country summit and
the High-level Partnership Forum in Istanbul next week
for concrete results in that direction.
After long endeavours, Somalia is at last moving
steadily towards State-building. This must be Somaliled, but at the same time supported by the international
community. It is my pleasure to announce that Japan has
recently provided additional assistance of $37.1 million,
which we expect to be used for State-building measures
in Somalia, such as supporting the election process
and police training. Japan is a strong supporter of the
Monitoring Group.
It is unfortunate that the Monitoring Group has
not been able to visit Eritrea since February 2011. I
would like to recall that all Member States are under
the obligation to act in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, and to cooperate with the
Monitoring Group so that this important body can carry
out its mandated tasks fully and effectively. To that
end, we hope to see the new experts of the Monitoring
Group and Government of Eritrea both engaging in a
cooperative and constructive manner this year, with the
support of the Sanctions Committee and the Council.
Japan stands ready to provide every support as we
continue our work in the sanctions committee under
your chairmanship.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to express my thanks to the Chairman
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992)
and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, the
Permanent Representative of Venezuela, for his efforts.
We highly value the efforts made by the Somalia
and Eritrea Monitoring Group as well. The sanctions
regime against Somalia and Eritrea is one of the oldest
regimes imposed by the Council. It clearly demonstrates
the necessity for the Council to accord adequate

S/PV.7626

importance to the working methods of subsidiary
organs of the Security Council. That should be done
in order to develop those working methods, modernize
the sanctions regime for further effectiveness and
impact, and attain the political objectives we all seek.
I therefore affirm what I said at the open debate in the
Security Council on 11 February (see S/PV. 7620).
The recent developments in Somalia show how
important it is for the Council and for all international
and regional parties to work to use the momentum,
realize an effective political reconciliation, re-establish
the State and confront the security threats posed by the
Al-Shabaab movement. We call upon all States to do
the necessary work and provide all necessary support
to the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
in order to guarantee the Mission’s success in fulfilling
its mandate. We also call upon States to accord greater
importance and provide further material assistance to
the Somali Government in order to build the capacity
of the Somali forces. This is the only way to reach
the desired result; it is a cornerstone for all efforts to
restore peace and security in the country.
We express our concern with regard to the continued
threats to relief organizations and the obstruction of
delivery of humanitarian assistance to civilians, as well
as the continued exportation of charcoal from many
Somali ports. We call on the Somali Government,
AMISOM and all international parties to provide the
necessary protection for humanitarian efforts and
guarantee that the international embargo on charcoal
exports is respected.
We reiterate the importance of improving the
effectiveness and efficiency of sanctions regime on
Somalia and Eritrea in a manner that is commensurate
with peace efforts and which does not have a negative
impact on international efforts to counter terrorism in
the southern Red Sea region and in the Bab el-Mandeb
Strait.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for your briefing on the work of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea. My delegation
welcomes your able leadership of that Committee. I
also take this opportunity to congratulate the members
of the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group on their
appointment pursuant to resolution 2245 (2015).
Malaysia welcomes the Monitoring Group’s
active pursuit of its mandate, including through its

16-042565/14

S/PV.7626

The situation in Somalia

engagement with a wide range of interlocutors, its
visits to third countries and its site visits in Somalia.
However, it is regrettable to note that the group was
not granted access into Eritrea during the reporting
period. Access of the group to Eritrea would provide an
important opportunity for the Government to engage
constructively with the international community,
with a view to achieving better understanding of
the outstanding issues and questions, as well as in
addressing possible concerns. We urge Eritrea to
consider positively enhancing its cooperation with the
Committee and the Group in line with its obligations
under the relevant Council resolutions.
Somalia has undergone tremendous changes over
the years. In the past few years, we have seen significant
positive momentum in the critical aspects of the political
dialogue and State- and institution-building processes.
Such momentum has resulted in modest yet tangible
gains, including in the areas of peace and security
and the socioeconomic development of the country.
Mindful that 2016 is a particularly important year for
Somalia, it is important for the positive momentum to
be maintained.
In this regard, Malaysia welcomes the recent
announcements by the Federal Government of Somalia
on the electoral model for 2016. The Federal Government
should continue to work closely and cooperatively with
the existing and emerging regional administrations
in a transparent and inclusive manner so as to ensure
buy-in and cement support for the model and the
ensuing process. This would be a crucial step towards
a successful political transition. In this regard, it is
equally important that differences between the federal
and regional authorities on the issue of exploitation of
mineral resources be managed in a constructive and
equitable manner.
On a separate note, Malaysia echoes concerns
expressed on the humanitarian situation in Somalia,
particularly in areas where there is ongoing fighting
against Al-Shabaab and where intercommunal tensions
and conflicts have re-emerged. We note that in 2015
alone, at least 157 incidents of grave violations against
children were documented. In its ongoing effort to
improve the overall peace and security situation in
the country, we urge the Government to continue
implementing its action plan on children and armed
conflict.
6/14

18/02/2016

It is important to continue focusing on the threat
posed by terrorist groups in Somalia, particularly
Al-Shabaab. Malaysia fully concurs with the view that
pressure must continue to be exerted on that group, its
supporters and affiliates. We greatly value and respect
the sacrifices made by all security sector actors in
Somalia, most notably by the African Union Mission in
Somalia and the Somalia security forces in countering
this threat. Such threats can only be effectively
neutralized through a comprehensive strategy.
In this regard, the finalization of the national
security policy and a national defence act as well as the
integration of regional forces into the Somali National
Army are positive developments, which contribute to
enhancing its ability to combat Al-Shabaab. At the
same time, we note that the respective presences of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida in
the Arabian Peninsula are seeping into Somalia and the
Horn of Africa. As rightly highlighted in the President’s
briefing, this worrying development is one of the factors
changing the security situation in the country.
With regard to the Council’s work on this issue, it
may be useful to consider convening a joint meeting
between the 751/1907 Committee and the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities. The purpose could
be, inter alia, to explore possible synergies in the work
of both Committees, including examining how the
existing sanctions regimes could be better focused
on terrorists, their supporters and affiliates, which
all threaten to undermine the positive gains made in
Somalia, and perhaps more generally in assessing and
addressing the threat posed to the Horn of Africa.
With regard to the implementation of the charcoal
ban, Malaysia supports the recommendations for better
coordination between the combined maritime forces
and the Federal Government of Somalia in curbing
the illegal trade in Somali charcoal. The Monitoring
Group could play a bridging role, including through the
sharing of information in this regard.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm my delegation’s
commitment to working closely with the 751/1907
Committee and its Chair, the Somalia and Eritrea
Monitoring Group, all Council members, partners and
stakeholders in contributing to our collective effort
in assisting Somalia, in the maintenance of peace and
16-04256

18/02/2016

The situation in Somalia

security and in securing stability in the Horn of Africa
and beyond.
Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We very much welcome
this open briefing, which we believe increases
transparency and helps implementation. The Somalia
sanctions regime has transformed over its long history
since the 1990s, and it now fulfils an important role in
supporting Somali State-building goals.
As we said in last week’s debate (see S/PV. 7620),
sanctions are not imposed in isolation. The sanctions
regime can assist in achieving the political, security
and humanitarian goals in Somalia, namely completing
Vision 2016, accelerating the fight against Al-Shabaab
and addressing Somalia’s humanitarian needs. When
the Council discusses Somalia in 2016, in what is
a precarious year for the country, we must include
discussion of sanctions, and we must take into account
the valuable information contained in the Somalia and
Eritrea Monitoring Group’s reports.
One important example is in the area of natural
resources. Generous maritime and mineral wealth
present a great opportunity for Somalia, but they also
present a possible driver of conflict, in the absence
of an effective regulatory framework. This risk is
exacerbated during the federalism process. The Council
will need to remain alert to how it can support Somalia
in its stewardship of its natural resources, drawing
on the expertise of the Monitoring Group, the United
Nations presence on the ground, and partners. That role
includes support for governance of natural resources,
but also extends to assisting Somalia in channelling its
natural resource wealth into State-building and other
key issues, for example, ensuring full and regular
payment to soldiers in the Somali National Army.
Resolution 2244 (2015), adopted last year, touched
on illegal fishing. That issue remains of concern and we
are ready to support the Federal Government’s efforts
to establish and enforce an appropriate legal regime as
contemplated by the resolution. Security sector reform
efforts and depriving Al-Shabaab of financing are also
priorities.
The Somalia sanctions regime must be implemented
by Somalia and other States Members of the United
Nations, including its neighbours. But to be truly
effective a range of other actors also have important
roles to play, including the African Union Mission
in Somalia and multinational partnerships like the
Combined Maritime Forces. Continued outreach by

S/PV.7626

the Committee and the Monitoring Group with those
partners is needed to ensure that sanctions are fully
implemented. An example of that is the progress made
on avoiding technical breaches of the arms embargo
through more consistent advance notifications of
imports under the arms embargo. We also welcome
the Committee’s recent initiative to develop an
implementation assistance notice on arms. That is
a practical initiative that has the potential to be very
useful in clarifying obligations, particularly for those
Member States not on the Council.
Finally, on Eritrea, we are hopeful that 2016 could
be a positive year for engagement with the Committee
and the Monitoring Group. We believe a visit to the
region by the Committee — something that was
discussed last year — would be a helpful step. We are
ready to support such efforts.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
the briefing on the activities of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning
Somalia and Eritrea, which you, Sir, chair.
We are worried about the recent intensification in
the various terrorist tactics of Al-Shabaab throughout
large parts of Somalia, including Mogadishu, and
the trend of strengthening the group’s ties with Boko
Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). Despite the fact that the forces of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) now control
80 per cent of the Somali territory, large-scale terrorist
attacks committed by Al-Shabaab since the beginning
of the year clearly demonstrate that extremists are still
in a position to seriously destabilize the situation.
Those factors, together with the potentially negative
consequences of the conflict in Yemen, demonstrate
the need to continue the military pressure on the
Islamists, based on the efforts of Somali authorities,
to stabilize the liberated areas and establish viable
local governance there. It seems that there is a need for
further international support for African peacekeepers
and the Somali National Army, including along the
lines of the United Nations Support Office in Somalia
(UNSOS), as well as in line with the coordination and
advisory role played by the United Nations Support
Office for AMISOM. We look forward to the successful
implementation of the obligations set out in resolution
2245 (2015), which expanded the mandate of UNSOS.

16-042567/14

S/PV.7626

The situation in Somalia

18/02/2016

We support the idea of strengthening
​​
the police
contingent of AMISOM and adapting the activities of
UNSOS to the task of increasing of the effectiveness
of its operations. In the future, we must increase the
provision of equipment and technical support in line
with Security Council decisions. In that context, we
welcome the adoption of a law on combating money
laundering and terrorist financing by the country’s
Parliament on 26 December 2015.

My delegation would also like to thank the Somalia
and Eritrea Monitoring Group for its high-quality report
(see S/2015/802) and encourage it to continue to work in
collaboration with the entire international community,
United Nations agencies in Kenya and all stakeholders
in the region to ensure the full implementation of its
mandate. With regard to Somalia, I wish every success
to the meeting of partners to be held next week in
Istanbul.

We call for a strengthening of the sanctions regime
with respect to Somalia, including strict adherence to
the arms and charcoal embargo, as well as monitoring
of the coastal waters of Somalia and assistance from
AMISOM in that area, in line with resolution 2244
(2015). We think that the embargo on arms and charcoal
from Somalia are key instruments for preventing the
fuelling of extremist forces in the country. We have
seen the effectiveness of a partial lifting of the embargo
in the provision of arms to the Somali armed forces.

My country continues to be concerned about the
differences between the Federal Government and the
regional administrations with regard to the management
of the mining resources of the country, which are
subject to the growing covetousness of international
companies, and with regional administrations tending
to sign contracts directly with those companies. In that
regard, Senegal condemns the ongoing violations of the
ban on the export of charcoal from Somalia, even though
there has been a slight lull in those activities since the
withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from the export sites. In that
regard, my delegation calls for better coordination of
the efforts among the Federal Government, the federal
member states, international organizations and the
forces on the ground to create a viable and effective
mechanism to combat illicit trafficking in Somali
charcoal.

The restrictions with respect to Eritrea reveal a
totally different picture. We are pleased to note that
the Monitoring Group has found no evidence that the
Eritrean Government is supporting the Al-Shabaab
armed group. No convincing data have yet been
provided to indicate that country is conducting
subversive activities. In that regard, we think attempts
to increase pressure on Asmara are counterproductive.
Once again, we call upon the Monitoring Group to use
only verified information in its reports.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this briefing.
We would like to thank the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009), concerning
Somalia and Eritrea, which you, Sir, preside over, for
the excellent report you presented. We assure you, Sir,
of our full support.
At the outset, I would like to convey to the Egyptian
delegation the sympathy and heartfelt condolences of
the Senegalese delation on the death of His Excellency
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, a well-known Egyptian
of Africa and the Arab world, who was an excellent
Secretary-General of the United Nations. Thanks to his
talent, rigour, vision and, above all, commitment, he
made a significant contribution to the development of
multilateralism, including in the Chamber in which we
are gathered today.
8/14

My delegation reiterates the need to uphold the
charcoal ban and fully implement resolution 2195
(2014), on the links between transnational organized
crime and terrorism. Cooperation should also be
bolstered to prevent Al-Shabaab militias from financing
their activities through trafficking in charcoal. Senegal
would like to encourage the ongoing efforts deployed
by maritime forces to fight against the illicit trafficking
in natural resources and the cooperation of those forces
with the Monitoring Group.
On the security front, Senegal remains deeply
worried by the ongoing threat of Al-Shabaab
throughout Somalia, including in the liberated areas.
My delegation is also concerned about intercommunal
tensions and the growing entrenchment of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant in the region. Facing these
ongoing threats, my delegation is pleased to note the
cooperation of the Monitoring Group with the Federal
Government on notification to the Committee of
imported weapons, and appeals for the arms embargo
in Somalia and Eritrea to be upheld. Along the same
lines, my delegation encourages the finalization of an
implementation assistance noticee to provide guidelines
16-04256

18/02/2016

The situation in Somalia

and operational recommendations to Member States,
the Somali Government and other relevant entities for
the full implementation of the arms embargo.
As you stressed in your briefing, Sir, Senegal
invites Member States to carefully consider the letter
dated 9 September 2015, in which the President of
the Somali Federal Government requested support
for rapid financing and technical assistance for the
security sector. Regarding attacks on humanitarian
personnel, the diversion of assistance and impediments
to its delivery, my delegation firmly condemns all such
attacks, whoever the perpetrators may be.
Senegal reiterates its support for the people and the
Government of Somalia in the electoral consultations
to take place in 2016, in particular with respect to
women’s representation at a level of 30 per cent in the
two parliamentary chambers.
Regarding Eritrea, we note that the Monitoring
Group found no proof that the Eritrean Government
is supporting Al-Shabaab. Regarding allegations that
the Government alledgedly supports armed groups in
Ethiopia, in violation of paragraph 16 of resolution 1907
(2009), the Monitoring Group could give us further
information with a view to promoting transparency. We
also call on the Eritrean authorities to cooperate more
fully with the Monitoring Group. My country alsonoted
that the report of the Monitoring Group indicates
the presence of Eritrean soldiers in Yemen, who are
alledgedly fighting on behalf of the Arab coalition.
That raises legitimate questions for Senegal. We would
like further clarification of that situation.

S/PV.7626

Experts, these agreements are tenuous. The electoral
reform has not been concluded. In many provinces,
local and political rivalries impede discussions on
the federal model. The recent fighting that bloodied
the city of Galkayo demonstrates the fragile nature
of progress in the protection of civilians and national
reconciliation. We must remain vigilant and continue to
work with the Somali authorities for the implementation
of these agreements and the ongoing commitment of all
in stabilizing Somalia.
On the military front, we welcome the courage
and commitment of the soldiers of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali security
forces leading the fight against Al-Shabaab. Al-Shabaab
is on the decline, economic activity is increasing, and
these are encouraging signs. However, that terrorist
group is far from being vanquished. We pay tribute to
AMISOM soldiers and Somali citizens who lost their
lives in the latest attacks. It is worrisome to read that,
in certain places, Al-Shabaab is enjoying the support of
local populations in launching its attacks. Our shared
goal is to continue relentlessly the fight against that
terrorist group, but military action is not enough. As it
is the world over, hearts must be won to rally people on
behalf of stabilization and reconstruction projects for
Somalia, rather than the morbid objectives sought by
Al-Shabaab.

I thank the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea. I wish to make three
points.

Thirdly, I wish to make a few comments on
sanctions, because the sanctions regime is a decisive tool
in supporting the political process and the fight against
Al-Shabaab. The work of the Monitoring Group is
decisive in that respect. Threats to the fragile process in
Somalia are genuine. There are many who are interested
in perpetuating war. They need to be identified and
punished. Al-Shabaab and certain other individuals
continue to finance their own activities through various
types of trafficking, helping to destroy the country a
little more every day and diverting financial resources
to their own profit. These flows and this traffic must
be identified and halted. Arms trafficking is, of
course, a major factor of destabilization. We cannot
overemphasize the importance of the arms embargo and
of the need to ensure its scrupulous implementation, as
well as the important role of the Somali Government in
following up the flow of weapons.

On the political front, we welcome progress made
with the adoption of the Mogadishu Declaration of
16 December, as well as the agreement on the electoral
model for 2016. As underscored by the Group of

On all of these points — and this is hardly a
comprehensive list — France welcomes the highquality work undertaken by the Monitoring Group and
encourages it to continue along this path.

Finally, we regret the lack of progress in resolving
border disputes between Djibouti and Eritrea.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): France,
like others, pays tribute to former Secretary-General
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who was a great leader both
of the United Nations and la francophonie. His passing
fills us with sorrow, and we extend our condolences to
his bereaved friends and family.

16-042569/14

S/PV.7626

The situation in Somalia

I wish to say a final word on Eritrea. We note the
fact that the Monitoring Group found no evidence that
Eritrea is participating in the financing or support of
armed groups in the Horn of Africa. Nevertheless, we
believe that conditions have not yet been met for the
lifting of sanctions, as requested by the authorities of
Asmara. We await frank and sincere cooperation on
their part with the sanctions committees, particularly
on the matter of Djibouti prisoners. This is the first
stage of a gradual evolution of the sanctions regime.
We do not understand what the Government in Asmara
has to hide or what is stopping it from fully cooperating
with the Monitoring Group.
The international community, the United Nations,
the African Union and the European Union have
invested much for peace and stability in Somalia. The
action of the Sanctions Committee and the Monitoring
Group is a game changer, and France guarantee its full
support as they continue their work.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
you, Sir, for your briefing and chairmanship of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea. It is abundantly
clear that the Council needs to remain diligent and
focused on supporting Somali efforts to advance a
stable, prosperous future with fair and transparent
governance, establishing a Government that is
accountable to the people and has the capacity to ensure
that the country’s natural resources are harnessed for
the benefit of all Somalis, and not misappropriated by
thieves or used to fund terror.
We would like to thank the Somalia and Eritrea
Monitoring Group for its efforts to oversee the
implementation of these important sanctions and to keep
the Council and the Sanctions Committee informed on
a range of issues, including countering Al-Shabaab,
piracy, corruption and violations of human rights.
These sanctions have limited the illict flow of charcoal,
depriving the terrorist group Al-Shabaab of revenue,
and the Committee, with the support of the Monitoring
Group, has helped us understand and maintain focus on
the corruption that undermines efforts to build strong
institutions in Somalia.
Peace will neither emerge nor be sustainable in
Somalia until Somalis create a professional security
sector, and we are commited to doing everything we
can to facilitate security assistance to achieve that
goal. However, the Government of Somalia must do
10/14

18/02/2016

its part by accurately reporting on the composition
and disposition of its security forces. Without that
reporting, we lack the most basic information to judge
whether arms or related materiel supplied to strengthen
Somalia’s security sector will be safeguarded from
diversion. Al-Shabaab still constitutes a serious threat
to Somalia’s peace and we remain committed to
ensuring that this terrorist group is defeated. Cutting
off Al-Shabaab’s sources of financial support is central
to that effort and a key to bringing about stability in
Somalia.
The Committee, with the support of the Monitoring
Group, should continue to expose and crack down
on the illicit charcoal trade. The Committee should
continue to engage directly with countries that may
be receiving such charcoal, and Member States should
remain vigilant and cooperative and actively share
information, including information on vessels carrying
charcoal, shipping documents, data on importers and
anything else that can help in order to robustly and better
enforce the ban. By imposing the charcoal ban, the
Security Council came together to take firm, effective
action to break the linkage between natural-resource
trafficking and threats to stability in Somalia. Where
we encounter this nexus, the Security Council should
act. We should not shy away from addressing drivers
of conflict in Somalia or elsewhere. We encourage the
Committee and the Council to look broadly at how
to prevent the diversion of Somalia’s natural wealth
to terrorists, corrupt officials and others who would
undermine peace.
Related to that, we commend the commitment of
the Combined Maritime Forces to helping track illicit
exports. The Committee should do more to ensure
that information from the Combined Maritime Forces
about illicit smuggling trends is publicly shared and
brought to the attention of relevant States. We would
also like to encourage the Combined Maritime Forces
to work closely with the Monitoring Group to update
the Committee in real time, if possible, on charcoal
shipments being tracked from Somalia. Such timely
intervention can lead to swift action to interdict. It can
help translate our intentions and commitments in the
Council into more real and meaningful changes on the
ground.
Even as we tackle the challenges posed by
terrorist groups such as Al-Shabaab and the illicit
trafficking of natural resources that finance them,
the Security Council must also keep a close eye on
16-04256

18/02/2016

The situation in Somalia

another scourge that threatens Somalia — corruption.
The mismanagement of public funds in Somalia will
undercut any security gains made in the country.
We therefore believe that the Federal Government of
Somalia must redouble its efforts to ensure financial
transparency, particularly with respect to the signing of
contracts related to natural resources. We encourage the
Monitoring Group to continue to focus on such issues
and make appropriate recommendations to improve
public financial management in Somalia.
As we fight terrorism and corruption, we must
redouble our efforts to ensure that Somalis are not
victimized, especially by those working to help secure
their country. We are deeply disturbed by allegations
that international forces bombed and launched ground
attacks on civilian areas on 15 January in Gedo and in
Middle Juba. We understand that this happened in the
wake of an Al-Shabaab attack on the Kenyan Defence
Forces of the African Union Mission in Somalia at the
El Adde forward operating base. The point of fighting
terrorists is to keep people safe. When the actions of
those fighting terrorists potentially endangers rather
than protects civilians, it merits serious scrutiny.
We urge the Monitoring Group to investigate such
allegations, including claims that cluster munitions
were deployed in violation of international law, and
report back to the Committee as soon as possible.
Finally, with regard to the situation in Eritrea,
unfortunately little has changed and, frankly, it needs
to. The Government’s refusal to engage constructively
with the Monitoring Group and the Sanctions Committee
must change before anyone can take Eritrean calls for
the sanctions to be lifted seriously. Obstructing the
ability of the Group to fulfil its mandate, combined
with further reports of Eritrean non-compliance with
the sanctions, is simply at odds with the stated desire
of Eritrean officials for the sanctions to be lifted. We
therefore call once again upon Eritrea to respond to
Monitoring Group requests for information and permit
the group to travel to Eritrea.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Ambassador
Ramírez Carreño, Permanent Representative of
Venezuela, for his briefing on the activities of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea.
We commend the activities of the Committee.
The debate organized recently (see S/PV.7620) by the
Venezuelan presidency on the working methods of

S/PV.7626

the Security Council’s subsidiary bodies, particularly
the sanctions committees, was a tangible contribution
to refining and making the work of the sanctions
committees effective. We still hope that the Venezuelan
initiative will have a positive outcome through the
adoption of a President’s note on the issue.
During the Uruguayan presidency, the Security
Council debated in depth the situation in Somalia,
developments in the country, challenges and prospects.
As we have done before, we reiterate our concern about
the capacity, or incapacity, of Somalian authorities to
control the territories liberated from the Al-Shabaab
terrorists becoming a huge challenge to ensuring the
participation of thousands of Somalis in the electoral
process ahead, while remaining a source of instability
with the resurgence of intercommunal conflicts.
We take note with concern of the findings of
the Monitoring Group regarding the illegal trade in
Somali natural resources and its potential to fuel the
conflict. We are of the view that, in this regard, the
Security Council should adopt an unequivocal stance
by strongly condemning it and taking further measures
for its disruption, considering that the exploitation,
management and sale of natural resources are the
prerogative of State authorities.
The suggestion of the Monitoring Group regarding
the ban on charcoal is a constructive one and should
be supported and implemented through cooperation
among Somali authorities, States Members of the United
Nations and the African Union Mission in Somalia,
ensuring that it is not violated through corruption and
falsified documentation.
Regarding Eritrea, we are pleased to note once
again that there is no evidence that the Government of
Eritrea has been supporting the Al-Shabaab terrorist
group. The Security Council should take note of that
development and take decisions accordingly.
With regard to border and regional issues, Eritrea
and Ethiopia should cease all support for armed and
rebel groups that affect the internal stability of both
countries. Djibouti and Eritrea should engage in good
faith, under the mediation of Qatar, to address the issue
of missing Djiboutian prisoners. The Government
of Eritrea should strengthen its cooperation with the
Monitoring Group to address the issue. The situation of
instability in Yemen and its proximity to Eritrea pose a
threat to the country’s security. We have doubts about
information on Eritrea’s decision to allow the United

16-0425611/14

S/PV.7626

The situation in Somalia

Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia to use its territories
in the fight in Yemen. It is our hope that Eritrea is not
importing that conflict to its borders.
To conclude, we encourage the strengthening of
relations between Somali and Eritrean authorities with
the Monitoring Group, whose work we fully support,
stressing that the Monitoring Group should strictly
observe its mandate and not extend it of its own
initiative.
Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Ramírez Carreño for his briefing and
appreciate the active the work of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning
Somalia and Eritrea, under his able leadership.
Recently, Somalia’s political process has made
progress. Efforts aimed at building a federal system
are proceeding steadily, and economic and social
development is gradually being restored, which China
welcomes. China believes that, with the help of the
international community, the Somali Government and
people will attain greater achievements on the path to
peaceful reconstruction. China maintains that sanctions
are not the end, just the means. Council sanctions
against Somalia and Eritrea should contribute to
promoting peace and stability in Somalia and the Horn
of Africa, as well as to the counter-terrorism efforts of
the Somali National Army and the African Union.
The final report of the Monitoring Group issued in
October (see S/2015/802) found no evidence of support
to Al-Shabaab by the Eritrean Government. In the light
of the changes in the situation, the Council should make
the corresponding adjustments to the relevant sanctions
regime.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to commend the Ambassador
of Venezuela for his outstanding work as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009), concerning
Somalia and Eritrea. I also express my resolute support
for the work being done by the Monitoring Group.
In line with the Toledo formula, I fully endorse the
statement made a short while ago by the Ambassador of
New Zealand. As such, I will confine my intervention
to the five most salient points.
First, with regard to transparency, this is an
inescapable requirement of our time. Society calls
on us to provide it and demands that the Council be
12/14

18/02/2016

democratic. For the Council to be democratic, more
transparent and stronger, we must open ourselves up
to the membership. Therefore, open briefings by the
Chairs of the Council’s subsidiary bodies should be the
norm, as should be the reports of the panels of experts
that support the committees.
Secondly, on the political process in Somalia,
today at last, there is hope for a new Somalia,
which, from reconciliation to the political dialogue,
should determine to move forward along the path
of progress and development for the benefit of the
Somali people — with, of course, the support of the
international community.
Thirdly, with regard to security, I express my
sincere condolences for the victims of Al-Shabaab
attacks. The victims are civilian, military and of all
genders, for Al-Shabaab lacks any sort of morality. In
order to rein in this violent movement, it is urgent that
we adapt the strategy in the fight against Al-Shabaab
to the current situation. To that end, we need to be
especially determined in two aspects. The first is to
impede the export of charcoal, and the second is to
cut off the sources of financing. Somalis should have
no doubts as to two issues: first, Al-Shabaab will be
defeated and Somalia’s future will not include them;
secondly, the African Union Mission in Somalia and
the Somali National Army are on the side of the people.
Fourthly, on human rights and the humanitarian
situation, I shall confine myself to stating our great
concern with regard to the humanitarian situation,
especially in areas under the control of Al-Shabaab. It
is important that we prevent and punish violations of
human rights, which are a genuine threat to the future
of Somalia.
Fifthly, on Eritrea, I would like to underscore the
importance of fostering a genuine and substantive
dialogue between the Monitoring Group and the
Government in Asmara. We welcome the visit by the
Monitoring Group to Eritrea.
I would like to conclude by touching on the issue
of sanctions. Spain’s position on sanctions is well
known. Members know that we believe that sanctions
are never an end in themselves. However, they are a
basic prevention tool in the Council’s efforts, including
to maintain international peace and security.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, Mr. President, Uruguay would like to thank you
16-04256

18/02/2016

The situation in Somalia

S/PV.7626

for your detailed briefing in your capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009), concerning
Somalia and Eritrea. We also welcome the fact that this
briefing is open to the membership.

capacities of the Federal Government of Somalia. In
that regard, we hope that the process of strengthening
institutions will allow the Government effectively to
control its territory and all of its economic and social
activities.

Uruguay would like to highlight the efforts of
the Federal Government of Somalia in providing
information with regard to arms imports. We welcome
the Committee’s decision to draw the attention of
Member States to providing their support for the
programme to reform the security sector, which requires
the necessary financial and technical assistance.

However, my country expresses its deep concern
about the continued presence of Al-Shabaab. Although
there have been major achievements in combating this
terrorist group, its asymmetric attacks against troops
of the African Union Mission in Somalia, the country’s
national forces and Somali civilians continue to be a
destabilizing element.

Uruguay reiterates its concern about the ongoing
threat posed by the Al-Shabaab terrorist group, which
continues to be present despite the measures undertaken
and the supposed loss of firing power. We should never
let down our guard when it comes to terrorism. Also of
alarm is the possibility that there may be open contacts
with other extremists in the region.

We are also concerned about the potential of the
conflict in Yemen to impact Somalia, especially when
it comes to the growth of Al-Qaida and the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant. If an alliance between the two
were to coalesce, it could pose a serious threat to peace
and security in Somalia. We call on the international
community to provide all the necessary support to
the State of Somalia so that it can exercise control,
ensure the rule of law, extend its administration and
provide services in areas liberated from Al-Shabaab,
failing which those areas could fall back into the hands
of terrorist groups. Although the sanctions — and the
Sanctions Committee — must achieve their goal, they
must be reviewed so that they can contribute to the
Federal Government of Somalia effectively controlling
areas being liberated from terrorists.

Uruguay would especially like to underscore
the need to protect civilians, especially women,
children and older persons. We encourage the Federal
Government of Somalia to seek mediation and stability,
in particular in areas where access to services and
humanitarian assistance is essential. At the same time,
we regret the fact that national and foreign forces
operating in Somalia continue to attack civilians and
violate international humanitarian law.
With regard to the information provided by the
Eritrea Monitoring Group, Uruguay expresses its
concern about the fact that there has not been greater
progress — and there may even have been a setback — in
achieving stability and peace in the region — if the
alleged support to armed groups in Ethiopia and Yemen
is confirmed, which has not been totally ruled out.
Lastly, Uruguay expresses its support and
commitment with the effort being done by the SomaliaEritrea Sanctions Committee. We look forward to an
update on its work in the months of April and October.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
With regard to the political situation in Somalia and
the work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
in support of the country’s stability, it seems clear to
us that the priority is to strengthen all of the national

We are concerned that Somalia, which possesses
enormous natural resources in the areas of oil, gas,
fisheries and charcoal, can neither exercise nor profit
from the rational exploitation of those resources, as is
its right. In that regard, we should cooperate to put an
end to the illegal trade in charcoal so that it is no longer
a source of financing for terrorism and instead serve
as a way of expanding and strengthening Somalia’s
capacity to effectively exploit its natural resources for
the benefit of its people, who so desperately need it.
With regard to Eritrea, we emphasize that all the
reports of the Monitoring Group, including its most
recent report (see S/2015/801), show that no link
exists between Eritrea and Al-Shabaab. Similarly, the
territorial differences between Eritrea and Djibouti are
under mediation through the Government of Qatar, and
there are Qatari peacekeepers stationed at the border
between the two countries. If we assume that the two
reasons, which I mentioned previously, that gave rise to
the imposition of secondary sanctions on Eritrea are no

16-0425613/14

S/PV.7626

The situation in Somalia

longer applicable, we believe it is time to re-examine the
validity and scope of the sanctions regime on Eritrea.
We recently held a debate on the working methods
of the sanctions committees (see S/PV.7620) and
the role of the monitoring groups. In the case of the
Somalia and Eritrea Committee, we have a robust
Monitoring Group, and some of its members have
been reappointed. However, my country believes that
the Monitoring Group has overreached its mandate
by offering unsupported information on some issues.
The first of those is the dispute between Eritrea and
Ethiopia. While the historic dispute and conflict that
exists between the two countries should be resolved, in
our opinion it is outside the purview of the Sanctions
Committee, and an appropriate forum should be found
to deal with the situation. We will have to carve out
a separate space if we are to make progress with the
issue of sanctions in compliance with the mandate of
the Sanctions Committee on Eritrea. However, that
should not be affected by the dispute between Eritrea
and Ethiopia, which should be treated in another forum.
Furthermore, with regard to the question of the
representative of Senegal, the presence of Eritrean
troops in Yemen has not been confirmed. This is an
issue related to the transparency of the reports. The
Monitoring Group of the Somalia and Eritrea Sanctions
Committee stated that it had received “unconfirmed
reports” of the presence of Eritrean soldiers in Yemen.
That is an aspect that we wanted to bring up at this open

14/14

18/02/2016

meeting, because there are elements introduced by the
Monitoring Group that have tended to complicate the
work of the Sanctions Committee and to perpetuate the
sanctions regimes on these countries.
I would also like to report that, as Chair of the
Somalia and Eritrea Sanctions Committee, I have
received an invitation from the President of Eritrea to
visit his country. We will organize a visit in the next few
months — certainly after February — with the aim of
gaining a greater understanding and arriving at specific
goals for facilitating the work being done between the
Monitoring Group and Eritrea. I will also be able to
hear at first hand the President’s views on the issue,
which I will then convey to the Sanctions Committee
and to the Council.
Lastly, the security situation in the Horn of Africa
has been greatly complicated both by the conflict in
Yemen and the huge flows of small arms and light
weapons into the area. We believe that the Sanctions
Committee should undertake a political assessment
of its scope and work. As the representative of Egypt
mentioned, it is one of the oldest of the Council’s
Sanctions Committees. We should try to re-evaluate the
situation and see how we can adapt in order to maintain
and preserve peace and security in the Horn of Africa.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

16-04256
