UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/1064
15 October 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 12 OCTOBER 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I should like to recall that, following consultations with the Government
of Liberia and the Security Council, the first United Nations Peace-building
Support Office (UNOL) was established in Liberia on 1 November 1997.
Since its establishment, the main focus of UNOL has been to provide the
Government of Liberia with support in its efforts to consolidate peace, promote
national reconciliation and strengthen its democratic institutions. UNOL has
also been providing a political framework for harmonizing and energizing the
efforts of the United Nations system on matters relating to post-conflict peacebuilding.
During 1999, UNOL has continued to assist the Government in facilitating
communication with the United Nations on matters relating to peace-building and
in providing political support to efforts to mobilize international assistance
for national reconstruction.
In order to help Liberia take another resolute step towards peace, UNOL has
been providing political and technical assistance to the Government in the
ongoing critical exercise of the destruction of the large quantities of weapons
and ammunition which had been collected during Liberia’s civil war.
UNOL has also endeavoured to facilitate communications between the
Government of Liberia and the United Nations as well as with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) on peace-building and other matters
related to subregional peace and security. It has been active in reducing
tension between Liberia and its neighbours, in particular Guinea and Sierra
Leone.
UNOL, in cooperation with the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra
Leone, and the Economic Commission for Africa, has joined efforts with ECOWAS to
provide support to initiatives aimed at resuscitating the Mano River Union, a
mechanism for subregional cooperation among Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
UNOL has also worked closely with the Government of Liberia in support of
subregional efforts to achieve a political settlement of the Sierra Leone crisis
and facilitate the implementation of the Lomé Peace Accord.

99-30024 (E)

151099

/...

S/1999/1064
English
Page 2

Much has been achieved in Liberia since the end of the civil war in 1997,
but much more remains to be done, particularly in the area of national
reconciliation, democratization, reintegration of former combatants, good
governance and the promotion of the rule of law.
In view of the catalytic contributions UNOL has been making to Liberia’s
post-conflict peace-building efforts, the Government of Liberia has asked that
the mandate of UNOL be extended until the end of December 2000. I should like
to inform the Council that it is my intention to agree to this extension.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention
of the members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

-----

Kofi A. ANNAN
