S/PV.8467

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8467th meeting

Thursday, 21 February 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Mele Colifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Equatorial Guinea)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic (S/2019/147)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-05011 (E)
*1905011*

S/PV.8467

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

I now give the floor to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic (S/2019/147)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Central
African Republic to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Sylvie Valérie Baïpo-Temon, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Central Africans Abroad of the Central
African Republic.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic and
Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic;
Mr. Smaïl Chergui, African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security; Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing
Director for Africa, European External Action Service;
and His Excellency Mr. Omar Hilale, Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations, in his
capacity as the Chair of the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Mr. Vervaeke is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Brussels.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/147, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, Mr. Chergui,
Mr. Vervaeke, Mr. Hilale and Ambassador Gbolié
Desiré Wulfran Ipo, Deputy Permanent Representative
of Côte d’Ivoire, speaking on behalf of the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the Central African
Republic.
2/31

21/02/2019

Mr. Onanga-Anyanga (spoke in French): Before
the Council is the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic (S/2019/147),
which I have the privilege to introduce today for the last
time in my capacity as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic. I
would like at the outset to express my deep gratitude
to Secretary-General António Guterres for the
confidence he has placed in me, and to all the members
of the Security Council for their invaluable support
throughout my tenure at the head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
I come here today with mixed feelings — the
optimism and satisfaction of a duty accomplished mixed
with a certain apprehension. Divided parties came
to Khartoum from all corners of the Central African
Republic on 21 and 22 January for negotiations that
promised to be difficult; the sons and daughters of
that country, torn by years of fratricidal conflicts,
came together on 6 February, two weeks later, to
sign in Bangui the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
marking their determination to collectively meet the
challenges of their common destiny. The path that
Central Africans have taken, not only during the
Khartoum talks but at greater length over the past five
years, thanks to the invaluable support of the Security
Council, was not easy.
The signing on 6 February of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation was the culmination of
a long process. After a difficult transition that was
crowned by the return to constitutional order, new
legitimate and democratic institutions have been in
place since 30 March 2016. Together we have patiently
contributed day after day to creating the conditions
for the gradual strengthening of State authority,
facilitated the launching of the national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme and
supported security sector reform through support for
the administration of justice, the fight against impunity
and the progressive deployment of State security agents
in the 16 prefectures, and defence and internal security
forces. At the local level, peace and reconciliation
agreements have helped to reduce the level of violence,
while territorial integrity and republican institutions
have been preserved and strengthened at the national
level. Those multifaceted, joint efforts of the
19-05011

21/02/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

Government, MINUSCA and all partners in the Central
African Republic have paved the way for a gradual
return to a certain normalcy.
The Government and the people of the Central
African Republic, thanks to the commitment of
President Touadera, signed on 6 February a peace
agreement that, with the tireless support of the Security
Council, could mark a turning point in the history of
the country. although the dangers remain numerous.
I stress that the agreement differs in several respects
from the previous agreements signed in the Central
African Republic.
First, it reaffirms from the outset the commitment
of the signatory parties to fundamental principles,
especially those derived from the country’s
Constitution, and it was sought and signed by a
legitimate Government. Secondly, the Central African
Government and the armed groups — the signatory
parties — have, by undertaking concrete commitments,
called on their fellow citizens, the region and the world
to bear witness. In addition, the implementation of these
commitments will be supervised by a certain number
of inclusive monitoring mechanisms involving all
forces in the country, including civil society, political
parties, parliamentarians, women’s organizations and
young people, as well as representatives of religious
denominations. Their deliberations will focus on
security, political and legal issues at the national,
prefectural and local levels. Presidential decrees
establishing these mechanisms have already been
published. The agreement also reflects the African
Union’s commitment to silencing the guns on the
African continent.
Importantly, the 6 February agreement reinforces
the Secretary-General’s vision of the primacy of politics
that must underpin any peace operation. In that spirit,
the 6 February agreement clearly expresses the desire
of Central Africans to renew their social contract, to
reaffirm their deep desire to live together and in peace
in their rich diversity, to ease tensions and to create
the conditions for their country’s recovery on more
solid bases — a country where the use of violence as
an instrument of conquest or the preservation of power
will be banned forever.
Thus, the success of the 6 February political
accord is first and foremost the expression of a deep
desire of the Central African nation to regain control
of its destiny in equity, justice and reconciliation and

S/PV. 8467

with due compensation to the victims. This success,
however, is also the culmination of a long process led
by the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic and supported by
the United Nations. In that regard, I commend the
commitment of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, to the cause of
peace in Africa and in the Central African Republic in
particular. I reiterate my gratitude and congratulations
to the African Union Commissioner Peace and Security,
Ambassador Smaïl Chergui — who is here with us
today — for having deftly and resolutely facilitated
the Khartoum dialogue, in close collaboration with the
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, JeanPierre Lacroix, testifying to the fruitful and fruitful
strategic partnership between the African Union and
the United Nations. It was a great privilege for my team
and me to contribute, alongside them, to the success of
the dialogue among Central Africans.
I would also like to acknowledge the role of the
countries of the region, which, in the framework of the
panel of facilitators of the African Initiative for Peace
and Reconciliation — to whom I pay a well-deserved
tribute — have made an important contribution to
the preparatory phase of the dialogue. Lastly, let me
commend the contribution of the Government and
the people of the Sudan for their investment and the
generous welcome they offered to all participants. My
thanks also go to all the other partners, near and far,
who played a discrete but decisive role towards the
successful conclusion of the peace talks.
While we rightly welcome the fact that our
multifaceted efforts have allowed this important
political advance in the Central African Republic,
we must remain clear-eyed and vigilant because the
situation is still serious. The unbearable situation of
displaced people and refugees — a reflection of the
precarious humanitarian situation — the scenes of
senseless violence and the numerous victims remind us
painfully of that fact. All of us know — the Central
Africans surely better than anyone — that through the
signing of the agreement the country has taken just
one step. It is a necessary and decisive step, certainly,
but only one step. The hardest remains indeed to
come. The real test will be in the full and good faith
implementation of the agreement. I solemnly appeal to
all parties to scrupulously honour all the commitments
made under the agreement. I urge them not to betray
their word and the trust placed in them by the Central

19-050113/31

S/PV.8467

The situation in the Central African Republic

African people and all those who supported them in
the peace process. Less than two years before the next
elections, whose organization will require substantial
support to consolidate the entrenchment of democracy,
the country has a real opportunity to turn its back on its
painful history once and for all.
I express the hope that, faced with differences
that are inevitable in the process of implementing any
peace agreement, the highest interests of the Central
African people and their legitimate aspiration to live in
peace will always be safeguarded in order to guarantee
strict compliance with the agreement. I urge the
parties to always favour dialogue in order to sustain
the new political and social consensus promoted by
the 6 February agreement. It will also be incumbent on
the parties to promote national ownership of the peace
accord through strategic communications to raise
awareness of the content and scope of that important
agreement, because what is at stake is the future of
the entire Central African nation, which is entitled to
believe that the agreement heralds the dawn of a new era.
The role of the guarantors, especially the neighbouring
countries and the region, and that of the facilitators will
be decisive for the full realization of the agreement.
The support of all partners will be equally essential.
In that regard, the recent visit to Bangui by the
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador
Omar Hilale, accompanied by Assistant SecretaryGeneral Bintou Keita and Under-Secretary-General
Oscar Fernández-Taranco, was most timely. I thank
them very much and have no doubt that the analyses
and recommendations they will make will be a major
contribution to the indispensable effort to realign the
targeted assistance that will be needed urgently to
facilitate the implementation of the agreement and,
more broadly, accelerate the recovery of the country
through the realization of its strategic plan, the National
Strategy for Recovery and Peace Consolidation. I
welcome the joint initiative of the United Nations and
the African Union to hold a meeting of the International
Support Group on the Central African Republic as soon
as tomorrow, because time is running out and we will
have to remain engaged and to act quickly and in a
concerted manner.
Finally, our faith remains strong that the Council
will provide the necessary political support for the
agreement and continue to support both the Government
and democratic institutions of the Central African
4/31

21/02/2019

Republic and the work of MINUSCA, in particular
its new Head, my successor, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye,
whom I fraternally greet and wish every success in his
noble mission.
(spoke in English)
Allow me to conclude with a few words
to commemorate our fallen heroes. Too many
peacekeepers have paid the ultimate sacrifice for peace
to begin to take root in the Central African Republic.
These peacekeepers gave their lives to help assist,
protect and comfort the Central African people and
support the country’s young democratic institutions
when they were under threat. Let us not doubt the
value of their sacrifice, the criticality of our presence
or the value of our contribution. Today, as the shadow
of violence begins to lift, the people of the Central
African Republic are growing more confident in their
ability to bend the arc of their volatile history in a new
direction. By turning their grievances into a powerful
transformative force, they have new reason to hope for
a brighter future.
The unified political support of the Council, the
countries of the region and the international community
will remain critical to the successful implementation of
the 6 February peace agreement. Never before has the
support of the international community and the region
been so vital for the Government and the people of
the Central African Republic. I have no doubt that, as
they do their part, taking full ownership of the peace
process, they can continue to count on the Security
Council’s unflagging backing.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chergui.
Mr. Chergui (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank you, Madam President, for the
opportunity to speak today to the Security Council and
to congratulate you, on behalf of the African Union,
on the way in which the sisterly Republic of Equatorial
Guinea is presiding over the work of the Council
this month.
As I am speaking after my brother, Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, I am not going to rehash a number of
the relevant elements and analyses that he has already
shared with the Council. However, I would like to begin
by stressing the importance of the result achieved in
Bangui on 6 February. It is the perfect expression of
19-05011

21/02/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union and should, we believe, be extended to
all the crises on the continent. Indeed, alongside my
friend Jean-Pierre Lacroix, we have undertaken to
make this year the year of peace and stability in the
Central African Republic.
We wanted the first act of the new year to visit
Bangui and hold interviews there, from 8 to 11 January.
Those interviews allowed us to establish that there is
fertile ground for bringing together all the protagonists
in the crisis. We were also pleased by the Sudan’s
offer to host those negotiations. The negotiations were
conducted by the African Union and I was honoured to
be the mediator, with the active support of Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga and the entire United
Nations team. I pay them sustained and heartfelt tribute
for their work during that exercise, which, as I am sure
the Council is aware, was not an easy one.
We met in Khartoum from 24 January to 5 February.
For the first time, the Government was able to meet
the 14 armed groups face to face and address the deeprooted causes of the crisis in a calm and responsible way.
The Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic reflects that approach
in so far that we did not set aside any issue that we felt
might be at the root of the very serious situation in the
Central African Republic — be it a question of justice,
fair distribution of national wealth, inclusivity in all
State institutions or even the claim of some that they
were compelled to drink the water set aside for animals
in some regions of the country. What more powerful
message could we hear from those suffered and sought
to explain how they had arrived at the situation in which
they found themselves?
We therefore felt the weight of responsibility in
trying to lead the country towards a different situation.
That was why we took the approach we did in relation to
previous agreements. We decided to address all of these
different aspects not only in a responsible way, but also
in a way that was clearly established in the agreement.
We also decided to establish a solid follow-up process
on three levels so that the protagonists would be able
to fulfil the commitments they had taken on. From the
beginning of the negotiations until now, we have been
pleased to see the cessation of hostilities respected by
everybody. I think that is a very positive signal that
should encourage us to move forward.

S/PV. 8467

The Council will see that we also have security
provisions in the agreement. We have tried to be
innovative in order to transform those who bear
weapons today into people who will serve the security
of the country’s institutions. In that regard, there are
provisions which we would like to see included in
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), which has done a remarkable
job so far. I thank and congratulate once again the Head
of the Mission, who is in attendance at this meeting, for
the work that has been done and the sacrifices that have
been made. I also associate myself with the tribute to
those who have paid the highest price for the stability
and security of the country.
We will therefore require the support of the Council
to adopt the MINUSCA mandate, as I would not like to
see analogous situations arise on the ground tomorrow.
We want the work of the Mission’s specialized units to
fall under the authority of the Government, as well as
under the direct and daily control of MINUSCA so as to
avoid any unnecessary incident on the ground. In that
regard, I thank President Touadera for the measures
that he has just taken in signing executive orders and
implementing certain provisions of the agreement. I
believe that his commitment is to be welcomed. We are
in almost daily contact with the Government, as well
as with all the armed groups, so as to ensure not only
that the ceasefire is respected, but also that the parties
honour the agreement.
Once again, I thank and welcome the commitment
of the countries of the region. It is an additional aspect
that makes this agreement different from those of
the past. If, for example, we seek to implement the
provisions related to transhumance and all the ensuing
problems in the area of security, I believe that we cannot
do so without the countries of the region. I therefore
commend the commitment of each Head of State who,
in Addis Ababa, officially and solemnly provided their
signatures to support the agreement and express their
readiness to re-establish the respective bilateral mixed
commissions of their countries with the Central African
Republic. I believe that such very important elements
will help us move forward to implement the Agreement.
We are under no illusions. Clearly, the entire
approach will remain insufficient if the friends and
partners of the brotherly country of the Central African
Republic fail to pool their efforts in response to what I
believe to be most important, as the real work will begin

19-050115/31

S/PV.8467

The situation in the Central African Republic

now that the agreement has been signed. The question
is how to respond to the needs of those in certain parts
of the country that, as I said earlier, are unfamiliar with
civilization, including roads, health care or hospitals.
To that end, I solemnly call on the Security Council
and all regional friends of the Central African Republic
to help us, starting tomorrow. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and
myself took the initiative to gather all the partners of
the Central African Republic here in New York so as
to open the way towards facilitating the means to act
immediately — I repeat, immediately — to implement
the agreement and, above all, to provide hope. Given the
level of suffering and the very difficult humanitarian
situation in the country, I believe that hope is the
word of the day. We must give hope and demonstrate
our solidarity with the brotherly people of the Central
African Republic.
I will not expand further because, as I said earlier,
my brother Parfait Onanga-Anyanga has already
expounded upon the guiding principles of agreement,
chief among which is the need to respect the territorial
integrity and the unity of the country and to shield
it from all ethnic, religious or other clashes so that it
can move forward in solidarity and confront its major
enemy, which is poverty and the lack of development.
It is important for the Council to stress the need for
the comprehensive and genuine implementation of the
agreement, but I would like to conclude by underscoring
that, in a way, the peace agreement is the successful
result of multilateralism and the renewed resolve of the
United Nations and African Union leadership to weigh
in together and in solidarity to silence the guns and
foster dialogue and reconciliation. To that end, we need
the support of the Security Council now more than ever.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Chergui for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Hilale.
Mr. Hilale (spoke in French): At the outset, on
behalf of the Peacebuilding Commission, in my capacity
as Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
I thank the members of the Security Council for having
invited me to brief the Security Council on my visit to
Bangui from 13 to 15 February. A detailed report of
that visit was sent to members this morning.
I take this opportunity to commend Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
6/31

21/02/2019

and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), on his detailed briefing on the
situation in the Central African Republic and to warmly
thank him and his entire team for their welcome and
support during our visit. I also commend all the other
speakers for their statements and would ask the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic
to convey to His Excellency President Touadera
our heartfelt thanks for the welcome we received in
their country.
My fourth visit to the country in my capacity as Chair
of the Central African Republic configuration stands
out from previous visits. I had the pleasure of being
accompanied this time by Assistant Secretary-General
for Africa Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacebuilding Support Oscar Fernández-Taranco and
their respective teams, as well as the representatives of
several members of the configuration, namely, China,
the Republic of Korea, France, Italy and Russia. Our
diverse delegation enjoyed the benefit of being able
to send a strong message conveying the unflagging
commitment of the international community in support
of the Central African Republic to all our interlocutors
in Bangui.
The visit took place the day after the signing of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic between the Central African
Government and the 14 armed groups in Bangui on
6 February. The Agreement, described as historic, is a
first step towards the restoration of peace and stability
in the country. It offers a unique window of opportunity
to end the conflict, which has lasted too long, and lays
the foundations for a truly inclusive reconstruction of
the country.
During the audience that he accorded to our
delegation, His Excellency Mr. Archange Touadera,
President of the Central African Republic, informed
us of his personal commitment and determination to
spare no effort in swiftly implementing the provisions
of the Agreement. Aware of the enormous difficulties
and expectations of the population, he appealed to the
international community to support the implementation
of the Agreement. The President also expressed his
wish that the Security Council adjust the mandate of
MINUSCA to allow adequate support for the Mission,
in particular the deployment of joint patrols.
19-05011

21/02/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

The same determination and willingness to be
part of the peace process was demonstrated by all the
Central African authorities, including the President
of the National Assembly as well as the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs, Justice and Planning.
In addition, during in its exchanges with
representatives of civil society, in particular women
and young people, the delegation sensed a strong desire
for peace and justice, as well as tremendous hope for a
better future. Such aspirations underline the importance
not only of strong symbolic acts in the coming days and
weeks but also of actions that will enable the population
to have a lasting benefit from the peace dividends in the
very short term.
During our exchanges with the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund, they informed us
that they had significantly increased their involvement
in the country, in particular in the context of the
implementation of the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan (RCPCA). The delegation also met
with the United Nations country team and humanitarian
actors. All the representatives present responded
positively to my appeal encouraging them to step up
their efforts in carrying out their respective mandates
despite the very difficult working conditions. However,
they emphasized that the support necessary for the
implementation of the peace agreement would require
additional funding to be made available quickly.

S/PV. 8467

The talks allowed us to note a certain momentum,
strengthened by the signing of the Agreement.
While $2.6 billion had been announced at the
Brussels Conference for the Central African Republic,
the implementation rate of ongoing projects for which
funding had already been obtained was only 16 per
cent in 2017. That rate significantly increased to reach
54 per cent in 2018, demonstrating that the accelerated
implementation of the RCPCA is well and truly
under way.
On the justice front, we were pleased to see progress
on the reform of the justice and corrections sector.
The main donors have informed us that the justice
sector policy being developed will be an essential
step in guiding their priorities for action. Despite that
progress, there are ongoing financial needs that require
the sustained attention of the international community,
in particular for the establishment of the truth, justice,
reconciliation and reparation commission and a trust
fund for victims, as provided for in the peace agreement.
With regard to support for the upcoming elections,
the configuration will continue to mobilize the
international community to ensure a free, transparent
and inclusive election that can free the Central African
Republic from the cycle of instability and violence and
start the recovery on a democratic basis, as was the case
with the last elections.

In that regard, following the launch of the 2019
humanitarian response plan for the Central African
Republic on 7 January and given the prevailing
humanitarian emergency in the country, in my capacity
as President of the humanitarian affairs segment of
the United Nations Economic and Social Council, I
extended an invitation to the President of the Central
African Republic to participate in the annual highlevel meeting of that organ, to be held in Geneva in
June. President Touadera’s participation will provide
the ideal opportunity to advocate the Central African
Republic’s cause, particularly with regard to its
humanitarian needs.

Finally, on the way to Bangui, I made a stopover
in Paris to meet the senior officials of the International
Organization of la Francophonie (OIF). I called on them
to work for the implementation of the peace agreement
and to strengthen their support for the Central
African Republic. I intend to soon contact Ms. Louise
Mushikiwabo, Secretary-General of the OIF, to seek the
support of her organization for trilateral cooperation
regarding the Central African Republic, in particular to
mobilize the human resources potential of the Central
African diaspora and other francophone expertise to
support the country in implementing the RCPCA and,
ultimately, to strengthen the implementation of the
peace agreement.

The improvement of the security situation, as well
as the redeployment of State authority throughout the
entire territory, will allow all those stakeholders to
become more involved in the recovery of the country
and the implementation of the peace agreement. The
delegation was also able to discuss the implementation
of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan.

Allow me now to share the main observations that
emerged from our visit to Bangui. First, the Central
African Republic needs the support and assistance
of the Security Council more than ever. Government
officials and the population expect a strong commitment
to implementing and supporting the Agreement, in
particular since the window of opportunity created by

19-050117/31

S/PV.8467

The situation in the Central African Republic

its signing is likely to quickly close due to the upcoming
presidential and legislative elections of 2020-2021.
Secondly, MINUSCA must be able to communicate
rapidly on the actions that it intends to undertake in
support of the Agreement and must continue its efforts
to raise awareness among the various political and
community stakeholders in support of the Central
African authorities. The latter, at the highest level, also
expressed their desire to see MINUSCA fully support
the implementation of the Agreement, in particular the
deployment of joint patrols.

21/02/2019

leading a multidimensional mission that faced
many challenges. His seriousness, self-sacrifice and
frankness, which is always constructive, have enabled
him to successfully meet many of those challenges. He
can leave Bangui with a sense of accomplishment.
My tribute also goes to the Deputy Special
Representative, Ms. Najat Rochdi, who during her tenure
has consistently drawn attention to the humanitarian
situation in the country and worked tirelessly for better
coordination and complementarity between the country
team and MINUSCA.

Thirdly, communication on the content and the
challenges of the Agreement is very important and
will be crucial to its success. An urgent first step will
be to translate the Agreement into Sango, the national
language, in order to facilitate the people’s ownership
of the document. In addition, better communication
on the Agreement will help to prevent rumours from
spreading about its content.

Lastly, the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, takes over
the leadership of MINUSCA at a pivotal moment for
the country’s future. With his extensive experience,
Mr. Ndiaye will be able to count on a strong and
competent management team within MINUSCA. He
will also be able to count on my full support, as well as
that of all the members of the configuration.

Fourthly, the partners of the Central African
Republic are urged to show flexibility and adaptability
in executing their programmes, since without the
rapid disbursement of funds, the implementation of
the Agreement, in particular its economic component,
could be jeopardized and deprive the population of the
long-awaited peace dividends.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Hilale for his briefing.

Fifthly, neighbouring countries are called on more
than ever to support and assist the Central African
Republic in implementing the peace agreement. They
participated constructively in the talks in Khartoum and
are part of the solution in getting the Central African
Republic out of the crisis. That indispensable support
was also raised by the President of the Republic, who
made it one of the conditions for the success of the
Agreement. Their commitment will be decisive.
Sixthly, MINUSCA is not intended to remain
in the Central African Republic indefinitely. It
is therefore conceivable that tailored and, as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General said,
targeted assistance towards implementing the peace
agreement would help it to fulfil its mandate, thereby
strengthening the exit strategy for peace operation so
strongly supported within the Security Council.
Finally, in conclusion, I would like to pay a warm
tribute to Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, who arrived in
the Central African Republic under difficult conditions,
8/31

I now give the floor to Mr. Vervaeke.
Mr. Vervaeke: I am honoured to brief the Security
Council on behalf of the European Union (EU), in the
presence of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, as well as African
Union Commissioner Smaïl Chergui and Ambassador
Omar Hilale.
The Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, which
was signed on 6 February in Bangui, is a genuine
chance for the recovery of the country from an
enduring crisis. We are hopeful because the agreement
starts with the right foundation, based on the Libreville
road map, while respecting the primacy of the rule
of law, following the recommendations of the Bangui
Forum on National Reconciliation, recognizing the
democratically elected institutions and putting at its
centre the fight against impunity and promoting justice
as a means of achieving national reconciliation. There is
also a follow-up mechanism, and sanctions are foreseen
in the case of violations of the agreement.
Throughout the process, the European Union lent
its full political support and expertise to make the peace
agreement happen. I would like first to express our
particular thanks to the African Union. From the outset,
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the
19-05011

21/02/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

Central African Republic has been the only framework
for the European Union, and it has delivered. Most
important were the tireless efforts and leadership of
Commissioner Chergui. His commitment was essential
for a successful outcome of the negotiations. Let me
also praise the leadership of the Central African
Republic — the country itself. President Touadera’s
vision and ownership made the difference. Lastly,
I would like to say a very special word to the United
Nations, and in particular to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Parfait Onanga-Anyanga
for his strong personal commitment to peace in the
Central African Republic and the indispensable role he
played in leading the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) over the past years.
It has been said that the peace agreement is a major
achievement. It opens a new chapter. Its implementation
is first and foremost the joint responsibility of its
signatories. But there is no reason to sit back. We
collectively need to engage more, not less. We, the
European Union, are mindful of our responsibility to
help the country achieve lasting peace and stability.
The first priority, in our view, is to rapidly put in
place the follow-up mechanisms. All Central African
Republic actors will need to be genuinely committed. We
are pleased to see that President Touadera has already
launched concrete steps in that regard. Winning the
people’s hearts and minds will be essential. Spreading
the word on the ground about the peace agreement
should therefore be another urgent priority.
Inclusiveness will also be central for the success of
the agreement, including making the Government more
inclusive and reflecting the various strands of society
and the country. Likewise, the National Assembly and
civil society will have a key role to play, notably in
giving a voice to victims, youth and women. Similarly,
justice and reconciliation require attention. Work needs
to rapidly take shape at both the national and local
levels, be it with the temporary inclusive justice and
reconciliation commission foreseen by the agreement,
the upcoming commission on truth, justice, reparation
and reconciliation or the local peace committees.
On the security side, which was already
mentioned, the mixed units can play a useful role as
a confidence-building measure, under the command of
national defence, with a clear mandate and specifically
marked geographic areas of operation, like the

S/PV. 8467

transhumance corridors. They will require vetting and
monitoring, and their establishment should be compliant
with the principles and the spirit of the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration process.
But the peace agreement should not let us forget
that the situation on the ground, as it still prevails today,
demonstrates the structural weakness of the State,
fragility and instability, together with a severe and
protracted humanitarian crisis. That will not disappear
overnight, as Special Representative Onanga-Anyanga
reminded us. That is where the European Union remains
committed, and it will continue to play its role during
the implementation of the agreement. We are currently
already looking at ways and means to sustain, and even
increase, our support. Tomorrow, at the special meeting
of partners in New York, we will play our role. Our
priorities are in the following sectors.
First, reforming the security sector remains a
top priority. The European Union Military Training
Mission, which is 200-staff members strong, will
continue to play the leading role in defence sector
reform, for which it has been given a mandate. Upon
the request of the Government, we are expanding the
Mission to also include a civilian element. The Mission
will continue to work hand in hand with MINUSCA,
which provides the umbrella for the deployment of
European Union-trained Forces armées centrafricaines.
Secondly, we will continue to support the
Government with regard to the redeployment of State
authority at the local level, which is indispensable for
its functioning and the delivery of social services to the
population. Under the Bêkou trust fund, which we set up,
in total, €240 million is currently being implemented.
We are working on a €50-million extension, as well
as potential additional support from our EU member
States. Those actions provide social services and
infrastructure that help in the reconciliation and
development of communities, including through labourintensive projects.
Finally, let me also stress that neighbours and
countries in the region will have an important role to play.
Their engagement with the Central African Republic
remains essential to achieve regional stability. In that
regard, the relaunch of bilateral joint commissions,
notably on transhumance, security and cross-border
issues, will contribute to a secure framework.
The true challenges of the peace agreement are
political, and not necessarily a question of additional

19-050119/31

S/PV.8467

The situation in the Central African Republic

budgets, however important they might be. The
European Union and the Central African Republic will
continue to work very closely in political dialogue. We
will also expand our dialogue with our partners in the
region in support of the peace agreement.
Let me end by reassuring the Council that the
European Union will continue to work with all partners
in the African Union, the United Nations and the region.
At a time of a unique opportunity to help the Central
African Republic emerge from its difficult history,
we will maintain, or even increase, our substantial
engagement. Together with the Government and the
parties to the agreement, with a strong civil society and
along with the neighbours in the region, we can make
the peace agreement the basis for a better future for the
Central African Republic. The European Union is fully
committed to that.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Vervaeke for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Ipo.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to express the regrets of Ambassador
Adom, Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013), for
being unable to attend today’s meeting. I will make this
statement on his behalf.
“I have the honour to address the members
of the Security Council in my capacity as Chair
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the
Central African Republic, to review the activities
of the Committee since my previous briefing to the
Council, on 23 October 2018 (see S/PV.8378).
“During 2018, the Central African Republic
saw some encouraging changes, including the
signing of the peace agreement between the
Government and 14 armed groups, thanks to the
sustained efforts of the African Union through the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic, supported by the
United Nations and other regional and international
actors. The Committee is committed to providing
all possible support within its mandate to ensure
the implementation of this Agreement, as well
as compliance with its provisions by the Central
African Republic’s stakeholders, including, where
10/31

21/02/2019

appropriate, through the Security Council measures
mentioned in the peace agreement.
“As we all know, given the current context, the
level of violence in the Central African Republic has
not decreased. The number of internally displaced
persons and refugees continues to increase, and
civilians, peacekeepers and humanitarian workers
have been regularly attacked by destructive armed
groups that are guilty of acts subject to sanctions.
“Since my previous briefing to the Council,
in October 2018, the Committee has held four
meetings: on 12 November and 7 December 2018
and on 21 and 29 January 2019. The Committee
also intends to meet on 22 February to discuss the
Panel of Expert’s findings. Press releases on these
meetings are available on the Committee’s website.
“The Committee held these meetings with the
aim of advancing the implementation of sanctions
and working more closely with key partners and
stakeholders. On 12 November, I convened a
meeting of the Committee to present the report of
my visit to the Central African Republic from 2 to
5 October 2018. This visit allowed me to continue
discussions with the Central African authorities
on a number of issues of importance to both the
Government and the Committee.
“As I indicated in my report, one of the main
concerns of the Central African Government is the
arms embargo imposed on it and which it demands
be lifted. This point was raised by the President and
the Prime Minister and by others we met, including
representatives of civil society. In essence, these
representatives requested that the import of arms
and related materiel by the Government should no
longer be subject to the Committee’s approval.
“I have taken the opportunity of my meetings
with members of the Government to express to them
the concerns raised by the relevant actors about the
Central African Republic’s difficulties in ensuring
the proper management of arms and ammunition on
its territory, and the fact that the lifting of the arms
embargo could facilitate the proliferation of arms
in the country. I also discussed with the national
authorities the applicable exemption procedures
and visited the capital’s weapons and ammunition
storage sites to get an idea of the country’s current
arms management efforts.
19-05011

21/02/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

“On 7 December 2018, I held informal
consultations of the Committee to discuss the final
report of the Panel of Experts before it was sent
to the President of the Council on 14 December
and issued as a Council document (S/2018/1119).
During the meeting, the Panel of Experts provided
an overview of its report and informed the
Committee of developments since its issuance.
While welcoming the African Union Initiative,
the Panel expressed concern about the continuing
violence and violations of the sanctions regime
in the Central African Republic. The Panel also
reported that armed groups continue to benefit from
the country’s natural resources, and that livestock
transhumance and trade play a central role in the
financing strategies of some of these groups.
“On 21 January, at the request of the Central
African authorities, I convened a meeting of the
Committee from Bangui by video tele-conference
to discuss concerns regarding the arms embargo
with a Central African delegation led by the
Minister of Defence. During that meeting,
Government
representatives
informed
the
Committee of the challenges that the arms embargo
created for the country, highlighted the progress
made in the management of arms and ammunition,
and reiterated their call for the Government to be
exempted from the arms embargo in order to protect
the population. The members of the Committee
welcomed the progress announced by the Central
African Republic, which delegations took into
account in the preparations for the negotiations on
the renewal of the sanctions regime by the members
of the Security Council.
“As Council members know, the Council took
action in this regard by adopting, on 31 January,
resolution 2454 (2019), in which it expressed,
for example, its intention to review, before
30 September 2019, the arms embargo measures
imposed on the Government of the Central African
Republic, in the light of the benchmarks to be
defined and the assessments that will be conducted.
“Finally, on 29 January, in accordance with
established practice to strengthen cooperation
with States in the region, I invited them, together
with all other interested States, to a briefing of
the Committee on the final report of the Panel of
Experts. During the meeting, the Coordinator of
the Panel of Experts presented an overview of the

S/PV. 8467

report and its recommendations, and the States
present expressed their views.
“In conclusion, I announce my intention to
visit the Central African Republic again this
year in order to engage directly in a frank and
open dialogue with the relevant interlocutors on
the ground, to communicate the importance of
full implementation of sanctions, to stress that
any sanctions regime should be reviewed and
adapted periodically, according to the situation
on the ground, and to define the applicable
exemption procedures.”
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Ipo for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Equatorial Guinean presidency for organizing today’s
meeting, which comes at a particularly important
time for the Central African Republic, two weeks
after the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
on 6 February. I would also like to extend a special
welcome to the important and appreciated presence of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Central Africans
Abroad of the Central African Republic, and thank all
our speakers for their very informative briefings.
I would also like to express our warm and
heartfelt thanks to Special Representative Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga for his exemplary and multifaceted
commitment to the outstanding work he has done for
nearly three and a half years at the helm of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
On behalf of France, I would like to express to him our
deep gratitude. Allow me also to express our gratitude
to Commissioner Smaïl Chergui, not only for his
presence here today but for his important contribution
to the conclusion of the peace agreement.
France welcomes the signing of the peace agreement
between the Central African Government and the 14
armed groups in Bangui on 6 February after two weeks
of negotiations in Khartoum within the framework of
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation,
under the auspices of the African Union and with the
support of the United Nations. This Agreement is an
important step towards lasting peace in the Central

19-0501111/31

S/PV.8467

The situation in the Central African Republic

African Republic and the restoration of State authority
throughout the Central African Republic. In other words,
this agreement can and must mark a new beginning for
the Central African Republic. In this context, France
welcomes the commitment of the Central African
parties to the negotiations, and commends the decisive
role played by the African Union and the United Nations,
whose exemplary partnership has once again proved its
full effectiveness, as well as the support provided by
the countries of the region.
We are already hearing sceptics claiming that
many other agreements have already gone unheeded.
But the main difference with the other agreements is
the unanimous commitment of the Central African
actors and the Central African Republic’s partners in
support of the agreement. The political will is there; it
is strong, and it is a tremendous reason for hope, even
if it is obviously not a question of underestimating
the difficulties that remain on the way ahead. The
challenge of the coming period is therefore to seize this
historic opportunity.
The signing of this peace agreement is a decisive
first step on the road to peace. All efforts must now
focus on its full implementation. That is why it is
essential for Central African parties, and in particular
the armed groups, to honour their commitments
immediately and in good faith. We see three immediate
priorities in that regard.
The first test will be ending the violence committed
by armed groups against civilians, humanitarian
personnel and MINUSCA. The abuses committed by
armed groups since last October, which have left more
than 100 people dead in Alindao, Bakouma and Ippy,
are unacceptable. The attacks against the Central
African defence and security forces and MINUSCA in
Bambari, during which French forces were compelled
to use force at the request of the United Nations, are
also unjustifiable. Armed groups must therefore lay
down their weapons, cease all forms of destabilizing
activities, including the recruitment and use of children,
and be held accountable for violence, including sexual
violence, before the courts, in particular the Special
Criminal Court. In that regard, I welcome cooperation
between the Central African Republic and the
International Criminal Court.
We also hope that the implementation of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic will make it possible to
12/31

21/02/2019

meet the aspirations expressed by the Central African
people at the Bangui Forum in May 2015, in particular
with regard to demands for justice, inclusiveness and
national reconciliation. We welcome the commitments
made by President Touadera and the establishment
of a mechanism to monitor the implementation of the
agreement at the national and local levels, which is
an important innovation compared to previous peace
agreements signed in the Central African Republic.
It is essential — and I would like to underscore this
point — that women be able to participate fully.
Lastly, the role of the international community in
supporting the implementation of the agreement will be
decisive, politically, financially and technically. France
reiterates its full support for President Faustin-Archange
Touadera and will remain fully committed, alongside
the Central African Republic, to supporting the
implementation of the agreement. In that regard, France
has decided to increase its bilateral aid contributions
to the Central African Republic, including through the
funding of quick-impact projects for the benefit of the
people in Central Africa. It essential that the people
concerned quickly see some initial tangible benefits of
the new peace agreement. It is vital that the countries of
the region support and assist with the implementation of
the agreement. Finally, it is absolutely necessary for all
partners of the Central African Republic to coordinate
their actions on the ground and act in a transparent
manner to ensure that peace is achieved.
Before concluding my statement, I would like to
reiterate France’s full support for MINUSCA and confirm
our full support to the new Special Representative,
Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, as he carries out his important
mandate. As we all know, MINUSCA operates in a
difficult environment. That is another reason for us to
be committed to supporting it and providing it with the
necessary means to conduct its mission, as it plays an
indispensable role in stabilizing the Central African
Republic — in particular with regard to the protection
of civilians, support for the delivery of humanitarian
aid and support for the redeployment of the Central
African Armed Forces, trained by the European Union
Military Training Mission in the Central African
Republic. I would again like to commend the work and
central role played by the Mission in supporting security
sector reform. The involvement of MINUSCA will also
be decisive, alongside other partners of the Central
African Republic, in supporting the implementation of
the peace agreement.
19-05011

21/02/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

Lastly, I would like to pay tribute to the Blue Helmets
who have paid a heavy price for their commitment
to the Central African Republic and commend all of
the efforts undertaken by MINUSCA to increase its
mobility, improve its operational performance, seek the
full safety of its personnel through effective medical
evacuation capabilities but also continue the work
undertaken to prevent cases of sexual exploitation and
abuse and ensure that they do not remain unpunished.
I would like to conclude my statement by
reiterating that it is important for the Council and for
the international community to remain mobilized and
united in support of the Central African Republic and
MINUSCA. That is the compass that guides France and
that must guide each Council member.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to extend a warm welcome to Foreign Minister
Baïpo-Temon. I thank Special Representative OnangaAnyanga for his briefing and, more important, for his
stewardship of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) over the past three and a half
challenging years. His leadership of MINUSCA during
some particularly difficult moments, especially leading
up to the historic presidential election, was enormously
valuable. The United States deeply appreciated his
consistent effort to make the most of MINUSCA’s
resources, his honesty in assessing the challenging
circumstances in the Central African Republic and his
positive and deeply respected leadership in the face of
many crises. We wish him the very best as he transitions
from Bangui.
I thank Commissioner Chergui for his briefing
today and for the African Union’s leadership over
the past month in Khartoum in facilitating efforts
and engagement that led to the 6 February Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Adom for his leadership as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2127 (2013) and Ambassador Hilale as
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission. as well as for their
insights into this particularly important moment in the
Central African Republic. I would also like to thank
Mr. Vervaeke.
Just over two months ago, as the Security Council
renewed MINUSCA’s mandate (see S/PV.8422), the

S/PV. 8467

Council was deeply concerned about the sustained
levels of violence and insecurity in the Central African
Republic and cautious about prospects for long-term
peace. Today the Central African Republic is just
more than two weeks beyond the signing of a peace
agreement between the Government and 14 armed
groups. The United States welcomes the efforts of
President Touadera and the authorities of the Central
African Republic, the commitment of the leaders of
the armed groups and the support of regional actors in
reaching the agreement. These conversations about the
future of the Central African Republic would have been
unimaginable just last year.
Nonetheless, the agreement is built on trust
and confidence — trust and confidence among the
signatories and the supporting actors in the agreement
and, most important, of the Central African people that
their leaders will finally put an end to cycles of horrific
violence that have plagued the Central African Republic
for far too long. Unfortunately, trust and confidence
have been in short supply over the past several years.
The Central African people are well aware that previous
peace agreements have failed to hold. The signatories
of the present agreement must fully implement its
content to earn the trust and confidence of the Central
African people.
The United States is deeply committed to supporting
the people of the Central African Republic as they work
to build a peaceful and prosperous future. In the past
several years, we have committed billions of dollars to
life-saving humanitarian assistance to help displaced
people and refugees build, rebuild and sustain their
lives; to capacity-building efforts, particularly in the
security and judicial sectors; and to the efforts of the
United Nations in support of the long-term peace and
stability of the Central African Republic. In particular,
we wish to highlight the important language in the
agreement pertaining to justice and accountability. For
far too long, impunity has protected the perpetrators of
the horrors of the past several years. In our view, justice
and accountability are essential to achieving lasting
peace and stability in the Central African Republic. We
strongly support victims in seeking justice.
We commend the signatories to the agreement for
acknowledging the need for justice and accountability,
including the commitment to creating a commission on
truth, justice, reparation and reconciliation. We hope
such efforts will be built on an inclusive basis, like the
Bangui Forum. We also urge all parties to fully support

19-0501113/31

S/PV.8467

The situation in the Central African Republic

and cooperate with the Special Criminal Court. We are
grateful to now have on the Council South Africa, Côte
d’Ivoire and Peru — three countries that have had their
own truth and reconciliation commissions and know
the challenges of such an effort. We expect the Council
will gain from their experience and expertise as we
address the situation in the Central African Republic
going forward.
We look forward to working with other partners
as well to support the Government in keeping its
commitments under the peace agreement. We are under
no illusion that it will be a fast process for this path to
become easier, but it is the only path.
However, it will be essential that all partners uphold
high standards so as to avoid undermining peace and
security in the Central African Republic. In that context,
we are deeply disturbed by reports of torture carried
out by Central African troops and Russian trainers in
Bambari. This is completely unacceptable. We urge
the Central African authorities to investigate these
allegations and hold accountable those responsible,
as we have similarly called on them to investigate the
murders of three Russian journalists in August 2018.
Any international support for the Government of
the Central African Republic should be transparent,
well coordinated and consistent with the highest
standards of military conduct and the laws of the Central
African Republic, including respect for human rights
and a commitment to upholding them. It must also be
consistent with Member States’ obligations under the
Security Council sanctions regime concerning the
Central African Republic. We look forward to joining
tomorrow’s meeting with the United Nations, the
African Union, the Government of the Central African
Republic and other international partners to continue
the conversation on how to support the implementation
of the peace agreement.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome Ms. Sylvie Valérie Baïpo-Temon, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Central Africans Abroad of the
Central African Republic, to this meeting. I also thank
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General; Ambassador Chergui,
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security;
Ambassador Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa,
European External Action Service; Ambassador Hilale,
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission; and Ambassador
14/31

21/02/2019

Ipo, on behalf of the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013), concerning the Central African Republic, for
their briefings.
In the past month there have been breakthroughs
on the issue of the Central African Republic. After
more than two weeks of negotiations, all parties to
the conflict officially signed a Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic in Bangui on 6 February. China welcomes
this progress.
The peace agreement represents the political will
of all parties to the conflict. It is also the result of a
multi-stakeholder mediation process by the countries
of the region, including the Sudan, as well as the
African Union and the United Nations. It was not
easy to achieve. The Central African Republic still
faces difficult security, political and humanitarian
situations, resulting in many practical difficulties
in the implementation of the Agreement. All parties
must honour their commitments thereunder, translate
their political will into genuine action and effectively
promote the peace and reconciliation process in the
Central African Republic.
The follow-up monitoring mechanism must be
established as soon as possible. The countries of the
region and the international community must provide
support for the implementation of the Agreement.
China commends the important role played by
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) in the promotion of peace and stability
in the Central African Republic. We also support the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
MINUSCA in the active implementation of the Mission’s
mandate. China hopes that MINUSCA will continue
to contribute efforts to enhancing the administrative
capacity of the Government of the Central African
Republic, promoting security-sector reform and
implementing the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation programme.
The additional 900 military personnel authorized
by the Council are in place with special equipment
and are performing their duties well. We trust that
MINUSCA will take advantage of this window of
opportunity, continue to carry out its work on the
basis of its mandate and provide solid support for the
implementation of the Agreement.
19-05011

21/02/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

Long-term peace and stability in the Central
African Republic will not be possible without sustained
support from the United Nations, the African Union,
the countries of the region and international partners.
All parties must enhance their coordination with the
Government of the Central African Republic, respect
its leadership and, on the basis of the evolving situation
and the needs on the ground, provide tailored support.
The priority at this moment is to assist the country
in achieving peace and reconciliation. The Council
must remain united and create the conditions necessary
for the situation in the country to improve.
The imposition of sanctions on the Central African
Republic is aimed at restoring national stability and
social order in the country at an early date. Against that
backdrop, when the situation there improves, China will
support the Council in adjusting the relevant sanctions,
in line with the situation on the ground and the wishes
and needs of the Central African Republic.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the presence here of Ms. Sylvie
Valérie Baïpo-Temon, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Central Africans Abroad of the Central
African Republic.
Côte d’Ivoire congratulates Mr. Parfait OnangaAnyanga on his excellent briefing on the situation in
the Central African Republic, which will be the last in
his capacity as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Central African Republic and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA). My country takes this opportunity to
pay strong tribute to him for his commitment and the
excellent work that he has done as Head of MINUSCA,
as well as for his exemplary cooperation with the
authorities of the Central African Republic, which has
allowed for significant progress to be made in resolving
the crisis in the country.
My delegation also thanks Mr. Smaïl Chergui,
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security;
Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa,
European External Action Service; and Ambassador
Omar Hilale, Permanent Representative of Morocco
to the United Nations, in his capacity as the Chair
of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, for their
enlightening briefings.

S/PV. 8467

My delegation sees the signing on 6 February in
Bangui of the comprehensive Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic — also known as the Khartoum
Agreement — between the Government of the Central
African Republic and armed groups in the framework of
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation and
under the auspices of the African Union, as a genuine
source of hope for a lasting settlement of the conflict in
that country.
In that respect, my delegation welcomes the
leadership of the African Union, the decisive support
of the United Nations and the commitment of the
countries of the region, in particular the Sudan, regional
organizations and civil society, which made it possible
to reach this important agreement. The interest to
which it has given rise among the people of the country
gives us hope that this represents a major stride towards
national reconciliation. That is why Côte d’Ivoire calls
once again on all parties to abide by their commitments
in the effective implementation of the provisions of the
Agreement, with a view to bringing about lasting peace
and stability in the Central African Republic.
My country believes that the spirit of transparency
and inclusivity that characterized the negotiations
on the Agreement must continue throughout its
implementation. In that respect, proper ownership of
the Agreement by all components of the Central African
Republic Society is necessary.
My delegation would like to remind parties that
the success of the Khartoum Agreement will require
an effective end to all violence against peacekeepers,
humanitarian personnel and civilians, in particular
women and children. My country calls on the authorities
of the country to speed up the implementation of
the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
rehabilitation programme, which remains a key element
in the process of ending the crisis. It calls also for the
establishment of the follow-up mechanism for the
implementation of the Agreement, which should make it
possible to support the parties in the process of meeting
their commitments. It also hopes that the actions of
the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Reconciliation, whose establishment is stipulated in the
Agreement, will also promote lasting reconciliation in
the Central African Republic.
Given these favourable trends, my country urges
the international community to continue to support the

19-0501115/31

S/PV.8467

The situation in the Central African Republic

process of the complete restoration of State authority
throughout the territory of the Central African Republic
through the implementation of the relevant provisions
of resolutions 2448 (2018) and 2454 (2019).
Finally, my country calls on neighbouring countries
and international partners to support the implementation
of the peace agreement and to coordinate their efforts
to allow for the restoration of lasting peace and stability
in the Central African Republic.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
its support to President Touadera, his Government and
to the people of the Central African Republic in their
efforts to definitively end the crisis.
Finally, we congratulate Minister Mankeur Ndiaye
on his appointment to the post of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of MINUSCA and
pledge our full support to him in the discharge of
his mandate.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We are delighted,
Madam President, to see you presiding over today’s
Council meeting, all the more so that something
positive is coming from Africa, from your own region
of Central Africa.
At the outset, let me join others in thanking the
outgoing Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Central African Republic and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), Mr Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, and the
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security,
His Excellency Ambassador Smaïl Chergui, for
their comprehensive briefings. We also express our
appreciation to the Managing Director for Africa,
European External Action Service, Mr Koen Vervaeke.
Last but not least, we wish to thank the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013), Ambassador Ipo of Côte d’Ivoire,
as well as the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
Central African Republic configuration, the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations, our
friend His Excellency Ambassador Mr. Omar Hilale,
for their briefings and hard work.
I would also like to offer a special welcome to
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Central Africans
Abroad of the Central African Republic, Her Excellency
Ambassador Sylvie Valérie Baïpo-Temon, and to assure
her that she can count on the support of South Africa
16/31

21/02/2019

as she begins the journey towards a stable and peaceful
Central African Republic.
South Africa welcomes the signing of the new
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic on 6 February 2019, under
the framework of the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in Central African Republic. In that
regard, we would like to pay tribute to the President
of the Sudan, His Excellency Field Marshal Omer
Hassan A. Al-Bashir, and the President of Chad, His
Excellency Mr. Idriss Deby Itno, for their leadership
support and their role in the negotiations in assisting
Ambassador Chergui and his team in negotiating the
new peace agreement, thus contributing towards a
peaceful neighbourhood in the Central African region.
We further congratulate the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security for the role he
played in facilitating and overseeing the negotiations
with all relevant parties, including close cooperation
with the United Nations, especially the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, and Special Representative Onanga-Anyanga,
Head of MINUSCA, who contributed to enhanced
cooperation between the African Union and the
United Nations.
South Africa encourages all stakeholders,
including the Council, to fully support the peace and
national reconciliation agenda for restoring durable
peace, security and development to the Central African
Republic and to implement the above-mentioned
agreement. In that context, we welcome the efforts of
President of Côte d’Ivoire, His Excellency Mr. Alassane
Ouattara, towards the implementation of the agreement.
In our view, the peace and stability of the entire
Central Africa region are critical if we are to achieve
the Africa we want as outlined in the African Union’s
Agenda 2063. The recently held elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which were relatively
calm and peaceful, coupled with the determination of
the Central African Republic leadership during the
negotiation of the peace agreement, no doubt represent
very positive and welcome developments. The role of
the Council and relevant regional organizations is to
support the two countries in their path towards stability
and long-lasting peace.
We also note with concern, however, the dire
humanitarian situation in the Central African Republic,
with more than 25 per cent of the population internally
19-05011

21/02/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

displaced and millions of people in desperate need of
humanitarian assistance. We urge the international
community to support the ongoing efforts aimed at
addressing the desperate humanitarian situation in
the country.
South Africa wishes to underscore the importance
of implementing disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation, as well as security
sector reform. South Africa calls on MINUSCA to
continue to assist with the above and to develop quick
impact projects that would allow for the reintegration
of demobilized elements of rebel groups into Central
African Republic society.
South Africa supports the concerted efforts by the
international community, through the African Union,
the United Nations and regional and international
partners, to continue engaging in post-conflict
reconstruction and development efforts in the country,
in particular for the establishment of critical State and
institutional capacity in support of governance, judicial
and security sector reform.
We remain concerned about the ongoing targeted
violence by armed groups and criminal gangs
perpetrated against the vulnerable civilian population
in most parts of the Central African Republic. This is
giving rise to a climate of human rights violations and
a burgeoning humanitarian crisis that are of serious
concern to South Africa. The scale of the challenge
highlights the need for the Council to ensure that
adequate funding and resources from United Nations
assessed contributions is allocated to MINUSCA in the
fulfilment and expansion of its current mandate.
South Africa would like to emphasize the importance
of peacebuilding in order to ensure a sustainable peace
and to kick-start the Central African Republic economy,
which will prevent recourse to armed conflict. In that
regard, we call on the Ambassador Hilale and the
Peacebuilding Commission to coordinate its efforts
with the African Union, development partners and
regional mechanisms to support the post-conflict
reconstruction and development efforts, especially the
provision of basic services to the population.
South Africa stands ready to assist in moving
the peace process forward through the promotion of
reconciliation and supporting the road map, including
towards the holding of elections and preparation of
a new constitution. We aspire to a stable Central
African region.

S/PV. 8467

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
briefings provided by the various briefers this morning.
We would especially like to commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, for his outstanding role as leader of
MINUSCA for the past three and a half years, which
was an extraordinarily difficult period.
We are also grateful to the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, His Excellency
Ambassador Smaïl Chergui, for his prominent role
in the process of negotiating the important Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, which was recently concluded.
We are grateful as well to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Central Africans Abroad of the Central
African Republic, Her Excellency Ambassador Sylvie
Valérie Baïpo-Temon, who has honoured us with her
presence this morning.
Peru welcomes the recent progress made in the
political sphere, which we consider to be encouraging.
The signing of the peace agreement between the
Government of the Central African Republic and the 14
armed groups, as a result of the dialogues initiated in
Khartoum in January, is a sign of the determination of
the people of the Central Africans to put an end to the
more than five years of conflict in their country. It was
significant that members of political parties, religious
leaders, civil society, representatives of the victims of
the conflict, women and young people also participated
in the dialogues, since the process towards a sustainable
peace is only possible if all Central Africans take
ownership of the process.
At the same time, for the agreement to be
truly successful, its results should be reflected in
improvements in the security and socioeconomic
development of the country, as well as in the relief of the
grave humanitarian situation faced by its population.
The parties should now focus, without delays, on
the proper implementation and compliance with the
agreed commitments. The support of the international
community at this stage is fundamental. In that regard,
we would like to refer to some aspects that we consider
to be a priority in the implementation of the Political

19-0501117/31

S/PV.8467

The situation in the Central African Republic

Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic.
First,
the
disarmament,
demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation programme must be
accelerated, based on compliance by the armed groups
with the obligations assumed in the peace agreement.
That is linked to the redeployment of national defence
and internal security forces throughout the territory
of the Central African Republic. We consider it of
the utmost importance to strengthen the support that
MINUSCA, together with the international community,
has been providing in that area in order to allow for
the establishment of mixed brigades and the integration
of former members of armed groups into the national
defence forces.
Secondly, the scope of sustainable peace requires
institutions and capacities that guarantee access to
justice and accountability for the crimes committed
and, as a result, promote national reconciliation. To that
end, we underscore the need for the establishment of the
truth, justice, reconciliation and reparation commission,
which will all allow for, among other things, providing
assistance to victims of sexual violence and children
recruited by armed groups. We recognize the efforts of
the Central African authorities in the establishment and
operationalization of their national judicial institutions,
particularly the Special Criminal Court, as important
steps in the fight against impunity.
Thirdly, it is important to increase State presence
throughout the national territory. To that end, it will
be essential that the Government of the Central
African Republic work within a progressive process
of decentralization that contributes to energizing
the country’s development, thereby improving the
standard of living of the citizens. At the same time, it
will allow for the involvement of communities that are
marginalized by the conflict.
In conclusion, we would like to highlight the
work carried out by the African Union and the United
Nations in the search for a solution to the crisis in the
Central African Republic. The coming months will be
crucial. The international community should remain
vigilant as to the implementation of the agreement
and be involved in the monitoring mechanisms. For
our part, we will continue to support the authorities
and the people of the Central African Republic in their
efforts to entrench State authority and achieve peace
and national reconciliation.
18/31

21/02/2019

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I thank Special Representative OnangaAnyanga, Commissioner Chergui, Director General
for Africa of the European External Action Service
Vervaeke, and my colleagues Ambassador Ipo and
Ambassador Hilale. I also want to welcome the
presence here today of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Central Africans Abroad of the Central
African Republic.
The comprehensive Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
signed in Bangui on 6 February, is an opportunity that
must be seized. The report (S/2019/147) of the SecretaryGeneral reminds us of the urgent need to finally put
an end to the violence, restore the presence of the
State and create conditions for the return of displaced
persons. We commend all those who contributed to the
agreement, including the African Union, the United
Nations and regional and international partners. We
call on them to continue their support for the Central
African Republic, in particular in the framework of
the follow-up executive committee established by the
peace agreement. We also commend the courage of the
Government of President Тouadera.
The agreement of 6 February will be truly historic
provided that all the parties invest sincerely, fully and
without delay in its implementation. First and foremost,
of course, the armed groups must cease hostilities
and lay down their weapons. As to the Government,
President Тоuаdera has committed to addressing the
underlying causes of the conflict. In particular, the
country will need an inclusive Administration and
defence and security forces and must move towards
greater decentralization.
The fight against impunity is an important
dimension. We hope that the Special Criminal Court
will soon be able to begin its work. Entrenching the
culture of peace and reconciling Central Africans are
possible. Other countries have done it. It is now the
turn of the Central African Republic to put in place a
transitional justice system to advance along the path of
lasting peace.
In addition, the Security Council unanimously
decided to renew the sanctions regime on the Central
African Republic, including the arms embargo. That
is obviously an important signal for those individuals
who are responsible for significant impediments to the
peace process. Sanctions are not an end in themselves,
19-05011

21/02/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

S/PV. 8467

but a means to contribute to the goal of peace in
Central Africa.

the participation of civil society and the young people
and women of the Central African Republic.

I would like to turn now to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). In this early
phase of the implementation of the peace agreement,
MINUSCA must continue to fully implement the tasks
of its mandate, including the protection of civilians,
if necessary through vigorous action, as was the
case last month in Bambari, and ensuring favourable
conditions for the delivery of humanitarian aid. The
Central African population is in great need of it. In the
new context after 6 February, the task of supporting
the peace process takes on new meaning. In addition,
MINUSCA, supported by the European Union Training
Mission and other partners, must continue to support
security sector reform, the extension of State authority,
and the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme, which must now accelerate.

We view with optimism the beginning of the
preparations for the elections scheduled for 2020-2021.
We believe the elections will be a great challenge in
upholding the commitments assumed. We call on
MINUSCA and the international community to deploy
logistical, financial and security efforts for the holding
of the elections.

I cannot conclude without warmly thanking Special
Representative Onanga-Anyanga for the outstanding
work he has accomplished in his years with MINUSCA.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to thank the
briefers for the information they provided and for the
efforts they have made in support of peace and security
in the Central African Republic.
The Central African Republic is experiencing
a moment of change following the success in the
negotiations between the Government and the 14 armed
groups held in Khartoum, which resulted in the signing,
at Bangui on 6 February, of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic — a momentous event for the consolidation
of peace and stability in that country. In that regard,
we congratulate the Government, the African Union,
the international partners, the United Nations,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) and all the entities involved for the great
efforts to make the agreement a reality.
We hope that the parties can fulfil their commitments
in the implementation of the agreement. In addition, we
highlight the role played by the Sudan in support of the
agreement, as well as the commitment of neighbouring
countries. We believe that implementing the peace
agreement constitutes a great challenge, for which we
urge the parties to do so in a transparent manner, with

We express our deep concern about the vulnerability
of the Central African Republic with regard to security.
We urge armed groups to refrain from all forms of
violence and destabilizing activities and to surrender
their weapons, in accordance with the provisions of the
peace agreement. In that connection, we welcome the
Government’s national disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation programme, which marks
a step towards the reintegration of ex-combatants into
society. We therefore encourage the parties to continue
with the effective implementation of that programme.
The Dominican Republic condemns human rights
violations perpetrated by armed groups, such as
arbitrary killings and conflict-related sexual violence
in camps for internally displaced persons, health
centres and places of worship. In that regard, we urge
the international community to continue to support
the efforts of the Government of the Central African
Republic to consolidate a judicial system that ensures
due process of law in the fight against impunity,
without prejudice to the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court over crimes committed in Central
African territory. We highlight MINUSCA’s efforts
in that regard, as well as the implementation of the
national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation programme last December.
With regard to humanitarian access, we call on
all parties to the armed conflict to ensure full, safe,
sustainable and unhindered passage for the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners, including
child protection advocates, so as to enable them
to provide timely humanitarian assistance to the
affected population.
The recruitment of children by armed groups
remains a major concern. Despite major efforts to
separate children from such groups, there are still
instances of rape and killings of children. Millions have
been left without schools, and cases of malnutrition have
been documented. Those circumstances make them

19-0501119/31

S/PV.8467

The situation in the Central African Republic

vulnerable to disease, abuse and exploitation, and many
are displaced or take refuge in neighbouring nations.
We urge the Central African Republic to criminalize
the recruitment of children by armed groups under
national law, in accordance with its obligation under
the Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in
armed conflict. In that regard, we urge the international
community to provide MINUSCA the necessary
resources to carry out effective monitoring, reporting
and response activities, and to increase dialogue with
the parties to the conflict, with a view to ensuring the
release of children and the development of action plans
to prevent serious violations.
Finally, I would like to acknowledge and support
the role of MINUSCA, the African Union and all the
actors that are working alongside the Central African
Republic to achieve lasting peace and stability.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I join previous speakers in thanking the briefers
for their important presentations during this meeting. I
would like to address three fundamental topics today.
I turn first to the political developments and
the reconciliation agreement. The most important
development since the Security Council’s consultations
on the situation in the Central African Republic,
on 7 February, was the signing of a reconciliation
agreement between the Government and 14 armed
groups, as well as representatives of civil society. Like
other speakers, I welcome the official signing of that
agreement on 6 February under the auspices of the
African Union and within the framework of the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation, with the support
and facilitation of the United Nations.
In that regard, we would like to express our thanks
and gratitude for the tireless efforts by the Government
of the Republic of the Sudan, which hosted the
Khartoum negotiations from 24 January to 5 February.
We hope that the agreement will end the armed conflict
in the Central African Republic, which began in 2012.
We also welcome the decision agreed by all parties
to create a monitoring mechanism to supervise the
effective implementation of the political agreement.
Some African conflicts have seen positive
developments, such as in the Horn of Africa, where
we have seen reconciliation efforts between Eritrea
and Ethiopia and remarkable stability achieved in
Somalia. In Central Africa, an agreement was reached
in South Sudan and there have been improvements in
20/31

21/02/2019

the situation in Darfur. There is also the first peaceful
transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
well as the signing of the reconciliation agreement in the
Central African Republic between the Government and
the armed groups. In addition, there are opportunities
to restore peace in northern Libya.
Those favourable conditions are a glimmer of hope
for Africa. They are the result of the efforts undertaken
by the African Union and regional organizations, as
well as the result of the will of the Governments of
African States to achieve tangible progress in terms
of development and security, with the support of the
United Nations and through cooperation between the
countries in the region. We hope that those efforts will
last until we attain a sustained and comprehensive
peace in all of Africa, which is rich in natural and
human resources. The peoples of Africa can then enjoy
security, stability and development — all the more as
we move towards presidential elections in the Central
African Republic in 2020.
Secondly, on the security situation, acts of violence
in the Central African Republic continue to pose a
significant challenge to the Government. Although
the agreement was signed and political progress has
been achieved, the security situation remains fragile
in Bangui and other regions. Since acts of violence
erupted in the Central African Republic in 2013 and
2014, we have had cause for concern about the security
situation as a result of the escalation of violence between
armed groups and the conflicting parties, incitement to
religious and sectarian hatred and hate speech.
In that regard, we express our deep concern about
the recurrent violations and acts aggression carried out
by those extremist armed groups against personnel of the
United Nations, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) and other humanitarian workers.
Attacks have also targeted Muslims, their religious
symbols and places of worship. We condemn those
attacks in the strongest possible terms, as we condemn
any attack that targets people because of their religious
beliefs or their places of worship, regardless of who
carries them out.
We also support the efforts undertaken by the Central
African Republic authorities to end such acts of armed
violence and to raise awareness among communities
to stop hate speech and establish peaceful coexistence
among all communities. The Government must ensure
19-05011

21/02/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

that the perpetrators of violence are brought to justice,
end the culture of impunity, hold perpetrators of crimes
against civilians accountable and bring them to justice
without delay in order to preserve peace.
Thirdly, the humanitarian situation in the Central
African Republic remains precarious. Half of the people
need urgent humanitarian assistance. The number of
those in need of humanitarian aid and protection has
increased from 2.5 million to 2.9 million recently. That
is an increase of 16 per cent compared to the same
period in 2017. It is also worrisome to note that half of
those who need humanitarian assistance are children.
We agree with what the Secretary-General
indicated in his most recent report (S/2019/147), that
the only way to end this crisis is through a peaceful
solution reached by dialogue, in accordance with the
Khartoum negotiations. Certainly, if the efforts to hold
a dialogue are successful and a sustained consensus is
reached among all the political parties, that would have
a positive impact on the humanitarian, economic and
development situations, as well as with regard to the
return of internally displaced persons to their homelands
and of refugees from neighbouring countries.
In conclusion, we would like to express our deep
gratitude to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for his tireless efforts
since he assumed his post as Head of MINUSCA.
We wish him every success in his future endeavours
and assure his successor, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, of
our support.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to welcome
Ms. Sylvie Valérie Baïpo-Temon, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Central Africans Abroad of the Central
African Republic, and to express my thanks for their
comprehensive briefings to Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General;
Mr. Smaïl Chergui, African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security; Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing
Director for Africa of the European External Action
Service; Ambassador Omar Hilale, Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission; and Ambassador Gbolié Desiré Wulfran
Ipo, Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African
Republic. I will focus on four points.
With regard to the political process, Poland welcomes
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic, reached in Khartoum
between the Central African Government and 14 armed

S/PV. 8467

groups and signed in Bangui, as a positive and longawaited step in the ongoing dialogue under the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation. We hope it will
enhance the country’s peace process and pave the way
for lasting stability there. We call on all the signatories
to the Agreement, who are ultimately responsible for
delivering concrete results for the people of the Central
African Republic, to honour their obligations and
ensure that the Agreement’s implementation responds
to the aspirations that the people have expressed. It
will require strong engagement and good faith on
both sides, and the upcoming elections in 2020 and
2021 will be a clear demonstration of adherence to the
commitments made. It will be critical to ensure that the
Agreement is implemented speedily, transparently and
with the participation of representatives of civil society,
including women and young people.
My second point concerns the extension of State
authority. It is important to ensure that the reconciliation
process goes hand in hand with an extension of State
authority throughout the country. Poland welcomes the
progress that has been made in deploying civil servants
across the territory of the Central African Republic,
but a far bigger presence of State institutions outside
the capital is needed to support long-term stability.
Ensuring that State authority and resources are
gradually decentralized is a top priority, and we hope
that the necessary related legislation will be enacted as
soon as possible. Besides that, redeploying the national
security forces remains a key element in the restoration
of State authority. We greatly appreciate the work that
the European Union Training Mission is doing to train
and enhance their capacities, and we encourage them to
further coordinate their efforts.
At the same time, Poland urges all the armed groups
to immediately end their violence against civilians,
United Nations peacekeepers and humanitarian
personnel and engage effectively in the disarmament,
demobilization,
reintegration
and
repatriation
programme. We also believe that the mixed security
units will help to stabilize the situation in the areas
worst affected by the conflict. It is reasonable for
society in the Central African Republic to expect the
reconciliation process to bring security and justice,
among other things by holding those responsible
for violations of international humanitarian law and
violations and abuses of human rights to account. It is
important to address the fight against impunity through

19-0501121/31

S/PV.8467

The situation in the Central African Republic

transitional justice mechanisms in a way that contributes
to efforts to achieve sustainable national reconciliation.
With regard to the regional dimension, Poland
believes that it was the genuine engagement of
the international partners and the Central African
Republic’s close neighbours that made it possible to
reach a comprehensive peace agreement, and we hope
that commitment will continue. We encourage the
African Union, the United Nations, the European Union
and all other partners to give constructive support
to its operationalization, especially the transitional
security arrangements, participate actively in its
follow-up mechanism and continue their cooperation in
assisting the people of the Central African Republic.
We also acknowledge the primary responsibility that
the subregional partners and neighbouring countries
have for stabilizing the Central African Republic
by addressing cross-border challenges such as the
smuggling of arms and natural resources, including
gold and diamonds, trafficking, illegal trade networks
and irregular migration, which have a critical impact on
the whole region.
With regard to the socioeconomic situation,
the political crisis has had a negative impact on the
country’s economy and humanitarian situation. We
share the view that the peace agreement represents a
possibility for expanding economic recovery and good
governance throughout the country. Poland commends
the Peacebuilding Commission’s efforts to bring
improvements to the lives of the people of the Central
African Republic, as well as the progress made on the
National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan.

21/02/2019

Special Representative of the Secretary-General;
Mr. Smaïl Chergui, African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security; Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing
Director for Africa of the European External Action
Service; and Ambassadors Omar Hilale and Gbolié
Ipo, the Permanent Representatives of Morocco and
Côte d’Ivoire, for their briefings. We would also like to
separately welcome Ms. Sylvie Valérie Baïpo-Temon,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Central Africans
Abroad of the Central African Republic. We would
particularly like to express our sincere gratitude to
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for his leadership of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA),
in which he has shown himself someone who can
maintain his self-control in any situation, however
critical. It is difficult to overestimate his contribution
to the work of stabilizing the Central African Republic.
We hope that his experience and knowledge will be put
to use in the United Nations system and we heartily
wish him every success in his future endeavours.
We see the holding of direct negotiations between
the Government of the Central African Republic and
key armed groups in Khartoum, under the auspices of
the African Union and with the support of the United
Nations and regional and international partners,
followed by the signing in Bangui on 6 February of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic, as a milestone in the modern
history of the country.

In conclusion, Poland commends the important work
that the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) is doing to protect civilians and support
the peace process in extremely difficult conditions on
the ground. I would like to take this opportunity to
express our special thanks to Special Representative
Onanga-Anyanga for his valuable contribution to a
better future for the Central African Republic during
his term as Head of MINUSCA. We also welcome his
successor, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, and wish him all the
best in discharging his heavy responsibilities at this
important stage of the political developments in the
Central African Republic.

The forum was the result of efforts to harmonize
every peace initiative related to the Central African
Republic, affirming its international partners’
determination to work together in the interests of the
country’s normalization for the long term. We want to
emphasize that this important Agreement was made
possible by, among other things, the talks between the
armed groups held in Khartoum in August 2018 and
mediated by Russia and the Sudan, which led to the
decision to establish a united Central African opposition
with the aim of achieving long-term, sustainable peace
in the Central African Republic. Russia’s collaboration
in organizing the interactions in Khartoum was designed
to align with the efforts of the African community,
which is making a decisive contribution to unblocking
crisis situations in Africa based on the African Union’s
principle of African solutions to African problems.

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,

For our part, we should say that we have listened
carefully to the Secretary-General’s call in his report

22/31

19-05011

21/02/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

(S/2019/147). Russia is ready to facilitate the process of
national reconciliation in the Central African Republic
in cooperation with the its leaders, the African Union
and those of the country’s international partners that are
involved in the quest for ways to normalize its situation
without hidden agendas or double standards. We will
continue to support the Central African Republic’s
authorities in reforming the national security sector,
including by strengthening its military capabilities and
its armed forces’ human resources. In a short period of
time Russian military experts have been able to achieve
significant results, training more than 1,000 Central
African troops. We also intend to continue to expand
our humanitarian assistance, particularly in providing
the population with medical services.
We pay tribute to the bravery of the United Nations
peacekeepers and to the memory of those who have
given their lives for the Central African Republic and
for Africa as a whole.
We have consistently advocated that the
international community and especially the Security
Council should support agreements that are reached
through the mediation efforts of the African Union and
other African frameworks, and should provide them
with political, moral and material support. It is clear
that the road to national reconciliation in the Central
African Republic will not be an easy one, as its people
are well aware. However, a critical first step has been
taken to lay a foundation for developing solutions that
can bring the country lasting peace. Supporting that
initiative is our shared goal.
In our view, the current circumstances in the
Central African Republic urgently need constructive
cooperation from all international stakeholders. There,
unfortunately, we have problems through no fault of
ours. Despite the positive opinion of what we are doing
from the country’s authorities and people, attempts
are being made to denigrate Russia’s efforts in every
possible way. We are sorry to say we saw an example of
such flagrant double standards today in our American
colleague’s statement, and I cannot let two of his
criticisms of Russia pass without comment. The Russian
journalists who died in the Central African Republic
were sent there by Mikhail Khodorkovsky, who found
refuge in the West a number of years ago. He failed to
provide them with the necessary protection, except for
a large amount of cash. The Russian Embassy was not
notified about their arrival and was unable to take the
necessary steps with the Central African authorities.

S/PV. 8467

The upshot was that they were robbed and murdered.
What happened is clear and undeniable. However,
we are continuing our investigation together with the
Government authorities, and all who are interested in
the incident will be informed of the results.
There is one more subject that we did not intend to
talk about, but since our American colleagues touched
on it, we feel compelled to. I will have to beg our
French colleagues’ pardon in advance. We did not bring
it up. On 12 February, Radio France Internationale
referred in a broadcast to a distorted interpretation of a
United Nations report that Russian military instructors
had allegedly tortured a 38-year-old Muslim market
trader. The distorted facts were denied by the trader
himself, Mahamat Nour Mamadou. He admitted that he
was incited to this provocation by an internal security
attaché at the French Embassy in Bangui named
Jacques Razafindranali who was also employed in the
General Directorate for External Security of France’s
Ministry of Defence. In his interview with journalists
from Afrique Média, he was quoted as saying,
“I was a Séléka combatant. I lost my thumb in battle.
After I was released, the French approached me and
offered me a large sum of money to say that I had
been tortured by Russians. They said that if I did
not say it they would kill me. They came a number
of times to check that I was saying everything right.
They promised to take me to France”.
Mamadou’s words were confirmed by neighbours,
who mentioned the official from the French Embassy
among those who visited. I think no further comment
is needed.
Our American colleagues are evidently in a kind
of provocationist frenzy, and after planning a flagrant
and undeniable act of provocation on the ColombianVenezuelan border for 23 February, they have now
gone completely overboard and decided to traffic in
insinuations and the dissemination of fake news right
here in the Security Council. This situation is a clear
illustration of the methods that our Western partners
are using in the Central African Republic. As with
Venezuela and Ukraine, it is not the countries they are
worried about, it is the geopolitics.
Everything in our world is moving and changing.
Only the methods that the United States and States
that support it use to interfere in the affairs of other
countries remain the same — overthrowing regimes
they do not like and showing no aversion to stooping to

19-0501123/31

S/PV.8467

The situation in the Central African Republic

the dirtiest political provocations. Russia will never be
resigned to that.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to acknowledge all of this
morning’s briefers, and in particular I want to thank
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for his work and to wish
his successor good luck.
I would like to begin by underscoring something in
Mr. Smaïl Chergui’s briefing, in which he said that the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic of 6 February was a success
for multilateralism. I would like to emphasize that and
the examples he gave of the close cooperation between
himself and Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix and between the African Union and the United
Nations generally. I believe that is extremely important
and an example for all of our work in Africa. I also want
to commend the cooperation between the European
Union, the African Union and the United Nations. I
believe that the work that the European Union is doing in
training security forces is very important. Cooperation
among the countries of the region is also crucial. All of
that does indeed represent success for multilateralism.
Secondly, as Mr. Chergui stated with regard to the
Agreement, we have completed only the first stage.
That means that we must now truly move towards its
comprehensive and genuine implementation. To that
end, as all my colleagues have emphasized, it is very
important that there now be a real cessation of hostilities
and for disarmament, reintegration and repatriation to
take place. I think that cooperation between the forces
and the various armed groups, as well as joint patrols,
are also very important. In that context, as colleagues
said earlier, I would to emphasize that there must be an
end to child recruitment.
Going forward, it is very important to have a
robust follow-up process. As Mr. Koen Vervaeke said
in his statement, I, too, would like to stress that the
follow-up process must be inclusive and comprise all
stakeholders, in particular women. In that context, I
wish to congratulate the Central African Republic on
having a woman Minister for Foreign Affairs. Women
and civil society must be a part of the process.
My colleague Omar Hilale described in his
briefing the strong desire for peace and justice among
the population. I think that that is very significant,
and I would like to pledge our full support for his
recommendations, of which I would like to mention
24/31

21/02/2019

one, namely, communication about the Agreement.
Apparently, there are many rumours circulating in the
country. The importance of truly communicating the
substance of the Agreement to the entire country is
therefore very important.
In terms of priorities, the implementation of the
agreement is of course essential. However, in our view,
the fight against impunity is also of great importance.
I believe that to really succeed in a true reconciliation
in the country, there must be justice. To that end, the
establishment of the Special Criminal Court is highly
relevant. I believe that it is vital that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) support the
work of the Court and its investigators.
With regard to MINUSCA, I would also like to
thank all the troops and Blue Helmets for all that they
have done and for what they have suffered in very
difficult circumstances. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/147) mentions attacks in Batangafo
and Alindao, in which there were many civilian
victims. In that context, I would like to emphasize the
importance for the Blue Helmets, in accordance with
their mandate, to truly protect civilians, including
children, and to combat sexual violence during the
Central African conflict. Unfortunately, that is not the
only case. There are too many women who have been
victims of sexual violence.
I would like to thank France for supporting
MINUSCA. We have just heard that the show of force
by the French troops was significant. I do not want to
get into the arguments made by our Russian colleague,
but I would have liked to hear more about the activities
of the Russian mercenary group Wagner, which is in
the country.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me first join others in
thanking the briefers, my brother Ambassador Omar
Hilale, Mr. Smaïl Chergui and Mr. Koen Vervaeke,
for their updates and in particular for their insights on
the issue that we are discussing. I would also like to
take this opportunity to express my appreciation for
the work of Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga in leading
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) since August 2015, and to welcome
Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye and offer him the full support of
my delegation. It would be remiss of me not to welcome
19-05011

21/02/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

Minister Sylvie Valérie Baïpo-Temon of the Central
African Republic to the Chamber.
Indonesia took note of the Secretary-General’s
report of 15 February, and echoes him in saying that
“the only path out of crisis for the Central African
Republic must be forged through political dialogue”
(S/2019/147, para. 75). To that end, we see the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, signed in Bangui on 6 February,
as an important political milestone. However, I must
recall that it will remain only a piece of paper if it is not
duly implemented.
Indeed, the implementation of the Agreement will
not be without challenges. It is therefore important
to establish a follow-up mechanism for the effective
implementation of the Agreement, have a sustained and
constructive dialogue between the Government and the
armed groups and, in that regard, ensure the full and
solid support of the international community, including
the Security Council. I appeal to all Council members
to be united in trying to ensure that the implementation
of the Agreement becomes a reality.
Indonesia would also like to commend the Sudan
and Chad, as well as other neighbouring countries, and
the African Union (AU) in its role in brokering peace.
We have always believed that neighbours and regional
organizations play an important role in settling disputes
and in promoting dialogue. We also commend the
closer cooperation of the United Nations with the AU
in that regard.
I will focus my comments today on two pertinent
points: first, the humanitarian situation in the Central
African Republic and secondly, the role of MINUSCA
in the Central African Republic.
First, while there is progress on the political aspect,
we should not overlook the humanitarian aspect in the
Central African Republic, which is equally important.
We are still concerned about the violence in the country
and the situation remains fragile. It is alarming to
hear that the number of people in need of assistance
and protection has increased to 2.9 million, which is
16 per cent higher than last year, and that there are
more than 1,000 protection-related incidents on average
each month. There are record levels of displacement,
with more than 1 million people displaced internally
and in neighbouring countries. Furthermore, we also
hear reports that one out of three children suffers from
severe malnutrition, and one out of two people does

S/PV. 8467

not have access to safe drinking water. The people of
the Central African Republic have suffered enough. I
urge countries to continue their assistance and deliver
on their commitments to the Central African Republic,
as well as supporting the work being done by the
Peacebuilding Commission.
In relation to the humanitarian situation, Indonesia
notes the relatively positive result of the disarmament,
demobilization,
reintegration
and
repatriation
(DDRR) programme. The programme works towards
reintegrating ex-combatants into society and has
succeeded in disarming 137 ex-combatants and in
separating a total of 923 children from armed groups.
Like others who spoke before me, using children as
combatants in armed conflict is a crime. We need
to work together in that regard. We urge the Central
African Republic to continue its commitment to DDRR
in order to truly silence the guns in the region, starting
in its own backyard. At the same time, the Council
should continue to support the DDRR process in the
Central African Republic, as stipulated in the recently
adopted resolution 2454 (2019) of 31 January. We also
believe that peace is illusive without investment in
development, with which the international community
should assist.
Secondly, after hearing the updates from the
briefers, it is more apparent that the role of the Mission
is more important than ever. I note in the SecretaryGeneral’s report that MINUSCA has supported efforts
to reduce violence, promote reconciliation among
communities and increase the protection of civilians,
as well as contribute to many other noble causes.
MINUSCA’s work in reinforcing the capacity of the
Central African armed forces through training and
technical and logistical support for recruitment is
crucial in the security sector reform of the country.
The Mission’s role also extends to justice and the
rule of law by providing local authorities with technical
support for investigations — important tools for enabling
the Government to protect its people. The Mission
is currently, on average, at 94.46 per cent of its total
authorized strength; nevertheless, given its important
role there is a need to optimize its performance through
training and the use of up-to-standard equipment, and
by ensuring the continuous support of the Council. It is
important to enhance the Mission’s accountability as
the face of the United Nations on the ground.

19-0501125/31

S/PV.8467

The situation in the Central African Republic

Since 2013, Indonesia has contributed 200
engineering troops, who have contributed to the
building of roads and bridges and, just recently, even
contributed to the management of waste and landfills.
This month Indonesia will increase its contribution by
sending an additional 140 formed police units to the
Mission, including 14 female police officers trained in
community-based approaches.
While on the subject of MINUSCA, Indonesia also
wishes to pay tribute to the many brave peacekeepers
who have lost their lives in recent years in the Central
African Republic, and to commend the countries that
provided them.
In conclusion, we should maintain the momentum
established by the agreement and continue to support
its implementation and monitor its progress. Let this be
the last agreement that will build a bridge to the path
of peace, end conflict and silence the guns once and
for all.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking all those who briefed the Security Council
today for their words of insight and their efforts towards
bringing peace and stability to the Central African
Republic. Let me also welcome to the Council Her
Excellency Ms. Sylvie Valérie Baïpo-Temon, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Central Africans Abroad of the
Central African Republic.
I would like to join others in extending particular
thanks to Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). His
frankness, integrity and outstanding leadership over
the past three and a half years have seen MINUSCA
perform effectively and efficiently through the most
challenging of times. On behalf of the United Kingdom,
I would like to extend the most sincere commendations
and warmest thanks to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga and wish
him the very best for the future.
The United Kingdom has consistently backed the
African Union-led African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic as the
only — I repeat, the only — viable peace initiative. We
are encouraged to see that it has yielded the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation, which is
based on sustainable foundations of communication
and compromise between the authorities of the Central
26/31

21/02/2019

African Republic and all 14 major armed groups. We
are hopeful for the future, and we commend Mr. Smaïl
Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, and the African Union itself, as well as the
Governments of the Central African Republic and the
Sudan and regional partners in particular, for their
efforts in bringing about the agreement.
The comprehensive briefing provided by His
Excellency Mr. Omar Hilale, Permanent Representative
of Morocco to the United Nations, in his capacity as the
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, as well as his
recommendations for the implementation of the
agreement, captured many themes that the United
Kingdom can support — ownership of the agreement
by the people of the Central African Republic; the
inclusivity of the Agreement for women, youth and
civil society; the need to combat impunity for the most
serious crimes; the importance of communication by
the Government of the Central African Republic to
instil trust in the population; and the importance of
sustained support by regional partners.
The United Kingdom also recognizes the need to
set a pace that keeps up the momentum of the agreement
and delivers the dividends of peace to the people.
But the requirement for rapid implementation should
not come at the cost of trust in the overall process.
The excellent work of the European Union Military
Training Mission has helped to build trust between the
population and its armed forces and police. Members of
armed groups will understandably have to work harder
than most to gain that trust. Therefore, it is vital that
demobilized members of armed groups are subjected to
the same rigorous standards of vetting and training in
human rights as regular members of the armed forces in
the Central African Republic before they are integrated
into those armed forces.
In that context, the recent allegations of torture
and illegal detention by Central African troops and
Russian trainers in Bambari are a matter of deep
concern. The United Kingdom welcomes the United
Nations investigation into those allegations, which
should be rigorous and independent. If the allegations
are found to be true, the United Kingdom calls on the
authorities of the Central African Republic to hold those
responsible to account. As my United States colleague
said, international support for the Government of the
Central African Republic should be transparent, well
coordinated and consistent with the highest standards
19-05011

21/02/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

of military conduct and law and with the obligations of
Member States under the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013),
concerning the Central African Republic.
My Russian colleague mentioned Ukraine, which
is indeed a dangerous precedent — there we saw a
classic Russian playbook on disinformation and media
manipulation, sponsorship of military groups and
the provision of arms, direct military intervention by
Russian forces and the illegal annexation of Crimea
in violation of the Charter of the United Nations and
international treaties.
The sanctions regime, comprising the arms
embargo, travel ban and assets freeze, is designed to
hold to account those who would threaten the peace and
security of the Central African Republic and prevent
the proliferation of weapons in the wrong hands. The
United Kingdom welcomes the efforts of the authorities
of the Central African Republic in security sector
reform and arms and weapons management, and urges
the authorities to continue those efforts to allow the
sanctions Committee to conduct a meaningful review
of the arms embargo in September. The sanctions
regime will continue to be an important tool in holding
to account would-be spoilers of the agreement. In
that regard, the effective implementation of sanctions
measures by the authorities and regional partners will
continue to be critical.
The United Kingdom has committed hundreds of
millions of dollars to the Central African Republic since
2013 — to MINUSCA, to life-saving humanitarian
assistance, to helping displaced people and refugees
rebuild their lives, to capacity-building, particularly
in the security and judicial sectors, and to United
Nations efforts in support of the long-term peace and
stability of the Central African Republic. The United
Kingdom remains committed to supporting the people
of the Central African Republic as they work towards
building a peaceful and prosperous future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Equatorial Guinea.
First of all, I would like to welcome Ms. Sylvie
Valérie Baïpo-Temon, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Central Africans Abroad of the Central African
Republic. I would also like to express my delegation’s
gratitude for the briefings on the latest news from

S/PV. 8467

the Central African Republic provided by Mr. Smaïl
Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security; Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing Director for
Africa, European Union External Action Service; His
Excellency Mr. Omar Hilale, Permanent Representative
of Morocco to the United Nations, Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission; and Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, who
is leaving his post after three years of excellent work
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA).
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea takes
this opportunity to pay well-deserved tribute to
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for his unwavering commitment
in support of peace in the Central African Republic,
especially during the 2014-2016 transition period,
which culminated in the Bangui Forum on National
Reconciliation and the 2016 elections, as well as for
being one of the key actors that prompted the signing of
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation.
His leadership, integrity, personal commitment and
tireless efforts have been crucial. We wish him success
in his future responsibilities and welcome his successor,
Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye.
I would also like to express our great joy in coming
together in this Chamber to celebrate a major event
that until a few months ago seemed impossible. I am
referring to the peace agreement signed on 6 February
2019 in the city of Bangui. The signing of this peace
agreement between the Government of the Central
African Republic and 14 armed groups, under the
leadership of the African Union and with the support of
the United Nations within the framework of the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, is undoubtedly an example of the
excellent cooperation between the African Union and
the United Nations. I also commend the Government
of the Republic of the Sudan for its considerable
diplomatic efforts to promote the signing of this historic
joint agreement, and all other actors who, directly or
indirectly, have made it possible for a flame of hope
for peace in Central Africa to be lit, and we express
our appreciation to all parties directly involved in the
negotiation process.
In accordance with the communiqué of the African
Union Peace and Security Council dated 9 February

19-0501127/31

S/PV.8467

The situation in the Central African Republic

21/02/2019

2019, I would like to underline the primary responsibility
of the signatory parties for the implementation of this
Agreement. In this new context, it is necessary for the
parties to exercise the same sense of responsibility in
scrupulously respecting their commitments under the
Agreement, including by complying with the deadlines
set out in the timetable for its implementation, in
particular the immediate cessation of all armed action
and violence against the civilian population. We urge
the member States of the African Union, as well as
bilateral and multilateral partners, to provide the
necessary support to the parties for its implementation,
in good faith and in accordance with their commitments
and obligations.

through local committees and joint awareness-raising
activities in order to prepare for the safe and voluntary
return of members of Muslim communities who had
been forced to flee their neighbourhoods in May 2017.

As emphasized in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/147), significant progress has been
made in the peace process under the auspices of the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation. Under
the leadership of President Touadera, the Central
African Government has undertaken to identify the
root causes of the current crisis and promote genuine
national reconciliation based on a social contract with
the people.

With regard to security, we note that the Central
African authorities plan to establish an efficient and
equitable management system to make transhumance,
which is essential for the harmonious economic
development of shepherds and farmers, a safe and
peaceful activity, and to that end that the signatory
parties have undertaken to establish special mixed
security units for an initial period of 24 months, under
the supervision of the Chiefs of Staff of the Defence
Forces, with technical support from MINUSCA,

As the experiences of other countries have
shown, Central Africans must understand and
assimilate that there can be no peace without a shared
and inclusive vision, forgiveness and a process of
national reconciliation. In this regard, we welcome
the establishment of a Commission on Truth, Justice,
Reparation and Reconciliation to corroborate and
advance the dynamics of reconciliation.
On the other hand, it is worth highlighting the
launch of the national programme on disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration in
December 2018, which constitutes a milestone on the
road towards the reintegration of former combatants
into society. In addition, the Government is committed
to putting in place, with the support of its partners,
appropriate mechanisms to recruit civil servants and
establish training programmes open to all.
The Government of my country — the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea — is pleased that, with the support
of MINUSCA, the Central African Government has
established several local peace processes and dialogues
to promote reconciliation among communities, reduce
violence, improve social cohesion and generate support
for the deployment of State institutions by campaigns

28/31

We commend the fact that the armed groups
have agreed to respect the legality of the country’s
democratic institutions, the constitutional order, the
unity and territorial integrity of the Central African
State, and that they have pledged to renounce the use
of arms and violence to assert any form of claim and
to proceed, by mutual agreement between the parties
and partners, to the complete dissolution of the armed
groups throughout the national territory.

The fight against impunity is a fundamental
aspect if true national reconciliation is to take place.
In this regard, several important milestones have
been noted, including trials by ordinary national
courts, the launching of investigations by the Special
Criminal Court, continued progress in the prosecution
of conflict-related crimes in the courts of appeal
in Bangui and Bouar, and the recent surrender of
two suspected criminals. This demonstrates the
determination of the Central African Government
to eradicate all that impedes the return to peace and
stability. We invite it to maintain this attitude so as to
promote the implementation of all measures necessary
to achieve its objectives, in particular through the
functioning of the local peace and reconciliation
committees. However, despite this progress, we regret
that civilians, especially women and children, continue
to suffer the consequences of the conflict and are
increasingly exposed to protection risks and urgent
humanitarian needs, and that the number of people in
need of assistance and protection has increased from
2.5 million to 2.9 million, an increase of 16 per cent
over the same period in 2017.

19-05011

21/02/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

The path to peace is not an easy one. After having
suffered over the past six years all the horrors of a
civil armed conflict — religious, ethnic and political
violence, with devastating consequences, loss of human
life, a humanitarian crisis, an economy with enormous
difficulties — the Central African Republic has
demonstrated that through various diplomatic efforts
and inclusive dialogue, events of historic dimensions
can be achieved that stand for a before and an after for
this beautiful and immensely rich country.
There is still much to be done on the fragile road
ahead that will require enormous sacrifices to achieve
reconstruction and lasting stability in the country.
It will be crucial for the Central African people to
mobilize and take ownership of the final resolution
of the conflict and for the resources required for the
implementation, monitoring and verification of the
Agreement serve to provide a renewed impetus towards
national reconciliation.
It is important that all stakeholders honour their
commitments during the implementation phase.
The international community can play a key part, in
particular in strengthening the role that the United
Nations, the African Union, subregional entities such
as the Economic Community of Central African States
and the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community, and neighbouring countries can play in
the process. There is no doubt that the brotherly people
of the Central African Republic long for lasting peace.
They must therefore receive assistance in the peace
process that is fully respectful of the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
country and of other States in the region, as well as
of the principle of non-interference in their internal
affairs. We hope that the peace agreement will allow
for the restoration of State authority throughout the
country, including the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of armed group members.
In conclusion, the winds of hope generated by the
successful elections held in the Democratic Republic
of Congo on 30 December 2018 seem to have reached
the Central African Republic. We therefore hope that
our Central African subregion can enjoy the stability
that peace provides and be able to maximize its
immense potential.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

S/PV. 8467

I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Central
Africans Abroad of the Central African Republic.
Ms. Baïpo-Temon (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): Madam President, before I update
the Council on the situation in my country, the Central
African Republic, I would like to congratulate you on
your presidency and thank you for having convened
today’s meeting, which comes at a particularly
important time for the Central African Republic.
Let me also take this opportunity to pay tribute to
the memory of all of those who lost their lives in the
Central African crisis and to express my sympathy in
connection with the victims of a deadly conflict that has
spared no one, from Central Africans to those who have
come to their rescue in the name of peace — children,
grandchildren, women, men, pensioners, young people,
soldiers, animists, Muslims and Christians. I would
also like to sincerely thank previous speakers for their
excellent and comprehensive briefings.
Our combined efforts in the Central African
Republic have led to the basis for peace. A peace
agreement between the Central African authorities
and the 14 armed groups — the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic — was signed on 6 February in Bangui.
The Agreement, the outcome of the dialogue held in
Khartoum on the initiative of the African Union,
supported by the United Nations, came into being
following a long common journey in the name of peace.
This is yet another opportunity for me to sincerely
thank all of the architects of the Agreement: Mr. Smaïl
Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security; Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations; Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic; all
of our bilateral and multilateral partners; and President
Omer Al-Bashir, who showed genuine generosity and
provided a warm welcome as the leader of the host
country talks.
I must also thank the entire panel of facilitators
appointed by the Heads of State of neighbouring
countries or by regional bodies for their involvement
in the negotiations, in addition to the Heads of State of
the subregion, for their commitment to the process of
restoring and maintaining peace in the Central African
Republic. Nor can I fail to thank the President of the

19-0501129/31

S/PV.8467

The situation in the Central African Republic

Republic and Head of State, Mr. Faustin Archange
Touadera, for his firm determination to use dialogue
as the only solution to the crisis in the Central African
Republic, and his Government for working towards
that goal.
The Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, signed
on 6 February, is symbolic, even historic, because the
leaders of the 14 armed groups attended the talks in
Khartoum and the Agreement was signed in Bangui, on
the territory of the Central African Republic. A major
step towards peace and national reconciliation has been
taken. However, it remains tentative and will depend on
the implementation by all parties of their commitments.
Only if the Agreement is fulfilled, through the
implementation of the mechanisms stipulated therein,
will peace and social cohesion be restored. It is
important to remember that considerable efforts have
been made, with the sustained support of our partners.
The Government, with the support of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, the European
Union and all our partners, has made progress in
extending State authority throughout the country
through, for example, the redeployment of prefects
and sub-prefects with a view to beginning the
decentralization process; the implementation of national
security and defence sector reform; the training of police
officers and gendarmes, 500 of whom are currently
operational; and through the launching by the President
of the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation programme in the north-western part
of the country. These efforts, which have been made
with current forms of support, must continue and be
strengthened and ramped up and, above all, updated
in order to adapt them to the current situation, with
a view to restoring State authority. That achievement
will enable us to confirm the historic character of the
peace agreement.
The authorities of the Central African Republic
have already taken measures for the implementation
of the Agreement, in particular by issuing a decree
to establish an inclusive commission tasked with
conducting work related to transitional justice pending
the establishment of the truth, justice, reparations and
reconciliation commission. Other measures are also
under way, including the creation of the steering and
follow-up committees vital to ensuring the proper

30/31

21/02/2019

implementation of the Agreement and a timetable for
the resumption of joint commissions with the countries
of the subregion. Furthermore, the Government is
committed to continuing its dialogue with the armed
groups in order to preserve the momentum that led to
the signing of the Agreement. The first visit was made
last week, on Friday, 15 February, when the Minister of
Humanitarian Action and National Reconciliation went
to Kaga Bandoro to discuss the issue of the treatment
of displaced persons.
I would like to point out here that the entire process
is part and parcel of continental and international
partnerships, which reflect our commitment to major
issues of common interest such as peace, security
and governance. Combating insecurity is an ongoing
challenge — indeed, our ongoing challenge — and
requires greater effectiveness and a better harmonizing
of our efforts. It is therefore important that our
commitments be consistent with the values and principles
that we promote — equality, equity, human rights, social
justice, sovereignty, democracy and humanitarian law,
to name but a few. Our partnerships must be mutual,
strong and responsible, without discrimination of any
kind. Our efforts must be comprehensive and meet
all expectations and challenges, on the understanding
that the goal of the Central African Republic is the
restoration of the rule of law. Achieving that ultimate
objective will open the way to a new era for Central
Africa, in which the Central African Republic will
learn to bind its wounds and accept its history, despite
the many painful events that have marked it, in order
to leave it further behind in the name of stability and
national harmony.
The Central African Republic has taken note of the
time frame issued by the Security Council in resolution
2454 (2019), which renewed the sanctions regime and
provided for the establishment by the end of April of
a road map that would pave the way, through agreed
measures, to a relaxation of the arms embargo. While
welcoming this opening of the Security Council, I
recall that the sanctions regime, in particular with
respect to the arms embargo and the Kimberley
Process, must neither limit nor constrain the efforts
and momentum undertaken by the Central African
Republic in its quest for lasting peace, the restoration
of State authority throughout the entire territory, and
economic development. Like any State, the Central
African State is mandated and duty-bound to protect its

19-05011

21/02/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

S/PV. 8467

population and its territory and ensure the social wellbeing of its population.

he will continue to have a thought for a country he
cherished so dearly in fulfilling his mandate.

I cannot conclude without paying special tribute to
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, whose role in the search
for peace in my country has been very important and
undeniable. The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral leaves us after a successfully completing a job
that lasted more than three years. He was one of the
architects of peace agreement, and the Central African
Republic will remain indebted to him. I wish him every
success in all his future endeavours, while hoping that

In conclusion, the Central African Republic
welcomes the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, and wishes
him every success in his mission.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

19-0501131/31
