S/2001/185

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 March 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 28 February 2001 from the Acting Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General
Next Wednesday, 7 March 2001, will mark six months since the Security
Council held its summit meeting entitled “Ensuring an effective role of the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and security, particularly in
Africa”. As will be recalled, the summit meeting was concluded by the unanimous
adoption of resolution 1318 (2000), contained in the corresponding declaration.
In this regard, I have the honour to inform you that on that day, during its
presidency of the Security Council, Ukraine intends to convene an open debate on
the topic of the follow-up to the Security Council Summit with a view to evaluating
the progress achieved in implementation of the above declaration over the past six
months and exploring further ways to enhance the role of the Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
With this in mind, I have the honour to forward to you a working paper (see
annex) on the topic of the debate, which was meant to serve as a basis for the
discussion. It is my hope that the open debate will provide a good opportunity for a
broad and frank exchange of views of its participants, which could contribute to the
efforts aimed at increasing the effectiveness of current and future activities of the
Security Council.
I should be grateful if you would have the text of the present letter and the
attached note with its appendix circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Valeriy P. Kuchinsky
Ambassador
Acting Permanent Representative

01-27102 (E) 010301

*0127102*

S/2001/185

Annex to the letter dated 28 February 2001 from the Acting
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General

“On the way of making intentions real”
Explanatory note for an open debate on the follow-up to the
Security Council summit meeting held on 7 September 2000
On 7 September 2000, the Security Council held a meeting at the level of
Heads of State and Government to consider the topic “Ensuring an effective role of
the Security Council in the maintenance of international peace and security,
particularly in Africa”.
From many standpoints, the Security Council summit meeting at the dawn of a
new millennium was both a remarkable and an indispensable event in the life of the
United Nations.
As the Secretary-General underscored in his statement at that meeting, “too
many vulnerable communities in too many regions of the world now hesitate to look
to the United Nations to assist them in their hour of need. No amount of resolutions
or statements can change that reality; only action can: prompt, united, effective
action pursued with skill and discipline to halt conflict and to restore peace. Only
such determined action can restore the reputation of the United Nations as a credible
force for peace and justice”.
Indeed, over the past years the Security Council has been confronted with truly
fundamental questions. Has it effectively discharged its primary responsibility in the
area of the maintenance of international peace and security? Is the Council ready to
produce and implement a well-targeted strategy to fulfil its primary task under the
Charter of the United Nations? Is there a common will to face this challenge? And is
there any shared vision of a real way to ensure an effective role for the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and security?
The Security Council Summit became an opportunity to revisit these questions.
It assembled the leaders of the Council’s Member States to reaffirm that organ’s
responsibilities in upholding the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. It made a valuable contribution towards achieving success of the
Millennium Summit aimed at the overall strengthening of the United Nations. Last
but not least, the Council’s Summit made a number of important commitments to
enhance the effectiveness of the United Nations in addressing challenges to peace
and security, which were recorded in its unanimously adopted declaration
(resolution 1318 (2000), annex).
Today, after the first six-month period since the adoption of the declaration,
Ukraine, as it assumes the presidency of the Security Council, proposes to hold an
open debate aimed at evaluating concrete results in its implementation. In
suggesting the holding of such a debate, Ukraine proceeds from the assumption of
the importance of conducting regular reviews of the practical implementation of the
decisions taken by the Council.
In order to make this debate more concrete and consequential, the President of
the Security Council would like to put to the delegations the following questions:

2

S/2001/185

– The Council has come to an understanding about the need to give special
attention to the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa; how effectively is this understanding being translated into practical
action?
– The Council stated its determination to give equal priority to the maintenance
of international peace and security in every region of the world; are there any
“forgotten” conflicts or situations which need greater attention on the part of
the Council?
– The Council expressed its resolve to strengthen the United Nations
peacekeeping operations and it is demonstrating its willingness to produce
tangible results in achieving this goal; in particular, over the past six months
significant steps have been taken to enhance the potential of the Organization
in this area; are there any specific issues related to the task of strengthening
peacekeeping which require more energetic efforts by the Council?
– The Council pledged to enhance the effectiveness of the United Nations in
addressing conflict at all stages, from prevention to settlement to post-conflict
peace-building; since this challenging objective requires the strengthening and
improvement of the entire range of instruments of peace that the Council has at
its disposal, what specific areas have been overlooked in this endeavour?
– The Council encouraged the development of comprehensive international
strategies to address the root causes of conflicts; how effectively has the
Council itself been contributing to the realization of this objective?
– The Council urged the strengthening of cooperation and communication
between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations; what
concrete progress has been achieved so far in this area, and is there any need
for institutional reinforcement of such cooperation?

3

S/2001/185

Appendix
Major ideas, initiatives and messages presented during
the Summit
At the Security Council Summit, opened by the Security Council President, the
President of the Republic of Mali Mr. Alpha Oumar Konare, speeches were
presented by the 16 participants, namely (in consecutive order):
The United Nations Secretary-General Mr. Kofi Annan, the President of the
United States Mr. William Jefferson Clinton, the President of the Argentine
Republic Mr. Fernando de la Rua, the President of the People’s Republic of China
Mr. Jiang Zemin, the President of the French Republic Mr. Jacques Chirac, the
President of the Republic of Namibia Mr. Sam Nujoma, the President of the Russian
Federation Mr. Vladimir Putin, the President of the Republic of Tunisia Mr. Zine El
Abidine Ben Ali, the President of Ukraine Mr. Leonid Kuchma, the Prime Minister
of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh Sheikh Hasina, the Prime Minister of
Canada Mr. Jean Chretien, the Prime Minister of Jamaica Mr. Percival James
Patterson, the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of the Netherlands Mr. Wim Kok, the
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Mr.
Tony Blair, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia Datuk Seri Syed Hamid
Albar, the President of the Republic of Mali Mr. Alpha Oumar Konare.
The distinguished participants stressed upon a number of principles, initiatives
and messages, that could be outlined as follows (the list is not exhaustive).

A.

General elements
• The United Nations must strengthen efforts to improve respect for human
rights, protect persons belonging to national minorities, establish truly
representative and participatory political systems and improve health and
education standards.
• The Security Council should, at all times, uphold the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
• This is exclusive purview of the Security Council to authorize the use of force
in international relations — except in cases where the right to self-defence is
being exercised — as well as to employ effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to peace.
• It should attach equal importance to and undertake swift responses to breaches
of international peace and security in all regions of the world.
• In all cases, the Security Council should be guided by three elements: a need to
summon the will to act preventively (before a crisis reaches the point of no
return), a need to have the ability to act, and a need to act effectively and
decisively.
• The Security Council has to focus on the prevention of armed conflicts by
building a culture of peace.
• When the Security Council acts in solidarity and unity, the most complicated
problems are resolved.

4

S/2001/185

• Disputes, if any, must be settled through dialogue, negotiation and
consultation.
• There was a stress, that wilful use of force and interference in the internal
affairs of other countries in the name of humanitarianism not only run counter
to the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
• There was a proposal that the principle of non-intervention should be
respected, but at the same time a complementary value should be added: the
principle of non-indifference.
• The international community [should] formulate a joint, objective vision of
certain concepts such as solidarity, the protection of human rights and
development issues.
• To meet the needs of the times, it is imperative for the Security Council to
reform itself where necessary so as to strengthen its role, maintain its authority
and improve its efficiency.
• There was a view that the existence of a veto power was anachronistic and
undemocratic.
• Any reform of the Security Council should adequately reflect the will of the
majority of the United Nations Member States.
• In order to maintain its full authority, the Council must be more representative
with respect to the membership in the Organization.
• One of the key orientations should be strengthening of the partnership between
the Security Council, the Secretariat and regional organizations and initiatives.

B.

Conflicts and crises
• The most important task is to improve the United Nations anti-crisis potential.
• It is a high need to develop a comprehensive conflict prevention strategy.
• The establishment of United Nations regional centres for conflict prevention
could become one of the first steps to implement such a strategy.
• It is also important to expand further the range of instruments required for the
maintenance of peace and security. In this context, conflict prevention
operations should gain prominence as a qualitatively new model of
peacekeeping activities.
• Strategies for conflict prevention should be developed in close coordination
with regional or subregional organizations.
• In order to enable United Nations peacekeeping operations to work better, it is
essential to treat symptoms and remove the root causes that lead to conflicts at
the same time.
• The United Nations system must manage a comprehensive and coordinated
strategy to address the root causes of conflict.
• The United Nations must take on board all the consequences of the changing
nature of conflicts, which are increasingly internal in origin.

5

S/2001/185

• The Security Council should give more attention to situations of humanitarian
crisis involving the civilian population.
• The Security Council should draw special attention to the so-called frozen
conflicts in the post-Soviet region.
• The world community needs to tackle the causes, and when the causes are
underdevelopment and lack of democracy, of the rule of law and of respect for
human rights, the Secretary-General should be able to bring them to the
Security Council’s attention and use his power of mobilization.
• The United Nations has to stem the rising tide of refugees and internally
displaced persons.
• The prevention of conflicts, the implementation of treaties on human rights
and on international humanitarian law and the protection of the most
vulnerable as well as other important reasons require the entry into force of the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
• The United Nations must tackle everything that finances and fuels conflicts,
such as the illegal exploitation of natural resources; drug trafficking; and small
arms accumulations.
• Due attention should be given to such root causes of conflict, as poverty and
underdevelopment.
• The United Nations increasingly has to deal with warlords or States that refuse
to keep the commitments that they have made in peace agreements. Credible
and respected peace agreements are the key to the effectiveness of the United
Nations action.

C.

Sanctions
• When the Security Council resorts to sanctions, it must summon the will and
the wisdom to ensure that those sanctions are effectively enforced and that
they reach intended target without inflicting unnecessary collateral hardships.
• The United Nations should develop a clear and coherent methodology for the
imposition and lifting of sanctions that takes into consideration the concerns of
innocent civilian populations and the interests of third countries.
• Sanctions must be proportionate to their objective.
• There is a need to ensure that the sanctions regimes are reviewed, eased or
lifted so as not to prolong the agony of the affected peoples.
• Sanctions regimes should not be open-ended. However, they remain a valuable
tool to use in various situations where wars and rebel atrocities are fuelled by
the illegal trade in diamonds and other natural resources.
• There is a need to set up a permanent body within the Secretariat to control
illegal trafficking of all high-value commodities.

6

S/2001/185

D.

Peacekeeping operations
• The United Nations and its peacekeepers cannot be the answer to every crisis,
and every conflict, and every threat to human life. Nor can United Nations
peacekeeping be a substitute for the political will of the parties to achieve a
peaceful settlement.
• Facts proved that the success of the United Nations peacekeeping operations
depends on the observance of the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter, particularly the principles of respect for State sovereignty,
non-interference in the internal affairs, seeking prior consent of the parties
concerned, neutrality and the non-use of force except for self-defence.
• The United Nations should sum up its past experience and lessons. It is true
that the peacekeeping operations have contributed to international peace and
security, but they are not a panacea.
• It is a priority task to develop strategies for peacekeeping and peace-building,
including those for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants.
• There was statement that only the Security Council has the right to sanction
such an extreme measure as the use of force in a crisis situation. When so
acting the Security Council has a special responsibility to clearly define the
mandate and rules for conducting a peacekeeping operation.
• The Council and the Secretariat should make every effort to engage Member
States, particularly potential troop contributors, at the planning stage and at
every subsequent phase of the operation.
• The United Nations peacekeeping operations should be strengthened through,
i.a., suitable mandates that include cooperation with the civilian population, an
improved planning capability, rapid deployment of peace operations, and good
coordination among participants in the field.

i.

Mandate
• When the Security Council is asking to deploy a peacekeeping operation, it
must ensure a clear, achievable mandate.
• The Security Council mandates should enable operations to address root causes
of conflicts (if appropriate). In this context, strong support deserve such issues
as poverty eradication, sustainable development, democracy, good governance,
rule of law and prolongation of human rights as foundations of lasting peace.
• The objectives of the peacekeeping operations must be in line with the
operating mandate and the resources provided.
• When necessary the mandate should include rules on the protection of
civilians.

ii.

Personnel
• Peacekeeping operations should be established only when there is assurance of
adequate and well-trained and equipped personnel from Member States.

7

S/2001/185

• The United Nations needs to be able to have peacekeepers who can be rapidly
deployed, properly trained and equipped, and able to project credible force.
• States must provide the United Nations with the right quality and quantity of
personnel and equipment.
• The most recent conflicts have shown that troops and civilian personnel should
be efficiently trained.
iii.

Financing
• The financing of peacekeeping operations should be sufficient, and the
permanent Members of this Council should have a special responsibility in this
regard. The need for a gradual approach and the situation of developing
countries should also be taken into account when reviewing the financing of
these operations.
• Budget concerns must not be a paralyzing constraint from the outset.
• The United Nations finances need to be consolidated.

iv.

The perpetrators of crimes
• The perpetrators of crimes that offend the common conscience of humankind
cannot be left unpunished.
• Necessary action must be taken against those who capture power by illegally
overthrowing any constitutionally elected Government.

E.

Women
• Women should not be seen as mere victims of war.
• There is a need to take concrete measures to ensure a greater role of women in
all efforts for the maintenance and promotion of peace and security.

F.

Children
• Additional efforts and initiatives are needed to put an end to targeting of
children in situations of armed conflict, including killing and maiming, sexual
violence, abduction and forced displacement, recruitment and use of children
in armed conflict in violation of international law.
• To establish child-soldier-free zones in various parts of the world.

G.

African issues
• The United Nations and its Security Council should pay greater attention to
Africa and increase their input into that continent.
• The United Nations and its Security Council should more closely coordinate
their activities with the peacekeeping efforts of the African nations themselves.

8

S/2001/185

• In dealing with problems facing Africa, the United Nations and the Security
Council should fully respect the sovereignty of African countries, pay close
attention to the opinions of African countries and regional organizations, such
as the Organization of African Unity, take effective measures to keep African
countries away from poverty and warfare and help African peoples onto the
road to tranquillity, development and rejuvenation.
• The painful conflicts in Africa have diverse causes that require integrated
responses which combine the essential elements of peace and security with
sustainable development, representative democracy and the rule of law.
• These conflicts should be examined by the Security Council with special
sensitivity, which can only be reached through direct knowledge of the reality
and greater coordination with regional organizations and other United Nations
organs.
• Recent events have demonstrated the invaluable role that regional and
subregional organizations such as the Organization of African Unity, the
Southern African Development Community and the Economic Community of
West African States can play in maintaining or restoring international peace
and security in Africa.

H.

Disarmament, as concerns weapons of mass destruction
• Striving for general and complete disarmament is the United Nations
commitment.
• The United Nations must work towards effective international legal standards
to control the circulation of light weapons.
• It was called for all States to ratify and implement the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction.

I.

Issues of high concern

i.

HIV/AIDS and infectious diseases
• Today there is crucial need to pay special attention to problems that kill
massively, cross borders and destabilize whole regions — infectious diseases
such as malaria, tuberculosis and AIDS.

ii.

Ecology and health
• There is a need to invest in the basics: clean water, safe food, good sanitation
and health education. The United Nations must make sure that the
advancements in science work for all people.
• There is a need to meet by concrete contributions the challenge of climate
change.
• There was a word of support to the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol and
other objectives that will reduce the environmental threats.

9

S/2001/185

iii.

Poverty
• The United Nations must advance the broader agenda to fight the poverty that
breeds conflict and war.
• Broad-based economic growth helps to reduce poverty as a root cause of
conflict and must, therefore, be part of conflict prevention strategies.

iv.

Education
• There was a word of support to the goal of universal access to primary
education by 2015.

v.

Debt relief
• The idea of relieving debt, if the savings will be invested in the human needs
of the people, is an idea whose time came long ago, and the world community
has to do much more.

10
