S/2002/430

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 April 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 17 April 2002 from the President of the Security
Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
decided to send a mission to the Great Lakes region from 27 April to 7 May 2002.
The members of the Council have agreed on the terms of reference of the
mission (see annex).
Following consultations with the members, it has been agreed that the
composition of the mission is as follows:

02-33822 (E)

1.

Ambassador Jean-David Levitte (France), head of mission.

2.

Ambassador Stefan Tafrov (Bulgaria).

3.

Ambassador Martin Chungong Ayafor (Cameroon).

4.

Chen Xu, Minister Counsellor (China).

5.

Ambassador Alfonso Valdivieso (Colombia).

6.

Ambassador François Fall (Guinea).

7.

Ambassador Gerard Corr (Ireland).

8.

Ambassador Jagdish Koonjul (Mauritius).

9.

Ambassador Adolfo Aguilar Zinser (Mexico).

10.

Ambassador Wegger Christian Strommen (Norway).

11.

Ambassador Andrey Granovsky (Russian Federation).

12.

Lip Cheng How, Counsellor (Singapore).

13.

Ambassador Mikhail Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic).

14.

Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland).

15.

Ambassador Richard W. Williamson (United States of America).

170402

*0233822*

S/2002/430

I should be grateful if you could have the Secretariat make all the necessary
arrangements to facilitate the work of the mission.
(Signed) Sergey V. Lavrov
President of the Security Council

2

S/2002/430

Annex
Terms of reference for the Security Council mission to the Great
Lakes region
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
1.
The mission is in keeping with the partnership between the Security Council
and the parties to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and with the regular contacts
established between the parties and the Council. Its aim is to give new impetus to
the peace process, to support the efforts of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and to encourage the parties,
including by meeting with the Political Committee of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, to implement fully their commitments and to fulfil their obligations on
the basis of that Agreement and the resolutions of the Council. The mission will call
on all parties to accelerate their efforts to remove any obstacle to the peace process
through a viable political solution.
2.
At the time when MONUC is deploying in the east of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to facilitate the voluntary disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
repatriation and resettlement of the armed groups referred to the chapter 9.1 of
annex A to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, the mission will urge all parties to take
the necessary measures to start this process and to carry it to completion.
3.
The mission will discuss with the parties the means of speeding up and
facilitating the withdrawal of foreign troops, in accordance with the provisions of
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and the resolutions of the Council.
4.
In the light of the meeting of the Inter-Congolese Dialogue in Sun City, South
Africa, the mission will encourage the Congolese parties to work together, in a
consensual spirit, for the success of this dialogue.
5.

The mission will remind the parties of their obligations, and in particular:
– The strict respect of the ceasefire and of the disengagement plans of Kampala
and Harare, as well as of the relevant resolutions of the Council and decisions
of the Political Committee;
– The demilitarization of Kisangani, as demanded by the Council in its
resolution 1304 (2000).

6.
The mission will take every opportunity to express with its interlocutors its
concerns over:
– The human rights situation in the territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo;
– The humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
question of access to help to those who need it;
– The economic situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
– The illegal exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and its link with the conflict.

3

S/2002/430

7.
The mission will address with the parties the means to enable the resumption
of commercial traffic on the river, which would have a major impact on the
improvement of the humanitarian and economic situation of the country.
8.
The mission will discuss with the parties any other means for the Council and
for the international community to energize the peace process, for example through
a regional conference on the Great Lakes region, while reminding the parties that in
fine the success of the peace process rests upon them and that cooperation, dialogue
and confidence among the parties are necessary to advance this process.
The situation in Burundi
9.
The mission will provide its support to the peace process in Burundi. It will
express the support of the Council to the transitional Government and institutions
and discuss the implementation of the peace process.
10. The mission will support the Facilitation and, in close cooperation with it, will
urge the rebel groups to cease immediately the hostilities and to enter into
negotiation to ensure the success of the peace process. The mission will also address
this question with the neighbouring States of Burundi, in particular the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Tanzania, whose efforts in support of the peace process
and the Facilitation are appreciated by the Council.
11. The mission will address with its interlocutors the question of the human rights
and the humanitarian situation in the territory of Burundi, including the issue of the
refugees and the demobilization of child soldiers. It will also discuss with the
transitional Government of Burundi the dire economic situation the country is facing
and the risks this situation brings to the success of the peace process.
* * *
12. The mission will share its findings and recommendations with relevant bodies,
including the donor community and humanitarian agencies.

4
