UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/44
14 August 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3812th meeting of the Security Council, held on 14 August 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Albania", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the eleventh and last report of
the operation of the multinational protection force in Albania of
11 August 1997 (S/1997/632), submitted pursuant to the requirement set out
in paragraph 9 of resolution 1114 (1997).
"The Security Council notes with appreciation that the mandate of the
multinational protection force, as set out in its resolutions 1101 (1997)
and 1114 (1997) has been successfully fulfilled. The presence of the
multinational protection force has contributed to the facilitation of safe
and prompt delivery of humanitarian assistance in Albania. Its presence
has also helped to create a secure environment for the missions of
international organizations in Albania, as part of the efforts of the
international community, particularly the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the European Union, to find a peaceful solution
to the crisis and to assist international organizations in their role in
the electoral process in close cooperation with the Albanian authorities.
"The Security Council recognizes the role played by the multinational
protection force and the Governments of the participating countries under
Italian leadership in the full discharge of the mandate in assisting the
Albanian authorities and the international organizations involved.
"The Security Council is of the view that the Albanian people and
their authorities bear the primary responsibility for the future of Albania
and for restoring normal conditions in the country. The necessary
international assistance will be conditional upon Albania's own efforts at
achieving reconciliation, security, rehabilitation and economic reform.

97-21839 (E)

140897

/...

S/PRST/1997/44
English
Page 2

"In this respect, the Security Council encourages the international
community to assist and support the economic, social and institutional
rehabilitation of Albania, and welcomes the steps that have already been
taken in this direction, including the preparatory meetings for the
Ministerial Conference to be held in Rome in autumn 1997."

-----
