A /73/PV.69

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

69

th plenary meeting
Friday, 1 March 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 140 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/73/722/Add.2)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before
proceeding to the items on our agenda, in keeping with
established practice, I would like to draw the attention
of the General Assembly to document A/73/722/Add.2,
in which the Secretary-General informs the President
of the General Assembly that, since the issuance of his
communication contained in document A/73/722/Add.1,
the Plurinational State of Bolivia has made the payment
necessary to reduce its arrears below the amount
specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes
due note of the information contained in document
A/73/722/Add.2?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 33
The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict
Note verbale dated 18 January 2019 from
the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (A/73/720)
Draft resolution (A/73/L.75)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania to introduce
draft resolution A/73/L.75.

Mr. Jinga (Romania): I see there is not a big crowd
in the Hall, probably because of the cold outside. Those
who were brave enough to come have done so for a
good cause.
I have the great pleasure to introduce today draft
resolution A/73/L.75, entitled “The role of diamonds in
fuelling conflict: breaking the link between the illicit
transaction of rough diamonds and armed conflict as a
contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts”,
on behalf of the European Union (EU), the outgoing
Chair of the Kimberley Process, in Romania’s current
role as President of the Council of the European Union.
The draft resolution welcomes the progress made by
the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme in severing
the links between the diamond trade and conflict. It
aims at intensifying that work and aligning it with the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. I would like
to congratulate the European Union and the European
Commission on their chairmanship of the Kimberley
Process. The European Union was at the forefront of
the Kimberley Process at its inception and will continue
to do its utmost to ensure that the Kimberley Process
continues to fulfil its role as a unique tool for conflict
prevention and a catalyst for good governance and
transparency in natural-resource management.
The Kimberley Process was established by the
United Nations in 2003 to prevent conflict diamonds
from entering the mainstream market. The Certification
Scheme has made a valuable contribution to international
security, development and human rights.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-05984 (E)

*1905984*

A/73/PV.69

The global diamond trade was very different 16
years ago than it is today. Diamond-rich areas in some
parts of the world had fallen under the control of rebel
movements, which used them to fund their activities
and fuel devastating conflicts. At the other end of the
supply chain, customers had little to no way of knowing
where the diamonds had originated. The Kimberley
Process, a joint initiative of Governments, civil society
and industry, has transformed that situation. It has cut
the flow of diamonds to insurgencies and rebel groups,
raised awareness among consumers and contributed
to safeguarding the legitimate diamond trade, thereby
improving the livelihoods of those relying on it to feed
and educate their families.
Despite those accomplishments, there remains a
sense of urgency in aligning the diamond industry with
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and to
thereby contribute to sustaining peace. Conflict-free
diamonds bring the world one step closer to ending
poverty and ensuring prosperity. We must work
towards a market free from human rights abuses and
forced labour.
This draft resolution is an important step forward
for the Kimberley Process. It contributes to the
broader United Nations agenda by encouraging further
strengthening of the Kimberley Process, enhancing its
effectiveness in addressing challenges and ensuring
that it remains relevant for the future. The draft
resolution also encourages further exploring and
advancing the ways by which the Kimberley Process
contributes to peacebuilding and sustaining peace,
international peace and security, and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
The EU chairmanship delivered progress on all of
its priorities for the Kimberley Process — ensuring
that the Process remained fit for purpose through
reform; reinforcing its unique tripartite structure of
Governments, industry and civil society; strengthening
its implementation and effectiveness; and focusing
on human conditions in mining and the prosperity of
producing communities.
The draft resolution recalls the commitment of
the Kimberley Process to the reform and review,
and in particular how to strengthen the scope of the
Process. It notes that the Ad Hoc Committee on Review
and Reform will continue its work in the areas of
consolidating the core document, strengthening the
2/12

01/03/2019

peer-review mechanism and establishing a permanent
secretariat and, potentially, an assistance fund.
The EU chairmanship worked towards consolidating
the effectiveness of the mechanism for peacebuilding,
conflict prevention and the promotion of in-country
due diligence. It also worked to further reinforce
cooperation among Governments, the diamond industry
and civil society organizations.
While placing special emphasis on local
communities and how diamonds can lift them out of
poverty, the EU Chair also focused on promoting
partnerships and cooperation between Governments
and local communities and between the private sector
and civil society in order to make sure that diamonds
are a source of sustainable growth instead of financing
wars. Romania, together with the other 27 States
members of the European Union, works to ensure that
natural resources serve local communities, not private
armies and criminal groups.
I take this opportunity to wish the best of luck to
India as incoming Chair of the Kimberly Process, the
Russian Federation as Vice-Chair for 2019 and Chair
for 2020, and Botswana as Vice-Chair for 2020 and
Chair for 2021.
From blood diamonds to peace diamonds, I count
on the members of the General Assembly to adopt this
draft resolution by consensus today.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Ms. Hardeman (European Union): As Chair of the
Kimberley Process for 2018, I have the honour today
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
The European Union has been at the forefront of
the Kimberley Process from the very beginning. Since
the start, the European Union has played an active role
in the development of this unique global partnership
to stop conflict diamonds, underpinned by the United
Nations. The Kimberley Process came about as a result
of concerted action by Governments, industry and
civil society. Its establishment followed a call by the
General Assembly.
The European Union is proud of what has been
achieved since the Kimberley Process was launched,
just over 15 years ago. The process has contributed
decisively to ending the trade in blood diamonds, which
19-05984

01/03/2019

fuelled several violent conflicts in the late 1990s. The
share of what can be defined as conflict diamonds has
decreased since 2003, from approximately 15 per cent to
less than 1 per cent today. That is significant. These are
not just figures; for several countries and communities
the Kimberley Process has made the difference between
life and death, between war and peace.
This joint effort to ensure that peace diamonds
benefit communities, not militias, has continued to
attract new participants. Most recently, the Republic of
Gabon joined the Process, and still more countries have
applied to join.
As Chair of the Kimberley Process last year, the
European Union worked to ensure that the Kimberley
Process delivers. The European Union also sought to
ensure that the Kimberley Process remained equipped
to address today’s challenges, including those resulting
from instability and conflict, and that the Process
remained an effective instrument for peace and
prosperity, thereby contributing to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
One of the priorities of our chairmanship was
to further strengthen the tripartite structure of
Governments, civil society and industry, which is the
backbone of the Kimberley Process. That tripartite
relationship is reinvigorated and increasingly active
today.
As Chair, the European Union devoted considerable
attention to sustainability and responsibility in
artisanal and small-scale mining, in keeping with our
commitment to the implementation of the Brussels
Declaration on Internal Controls of Participants with
Rough Diamond Trading and Manufacturing, the
Moscow Declaration on Improving Internal Controls
over Alluvial Diamond Production and the Washington
Declaration on Integrating Development of Artisanal
and Small-Scale Diamond Mining with Kimberley
Process Implementation.
The European Union continues to encourage
regional approaches to addressing challenges of
compliance, building on the experience of the Mano
River Union. We welcome the efforts to develop a similar
approach in the Central African region. Transparency
and accountability of the rough diamond supply chain
are paramount to ensuring a responsible approach
to sourcing rough diamonds. The European Union
supports the continued and strengthened commitment
of the Government of the Central African Republic

A/73/PV.69

to working collaboratively with the monitoring team
in order to ensure the traceability of rough diamond
shipments from compliant zones.
Since its establishment, in 2003, the Kimberley
Process has made a real difference, but much more
needs to be done. A sense of urgency remains. The
European Union strongly believes that the Process must
continue to evolve so that it remains fit for purpose in
future. If we are faithful to the Kimberley Process, we
must act on those challenges now.
That is why in 2018 the European Union made the
review and reform process of the Kimberley Process
the centrepiece of its chairmanship, while assuming the
role of honest broker in moving the third reform cycle
forward. That is also why the European Union launched
a debate on the scope of the Kimberley Process. That
debate must reach a positive conclusion in 2019. To that
end, the EU will contribute actively to the work of the
Ad Hoc Committee on Review and Reform, now under
the chairmanship and vice-chairmanship of Angola and
Canada, respectively, and will work closely with India
as Chair of the Kimberley Process for 2019 and with the
Russian Federation as the 2019 Vice-Chair.
The Kimberley Process stands out as an example
of the positive change the international community can
bring about when we work together towards a common
objective. It stands out, as well, as a practical example
of rules-based multilateralism that has had a real impact
on the lives of men and women, of girls and boys and of
entire communities across the globe.
The European Union will continue to strive for
the Kimberley Process to carry on fulfilling its role
as a unique tool for conflict prevention, a catalyst for
good governance and transparency in natural-resources
management and an instrument for development,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
The European Union looks forward to working
closely with India as the 2019 Kimberley Process Chair,
with the Russian Federation as Vice-Chair and with all
participants and observers to ensure that an enhanced
Kimberley Process can face up to new challenges,
prevent conflict and create opportunities for a better
life and a better world. If we work together, we can and
will deliver.
Ms. Fisher-Tsin (Israel): I would like to convey the
delegation of Israel’s sincere gratitude to the European
Union for serving as Chair of the Kimberley Process

19-059843/12

A/73/PV.69

for 2018 and for its leadership role in facilitating draft
resolution A/73/L.75. We welcome India as the new
Chair for 2019 and look forward to continuing the
ground-breaking work of the Kimberley Process as a
model for multilateralism at its finest.
A group of African diamond-producing countries
put forth an initiative in 2003 that would change the
diamond industry forever. Today, 16 years later, 81
nations have committed to a measure that has made
99.8 per cent of the world’s diamonds conflict-free.
The Kimberley Process is proof that the right mix of
cooperation, determination and commitment can solve
this complex problem, save countless lives and improve
the well-being of those dependent upon the diamond
trade to make a living. For that we should be proud.
The legitimate trade in diamonds, the success of which
can be largely attributed to the Kimberley Process, is
critical for economic growth, social development and
the eradication of poverty. As such, Israel commends
the efforts made to tie the Kimberley Process to the
Sustainable Development Goals.
Israel was one of the first countries to play a part in
establishing the Kimberley Process, and the first country
to issue a certificate when the Process went into effect
in 2003. Israel pioneered harnessing technology to aid
the process. It has mandated that diamond imports be
fully computerized, opened at delivery and examined
at customs with the minimum possible margin of error.
Israel was also among the first nations to look into
harnessing blockchain technology for the maintenance
and development of the ever-increasing regulatory
measures designed to best uphold the process. Our
control measures and regulations form a highly secure
environment for the Kimberley Process to operate most
effectively. Israel went through its peer review in 2017,
passing with flying colours. In the findings of the review
we were praised not only for meeting the minimum
standards of the Kimberley Process and for being in
full compliance, but particularly for our strict auditing
processes, data organization and uniform enforcement
of the Kimberley Process nationwide. Members of the
Israel Diamond Exchange are required to abide by
the recently adopted ethical code of conduct, which
stresses integrity, fairness, accountability, tradition,
human rights, the rule of law and other principles to
ensure fair and moral business practices.
The legitimate diamond industry today employs
almost 40,000 people in Southern Africa alone.
4/12

01/03/2019

Its revenues generate substantial funding for HIV
prevention, detection and treatment services in Africa
and help countless young boys and girls gain access to
better education.
However, we cannot forget that, despite the
overwhelming good the Kimberley Process has done, it
is not a perfect system. Still, 0.2 per cent of diamonds
worldwide are conflict diamonds, linked directly to
armed conflict and the trampling of human rights. The
international community must do everything in its
power to secure the remaining 0.2 per cent of diamonds
within the boundaries of the Kimberley Process.
Israel attaches great importance to the peerreview mechanism and supports the establishment of
a multi-donor fund and the creation of a new code for
international customs controls for synthetic diamonds.
As a member of all Kimberley Process subcommittees,
Israel is ready to take a leading role in increasing the
impact of the Kimberley Process as it relates to stability
and sustainability across diamond-producing States.
By sharing our knowledge, expertise and strategies,
Israel looks forward to making a difference until every
last diamond on Earth is certified and every civilian in
the process is safe.
Mr. Kelapile (Botswana): At the outset, our
delegation joins others in thanking you, Madam
President, for convening this annual briefing on
the Kimberley Process under the theme “The role
of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the link
between the illicit transaction of rough diamonds and
armed conflict as a contribution to prevention and
settlement of conflicts”. We also express our sincere
appreciation to the delegation of the European Union
(EU) for its able stewardship of the Kimberley Process
in 2018. Indeed, during its tenure the Kimberley Process
held two main successful sessions — the intercessional
and plenary meetings — through which the 2018
Kimberley Process final communiqué was adopted by
the 55 participants representing 82 countries, including
the 28 States members of the European Union. We
therefore commend the European Union, as outgoing
Chair, for presenting the 2018 implementation report
(see A/73/720), and Romania for introducing draft
resolution A/73/L.75.
As both the report and the draft resolution before
us emphasize, the Kimberley Process has made great
strides over the past 16 years, including achieving
the broadest possible participation in the Certificate
19-05984

01/03/2019

Scheme. Since its establishment, in 2003, conflict
diamonds have dropped from 15 per cent to less than
1 per cent as a proportion of the global trade in rough
diamonds. It was this organ, the General Assembly, that
supported the call by the diamond industry, especially
African producing States, to launch an international
trading regime that would monitor and regulate the
trade in rough diamonds, hence the gradual reduction
in conflict diamonds that we witness today.
Through the important draft resolution that we will
adopt today, the United Nations will once again confirm
the importance of the diamond sector as a catalyst for
promoting economic and social development, which
are necessary for poverty reduction and addressing
inequalities in our countries.
The Assembly has noted the positive benefits of
the legitimate diamond trade to producing countries,
including transparency and accountability, and
the contribution the diamond sector continues to
make to the economies of producing, exporting and
importing States. It has therefore underlined the need
for international action with regard to the ethical
exploitation, sale and trade in diamonds.
The draft resolution also encourages further
strengthening of the Kimberley Process to enhance
its effectiveness in addressing the challenges to the
diamond industry and its implications for the lives of
people in the communities that should benefit from the
associated gains. That includes addressing instability,
preventing conflict and ensuring that the Kimberley
Process remains relevant in contributing to sustainable
development, peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
Also crucial to note is the commitment of
the Kimberley Process members to continuing
discussions on reform and review, as noted by the Ad
Hoc Committee on Review and Reform, which will
continue consultations on the areas of consolidation
of the core document and strengthening of the peer
review mechanism, the establishment of the permanent
secretariat and the multi-donor fund and how to
strengthen the scope of the Kimberley Process.
Furthermore, our delegation is pleased that the draft
resolution also calls for efforts to enhance cooperation
and to provide assistance to diamond-producing
countries, including through the sharing of best
practices, capacity-building and required compliance
with the Kimberley Process standards, rules and
procedures, as well as the Certification Scheme.

A/73/PV.69

There is no doubt that the Kimberley Process is
a truly unique multilateral initiative that has brought
together key stakeholders — such as Governments, the
diamond industry and civil society — in a concerted
effort to curb the flow of illicit and conflict diamonds
to the legitimate diamond market. The tripartite nature
of the Kimberley Process continues to be the main
source of strength of its Certification Scheme. In that
regard, we have good reason to jealously guard this
multi-stakeholder partnership, which remains one of
the best examples of a United Nations-led initiative for
a common endeavour. It is for that very reason that the
Chairs of the Kimberley Process are mandated by the
General Assembly to brief it annually on the state of the
diamond industry and compliance by Member States.
Beyond enabling socioeconomic development for
the benefit of millions of our peoples, the combined
efforts of the Kimberley Process and the United
Nations have seen the settlement of intractable conflicts
and the consolidation of peace in several African
countries. It is our fervent hope that soon the entire
Central African Republic will also be declared a full
green zone exporting State so that its people can also
enjoy the fruits and positive dividends of the minerals
sector. We therefore look forward to seeing the Central
African Republic implement its post-sanctions strategy.
Botswana is ready to contribute to that effort, which is
also crucial to the neighbouring countries.
The continued success of the Kimberley Process is
important and confirms what can be accomplished when
global commitment is matched with global action. The
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme has a direct
impact on the effective mobilization of resources to
achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Furthermore, the effective implementation of Security
Council resolution 1459 (2003) has significantly reduced
the trade in conflict diamonds for many Member States,
thereby enabling them to use the economic gains to
raise the living standards of their people.
For countries like our own, Botswana, whose
diamond revenues have always been channelled
towards development purposes, the Kimberley Process
has enabled us to protect the integrity and reputation of
our most valued commodity, diamonds. As the world’s
leading diamond producer by value, it goes without
saying that diamonds, which account for the larger
part of our gross domestic product, are unquestionably
the mainstay of Botswana’s development agenda. As
Botswana’s former President Mogae once said when

19-059845/12

A/73/PV.69

presenting the Kimberley Process report to the General
Assembly a decade ago in his capacity as the then Chair
of the Process,
“For our people in Botswana, every diamond
bought means food on the table, better living
conditions, better health care, safe drinking water,
more roads and much, much more.”
In short, for Botswana, diamonds are for
development, and we aspire to see the same for all
producing Member States. Through sound policies, our
Government has successfully ensured that the proceeds
from diamond sales contribute to the implementation
of our successive national development plans and
national visions, including our Vision 2036. Through
our national road map, we are equally committed to
applying those gains to realize the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the African Union’s
Agenda 2063, all of which Botswana fully subscribes
to. We encourage all the members of the Kimberley
Process to adhere to high standards, which includes
putting in place enabling national legislation and
competent institutions, as well as stringent internal
controls to ensure transparency and to facilitate the
exchange of statistical data.
Based on its development success story, Botswana
stands ready to share lessons, experiences and best
practices with other mineral-producing countries,
especially those emerging from conflict situations.
In that regard, we support the African Union’s Africa
Mining Vision, adopted in 2009, and its ongoing
transition, and hope that it will serve as a pivotal
common platform for African countries to work
together based on a shared vision of the Africa we want.
In conclusion, we once more underscore that through
the Kimberley Process and the firm commitment of
the General Assembly, we can enhance our prospects
of achieving peace and security and the commitments
set out in the Organization’s 2030 Agenda, as well
as the African Union’s Agenda 2063 and associated
initiatives, such as the Africa Mining Vision.
We reaffirm Botswana’s commitment to the
Kimberley Process initiative. Moving forward, we take
this opportunity to welcome the selection of India as
Chair of the Kimberley Process for 2019 and the Russian
Federation as Vice-Chair for 2019 and subsequent Chair
for 2020. We assure them of our full cooperation and
support during their tenure. My country, Botswana,
6/12

01/03/2019

will be ready to serve as Vice-Chair for 2020 and Chair
for 2021.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates): I take
this opportunity to thank the President of the General
Assembly for convening this plenary meeting on agenda
item 33, “The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict”.
At the outset, I would like to express my
delegation’s appreciation to the European Union,
the outgoing Chair of the Kimberley Process, for its
distinguished leadership and hard work in facilitating
and coordinating the negotiations on draft resolution
A/73/L.75, which we will adopt today.
The Kimberley Process is one of the most successful
partnerships between Governments, the private sector
and civil society to ensure that blood diamonds are not
entered or involved in the legitimate trade of diamonds.
The challenges are not limited to the blood diamond
trade, but make the diamond trade stronger and
more sustainable.
During its remarkable chairmanship in 2016,
the United Arab Emirates initiated a discussion on
establishing a permanent secretariat for the Kimberley
Process, among other initiatives. We are pleased to see
the commitment that the members of the group have
shown on finding a way forward for establishing a
permanent secretariat, which will spare them all the
various structural deficiencies that result from the lack
of a permanent secretariat equipped with professional
skills and resources that will outlive the rotation of
country Chairs. We should accelerate our efforts to
achieve greater quality and effectiveness so as to ensure
the Kimberley Process’s efficiency and success.
Ms. Al-Thani
the Chair.

(Qatar),

Vice-President,

took

We are very grateful that this initiative is
recognized in the draft resolution and will be discussed
further under the incoming Chair. In that regard,
on behalf of the United Arab Emirates, I would like
to congratulate India and the Russian Federation, the
Chair and Vice-Chair, respectively, of the Kimberley
Process for 2019.
Ms. Bird (Australia): I would first like to thank
the European Union for its leadership of the Kimberley
Process as Chair in 2018, and in particular for its
commitment to taking forward the targeted reform
agenda on which the Kimberley Process agreed at
the Brisbane plenary in 2017. We thank the European
19-05984

01/03/2019

Union for leading the process of revising the core
document. Australia also welcomes India to the role
of Chair of the Kimberley Process in 2019 and looks
forward to working with it to strengthen the Kimberley
Process so that it remains relevant in an era of new
challenges to the modern diamond industry, including
artisanal and alluvial mining and synthetic diamonds.
We acknowledge the significant contribution of all
stakeholders, including those that serve on committees.
We welcome the extension of the Ad Hoc Committee on
Review and Reform for a further year and thank India
for chairing it in 2018.
Australia is honoured to have chaired the
Committee on Participation and Chairmanship in 2018.
In that role, we worked to ensure that the Kimberley
Process maintains high standards of compliance and
integrity. We worked inclusively with stakeholders to
strengthen the tripartite Government, industry and
civil-society structure. We made progress on draft
policy and procedures for including or admitting
observers and welcomed Gabon as a participant in the
Kimberley Process.

A/73/PV.69

Union for its hard work and effective chairmanship of
the Kimberley Process in 2018, and to welcome India,
which has assumed the post this year. We would like to
note that the Russian Federation takes a positive view
of draft resolution A/73/L.75 and is one of its sponsors.
The Kimberley Process is a unique international
process that ensures the comprehensive monitoring of
trade in commodities and specifically in what is itself
an exceptional product, rough natural diamonds. This
year will be important to the future development and
improvement of the Process. We commend the guiding
principles of the World Diamond Council System of
Warranties, adopted last year. We would like to thank
the Republic of Botswana for its constructive attitude
to determining the rotation of chairmanship of the
Process. Russia and Botswana’s joint work will enable
us to ensure the future development of the Process and
to raise relations between our countries to a new level.

The Kimberley Process Certification Scheme makes
an important contribution to achieving the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable
Development Goals. Peace and development are
intrinsically and increasingly linked, and we welcome
the ways in which the Kimberley Process continues to
contribute to peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We
encourage other stakeholders whose work is relevant to
the diamond industry and that have a commitment to
the Kimberley Process values and processes to join or
participate in the Scheme.

We note the importance of increasing monitoring
of the unconditional disclosure of information on the
source of diamonds at every stage that ownership
changes hands in order to eliminate the possibility
of synthetic stones entering the international market
as natural diamonds. During our chairmanship of
the Kimberley Process, we intend to showcase an
integrated information system for monitoring the trade
in precious metals and stones, including, among other
things, tracking the trade in rough natural diamonds
and their subsequent processing and sale. The system
experiment will be completed in 2019 and as a result
will then become mandatory for all participants in the
Russian Federation’s market.

We thank the European Union for continuing to
advance reform, building on the progress achieved
during Australia’s chairing of the Kimberley Process
in 2017. Such reform is critical to positioning the
Kimberley Process to make an increasingly important
contribution to maintaining international peace and
security and ensuring that communities benefit directly
from the proceeds of diamond production and trading.

The Kimberley Process is a unique forum in which
members in any situation can find mutually beneficial
solutions based on the principle of consensus, regardless
of their international relations on other issues of
international cooperation. We firmly believe that the
joint productive work of all participants this year will
enable us to achieve significant results in developing
and improving the Process.

Finally, we congratulate the Russian Federation
and Botswana on their appointments as Vice-Chair for
2019 and 2020, respectively, and look forward to their
assumption of the roles of Chair and host in 2020, for
Russia, and 2021, for Botswana.

Mr. Chaturvedi (India): I am speaking today in
my delegation’s capacity as Chair of the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme for 2019. We would like
to congratulate the European Union on its leadership
of the Process in 2018 and on its introduction of draft
resolution A/73/L.75 for the Assembly’s consideration
and adoption today. I also want to take this opportunity

Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would first like to thank the European

19-059847/12

A/73/PV.69

to welcome the Russian Federation and Botswana as
Vice-Chairs for 2019 and 2020, respectively.
India is one of the founding members of the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme and looks
forward to continuing the excellent initiatives taken
last year under the chairmanship of the European
Union. We will also strengthen the tripartite structure
of the Kimberley Process by engaging regularly with
the civil society coalition and industry and encouraging
discussion among the three pillars that make up the
Kimberley Process — Governments, industry and civil
society — with a view to reaching consensus on the
various agendas set forth. We will also work to enhance
the regional approach, which has been immensely
successful with the Mano River Union countries.
One of the key priorities this year will be to work to
support the alluvial and artisanal mining countries with
capacity-building initiatives. In addition, we would also
like to focus on important organizational issues, such as
the creation of a permanent secretariat for the Kimberley
Process, the reform of the peer-review process, the
consolidation of the core document, the creation of
multi-donor funding and other important issues.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that we will
continue to work together as the Kimberley Process
family and take its mandate forward, on the basis of
the established guiding principles of inclusiveness,
responsibility and dialogue.
Mr. Manyeh (Sierra Leone): I congratulate the
President on organizing this meeting on the adoption
of draft resolution A/73/L.75, entitled “The role of
diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the link
between the illicit transaction of rough diamonds and
armed conflict as a contribution to prevention and
settlement of conflict”. Let me also thank the European
Union, 2018 Chair of the Kimberley Process, for
its efforts in that regard. I would like to express our
congratulations to India as the incoming Chair of the
Kimberley Process, as well as to the Russian Federation
as the new Vice-Chair.
The Kimberley Process, which is celebrating its
fifteenth year of existence, has since its inception, in
2003, contributed extensively to peace, security and
prosperity. For all intents and purposes, the Kimberley
process has proved to be an effective mechanism for
conflict prevention by reducing the flow of conflict
diamonds over the years, thereby inducing diamondproducing countries to follow due process prior to the
8/12

01/03/2019

shipment of rough diamonds. In addition, the Kimberley
Process is also contributing to the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
as it has put in place a mechanism that has greatly
increased diamond revenue, which in turn has given
Governments the opportunity to invest in povertyeradication programmes.
Our delegation is of the view that the Kimberley
Process serves as an effective tool to address the
problems related to the diamond industry. There is
therefore a need to support the draft resolution, in
view of its potential to contribute to international
peace and security as well as peacebuilding. Following
the end of the 11-year civil war in Sierra Leone, the
Kimberley Process helped stabilize the illicit trade in
diamonds. All diamonds exported from Sierra Leone
now go through the certification mechanism that was
put in place by the Kimberley Process. The illicit sale
of diamonds has thereby been reduced to a minimum.
Our delegation is pleased to inform those present at
this meeting that Sierra Leone has now put in place a
policy for artisanal mining with a view to eliminating
the risks involved in that type of mining. That is the
first policy on artisanal mining since diamond mining
started in Sierra Leone, in the 1930s, when diamonds
were discovered. We hope that the draft resolution,
which is to be adopted today, takes into consideration the
situation in our mining communities. We believe that if
the Kimberley Process were to include development in
the mining communities in its mandate, it would be easy
to ensure mining companies lived up to their corporate
social responsibilities, which would provide basic
social amenities for the benefit of mining communities.
Gender inclusion in the diamond industry is
another aspect that the Kimberley Process could
consider bringing on board during the implementation
of the draft resolution, given the fact that there is a
significant percentage of women actively participating
in the mining industry.
The potential for regional cooperation is high,
especially in the Mano River Union region of Guinea,
Sierra Leone, Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire. To a very large
extent, regional cooperation would help enhance the
Kimberley Process. With that kind of cooperation in
place, all diamond sales within the region would have
to go through a thorough certification process, thereby
curtailing the illicit sale of diamonds. Our delegation
calls on all actors working on the Kimberley Process
19-05984

01/03/2019

A/73/PV.69

to work in close collaboration, coordinate actions
and share information with a view to achieving that
common goal.

United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields.

In conclusion, let me assure the General Assembly
of Sierra Leone’s full support for draft resolution
A/73/L.75.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the Minister of Environment and Natural
Resources of El Salvador to introduce draft resolution
A/73.L.76.

The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/73/L.75, entitled “The role of diamonds in fuelling
conflict: breaking the link between the illicit transaction
of rough diamonds and armed conflict as a contribution
to prevention and settlement of conflicts”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/73/L.75: Albania,
Armenia, Australia, Cameroon, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
El Salvador, Estonia, Hungary, India, Ireland, Israel,
Japan, Namibia, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Portugal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, the
United Arab Emirates and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
adopt draft resolution A/73/L.75?
Draft resolution
(resolution 73/283).

A/73/L.75

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 33?
It was so decided.
The President took the Chair.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major

Draft resolution (A/73/L.76)

Ms. Pohl Alfaro (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, on behalf of the Government of El Salvador,
allow me to thank the General Assembly for the
opportunity to introduce draft resolution A/73/L.76,
entitled “United Nations Decade on Ecosystem
Restoration (2021-2030)”. The draft resolution seeks
to establish a framework for action to promote and
revitalize existing agreements and commitments and
ensure coordination and synergy, thereby making
a significant contribution to the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, while respecting
the existing mandates of United Nations agencies.
Ecosystem degradation has a considerable effect
on biodiversity, land productivity and the economy of
our nations, in particular in vulnerable areas in Africa,
Asia and Latin America. Ecosystem degradation leads
to a loss of critical ecosystem services, which has a
negative impact on the well-being of at least 3.2 billion
people in the world and increases their vulnerability to
the effects of climate change. Reversing that situation is
possible with nature-based actions. A holistic approach
to ecosystem restoration can generate tangible benefits
that will increase food and water security, help preserve
biodiversity and contribute to climate-change mitigation
and adaptation efforts and disaster risk reduction.
The establishment of the decade will create an
enabling environment to raise public awareness about
the importance of functional ecosystems that ensure
human well-being, economic sustainability and
sustainable development. Similarly, it will also promote
and facilitate greater engagement by the relevant
actors in restoration activities, thereby encouraging
and achieving the full participation and involvement
of various stakeholders, such as local communities,
the private and public sectors, academia, indigenous
peoples and society in general.
Promoted through the proposal for a United
Nations decade, ecosystem restoration would adopt
a multifunctional landscape approach through a

19-059849/12

A/73/PV.69

01/03/2019

mosaic of interdependent land uses, where ecological,
economic, social and development priorities can find
convergence, balance and complementarity to become
a cost-effective instrument for achieving the goals and
objectives set by the various multilateral environmental
agreements. It would lead to synergistic approaches to
agendas relating to climate change, biodiversity, water
resources, land degradation and risk reduction, which in
turn would result in the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals, in particular SDG 15, regarding
life on land; SDG 2, on zero hunger, food security,
improved nutrition and sustainable agriculture; SDG 6,
on clean water and sanitation; SDG 12, on responsible
consumption and production; SDG 13, on climate
action; and SDG 14, on life under water in the oceans
and seas.
I would like to especially thank all delegations
for supporting the initiative and for contributing
constructively in the process to prepare a consensusbased draft resolution. I also thank the United Nations
Environment Programme, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the International
Union for Conservation of Nature for their valuable
technical support, commitment and contribution to the
development of draft resolution A/73/L.76. I especially
thank the 71 countries that have co-sponsored it
thus far. I am also grateful for the current efforts to
develop monitoring tools and protocols for ecosystem
restoration activities. They will help to monitor the
benefits derived from the United Nations decade at
the national and international level, which will help
to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and the
2030 Agenda.
El Salvador invites all States Members of the
United Nations to proclaim the United Nations Decade
for Ecosystem Restoration 2021-2030.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.76,
entitled “United Nations Decade on Ecosystem
Restoration (2021-2030)”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I deliver the
following oral statement in accordance with rule 153 of
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
10/12

Under the terms of paragraphs 1, 4 and 7 of draft
resolution A/73/L.76, the General Assembly would first
decide to proclaim 2021-2030 as the United Nations
Decade on Ecosystem Restoration, within existing
structures and available resources, with the aim of
supporting and scaling-up efforts to prevent, halt and
reverse the degradation of ecosystems worldwide
and raise awareness of the importance of successful
ecosystem restoration; secondly, invite the United
Nations Environment Programme and the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to lead
the implementation of the decade, in collaboration with
the secretariats of the Rio conventions, other relevant
multilateral environmental agreements and entities of
the United Nations system, including by identifying and
developing possible activities and programmes, within
their mandates and existing resources, and through
voluntary contributions, as appropriate; and, thirdly,
request the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its eighty-first session on the status of
the implementation of the present draft resolution,
including its contribution to the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
It is anticipated that the request in paragraph 7
related to the report at the eighty-first session will
constitute an addition to the documentation workload
of the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management of one pre-session report of
8,500 words, to be issued in all six official languages
in 2026. That would entail additional requirements for
documentation services in 2026, which are currently
estimated at $27,200. With regard to the requests in
paragraphs 1 and 4, it is expected that extrabudgetary
resources would be required to implement the activities
related to the United Nations Decade on Ecosystem
Restoration (2021-2030). It is, however, not possible at
the present time to establish the scope and modalities of
those activities, and therefore to estimate the potential
cost implications.
The activities related to the requests in paragraphs 1
and 4 would be carried out provided that the related
extrabudgetary resources were made available.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt draft
resolution A/73/L.76, additional requirements currently
estimated at $27,200 under section 2 — General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council Affairs
and Conference Management — would be included in
the proposed programme budget for the year 2026.
19-05984

01/03/2019

A/73/PV.69

Copies of the statement I just read out have been
made available on the PaperSmart portal.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.76,
entitled “United Nations Decade on Ecosystem
Restoration (2021-2030)”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that, since the submission of the
draft resolution, and in addition to those delegations
listed in the document, the following countries have
become sponsors of draft resolution A/73/L.76:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, Cameroon, Canada, the Central African
Republic, Chile, Colombia, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Kazakhstan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, the
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia,
Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Romania,
the Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Tajikistan, TimorLeste, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay and Viet Nam.
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/73/L.76?
Draft resolution A/73/L.76
(resolution 73/284).

was

adopted

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the representative of the United States
of America, who wishes to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Lawrence (United States of America): At
the outset, I would like to say that we were surprised
and somewhat disappointed to learn of the programme
budget implication associated with resolution 72/284.
We were not led to believe that would be the case. This
once again gives evidence that we do not always adopt
these sorts of year, decade and day resolutions fully
informed. We take this opportunity to make important
points of clarification on some of the language in
the resolution.

We underscore that the resolution, and many of
the outcome documents referenced therein, including
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, are non-binding
documents that do not create rights or obligations under
international law. The United States position regarding
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development was
articulated in the explanation of position on that
document. The United States supports the spirit of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as a
framework for development and will continue to be
a global leader in sustainable development through
its policies, partnerships, innovations and calls to
action. We applaud the call for shared responsibility,
including national responsibility, in the 2030 Agenda
and emphasize that all countries have a role to play
in achieving its vision. However, the 2030 Agenda
recognizes that every country must work towards its
implementation in accordance with its own national
policies and priorities.
The United States also underscored that paragraph
18 of the 2030 Agenda calls for countries to implement
the Agenda in a manner that is consistent with the
rights and obligations of States under international law.
We also highlight our mutual recognition in paragraph
58 that the implementation of the 2030 Agenda must
respect and be without prejudice to the independent
mandates of other processes and institutions, including
negotiations, and does not prejudice or serve as
precedent for decisions and actions under way in other
forums. For example, the Agenda does not represent a
commitment to provide new market access for goods
or services. The Agenda also does not interpret or alter
any World Trade Organization agreement or decision,
including the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights.
We also make important points of clarification
regarding the reaffirmation of the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda. Specifically, we note that much of the
trade-related language in the Addis Ababa outcome
document has been overtaken by events since July
2015. Therefore, it is immaterial, and our reaffirmation
of the outcome document has no standing for ongoing
work and negotiations that involve trade.
Finally, with regard to the New Urban Agenda, the
United States believes that every Member State has the
sovereign right to determine how it conducts trade with
other countries and that that includes restricting trade
in certain circumstances. Economic sanctions, whether

19-0598411/12

A/73/PV.69

unilateral or multilateral, can be a successful means of
achieving foreign policy objectives. In cases where the
United States has applied sanctions, they have been used
with specific objectives in mind, including as a means
to promote a return to the rule of law or democratic
systems, to respect human rights and fundamental
freedoms or to prevent threats to international security.
We are within our rights to utilize our trade and
commercial policy as tools to achieve noble objectives.

12/12

01/03/2019

Targeted economic sanctions can be an appropriate,
effective and legitimate alternative to the use of force.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker after the adoption of the resolution.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 14.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

19-05984
