S/PV.8195

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8195

th meeting
Wednesday, 28 February 2018, 10.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Allen
Ms. Eckels-Currie

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016) and
2393 (2017) (S/2018/138)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-05507 (E)
*1805507*

S/PV.8195

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016) and 2393 (2017) (S/2018/138)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, and Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2018/138, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165
(2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016) and 2393
(2017).
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: We have received a lot of questions
about resolution 2401 (2018), which the Security Council
adopted on Saturday, 22 February, and its demand for
a cessation of hostilities without delay for at least 30
consecutive days throughout Syria. I want to start
today by answering the questions we have received.
Is the United Nation ready to deliver to people who
need humanitarian assistance? Yes. We have convoys
ready to go to 10 besieged and hard-to-reach locations,
including a 45-truck convoy with aid for 90,000 people
to Douma and eastern Ghouta. Are you ready to support
medical evacuations from eastern Ghouta? Yes, we are
working very closely with the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC), the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
and other health partners on that. Has resolution 2401
(2018) been implemented? Is there a ceasefire in Syria?
No, and no. Have you got any inter-agency cross-line
convoys through to hard-to-reach or besieged areas?
No. Have you been given permission to access any of
those locations? No. Have you received the necessary
facilitation letters for convoys? No. Have there been
2/22

28/02/2018

any medical evacuations? No. Have any civilians left
eastern Ghouta? No. Is there any actual improvement
in the humanitarian situation in eastern Ghouta since
the adoption of the resolution demanding, as it did,
unimpeded access? No. Can you deliver assistance in
eastern Ghouta during a humanitarian pause between
9 a.m. and 2 p.m. local time? To quote the ICRC Middle
East Director, who spoke about that yesterday: “It is
impossible to bring a humanitarian convoy in five
hours.” Agencies now have years of experience in that
area, and it can take a day simply to pass checkpoints,
even when the parties have agreed. The goods then
have to be offloaded.
If there has been no humanitarian access since the
adoption of resolution 2401 (2018) on Saturday, what
has happened in the past few days? More bombing,
fighting, death, destruction, maiming of women and
children, hunger and misery — in other words, more
of the same.
On 26 February, two days ago, airstrikes, barrel
bombs and artillery shelling were reported across
eastern Ghouta, including in Harasta, Shafuniyeh,
Otaya, Hosh Eldawahreh, Al-Ashari, Jobar, Beit Sawa,
Hazerma, Hannnura, Nashabiyeh, Sagba and Douma.
Reports indicate that at least 30 civilians, including
women and children, were killed. In Shafuniyeh, 14
people, including three women and four children, were
reportedly killed and many others injured by airstrikes.
Eighteen civilians, including drivers of ambulances,
women and children, were reportedly received at
health facilities in Shafuniyeh with difficulties
breathing, consistent with the use of chlorine. One
child reportedly died as a result. On the same day, two
workers from local non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) were reportedly killed as a result of shelling
on the besieged enclave. It was also reported that two
health-care facilities in Saqba were taken out of service
by airstrikes. In the past few days, shells have also
reportedly continued to fall on Damascus city from
eastern Ghouta.
Since 18 February, more than 580 people are now
reported to have been killed due to air and ground strikes
in eastern Ghouta, with many more than 1,000 people
injured. At the same time, hundreds of rockets fired
from eastern Ghouta into Damascus have reportedly
killed 15 people and injured more than 200.
I now want to update the Security Council on the
situation in other parts of the country.
18-05507

28/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

In Idlib, fighting continues to kill and injure
civilians, destroy civilian infrastructure and result
in large population movements. Since December, an
estimated 385,000 people have been displaced, with
many civilians moving north. Half of Idlib’s population
was already displaced. People are being forced to
move yet again, with each disruption increasing their
vulnerability. Civilians are concentrated in an eversmaller area. Many are forced to live in makeshift camps
or in the open air. Formal camps are overwhelmed,
operating at up to 400 per cent of their capacity. The
response is being stretched to its limits.
We are receiving reports of civilian deaths and
injuries and of restriction on the movement of many
civilians as a result of military operations in Afrin.
Those who risk moving continue to be stopped at exit
points by the local authorities in Afrin, preventing
them from accessing safer areas. We believe that, so
far, approximately 5,000 people have reached the
surrounding villages and Aleppo city. Tens of thousands
are believed to be displaced within Afrin. The Turkish
authorities have emphasized to us their willingness to
facilitate humanitarian access. We would like to see aid
convoys operated from Damascus. However, to date
that has not been agreed by the Syrian side.
In Raqqa city, conditions remain unsafe for the
return of internally displaced persons (IDPs). Among
those trying to return home, 637 people have been injured
and more than 125 killed by unexploded ordinance since
last October. Medical and other essential services are
absent and access for humanitarian workers to the city
remains precariously limited because the conditions are
so dangerous. As I have said before, demining activities
need to be accelerated as a matter of urgency.
Humanitarian access for the United Nations and
its implementing partners in Hasakah was limited for
much of January due to the increased restrictions placed
by the local authorities. United Nations convoys were
blocked from travelling to the northeast from elsewhere
within the country. The delivery of aid already in local
warehouses was also blocked. While an agreement
to resume humanitarian deliveries was reached on
30 January, that agreement will end in March. NGO
partners continue to deliver goods and services across
the north-east. However, sustainable access for the
United Nations is critical. Any protracted interruption
of humanitarian assistance and services in the IDP sites
may drive the displaced people back to areas where
they are not safe.

S/PV. 8195

Earlier this month, the United Nations received
clearance for the first assessment visit to Deir ez-Zor
after it had been under the control of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) for three and a half years.
More than 100,000 people live in the town despite that
fact that it is estimated to be 80 per cent destroyed.
The infrastructure is almost completely destroyed,
particularly in the central and the eastern areas, where
ISIL was in control. In coordination with the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent, the United Nations has dispatched
78 trucks carrying food, health, nutrition, protection,
shelter, education, water and sanitation items since last
September, when ISIL was driven out.
Finally, we remain concerned about the tens of
thousands of people stranded in Rukban, in southeastern Syria. We continue to seek the necessary
agreements for convoys of life-saving assistance
to them.
As I said last week (see S/PV. 8186), there was a
severe reduction, of nearly 40 per cent, in cross-line
access to besieged and hard-to-reach areas in 2017
as compared to 2016. On average in 2017, over the
entire 12-month period, we reached 165,000 people a
month with cross-line convoys. That was completely
inadequate. So far this year, we have reached a total of
only 7,200 people through a single small convoy earlier
this month. In other words, we were reaching more than
50 times as many people in besieged and hard-to-reach
areas last year as to date this year. The main reason
for the reduction in the number of convoys has been
the consistent refusal by the Government of Syria to
provide the necessary approvals and facilitation letters
to support delivery.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/138)
details, while we continue to reach millions of people
in urgent need in areas controlled by the Government
of Syria and through the cross-border programmes
mandated in resolution 2393 (2017), assistance across
conflict lines to millions of people in hard-to-reach
and besieged areas has completely collapsed in recent
months. Unless that changes, we will soon see even
more people dying from starvation and disease than
from the bombing and shelling.
The United Nations remains focused on reaching
those most in need throughout the country, including
the 5.6 million people considered to be in acute need.
The needs-based approach means that the United
Nations will continue to seek to deliver aid and to

18-055073/22

S/PV.8195

The situation in the Middle East

provide services to millions of people in a principled
manner regardless of where they are located. More than
half of those in need are in Government-controlled
areas. However, millions more people are not.
What the Syrian people need has been made
abundantly clear — protection, access to basic goods and
services, an end to sieges and respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
The Security Council has unanimously supported all
such needs in adopting resolution 2401 (2018).
I started today by answering questions that we have
received regarding resolution 2401 (2018). I would like
to end with a question for the Security Council. When
will the resolution be implemented?
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Lowcock
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: I am grateful for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council following the comprehensive
briefing by Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock.
In two weeks, we will mark the beginning of the
eighth year of the Syrian conflict. There are no words
to express our frustration over the collective failure of
the international community to end this war, but that
frustration is nothing compared to the suffering and
destruction visited ceaselessly upon the Syrian people.
We are here again today because the brief respite
that the Council unanimously demanded only days
ago in resolution 2401 (2018) has not materialized, as
Mr. Lowcock just described. The air strikes, shelling
and ground offensives continue. There are even reports
of yet another chlorine gas attack. What we need is the
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018), and that is
not happening.
Nearly seven years since the peaceful protests in
Dar’a and the reaction that set in motion what would
eventually become all-out war, we are still grasping
for a political solution, which is the only way to end
the bloodletting. The Secretary-General has called
eastern Ghouta a hell on Earth. The United Nations will
continue to work with Syrians and the international
community to help bring about a durable political
solution. We will also continue to demand that all the
parties involved in the conflict respect international
humanitarian law — the rules of war — and protect
civilians. We will continue to demand the release of
those who have been arbitrarily detained and the end of
4/22

28/02/2018

enforced disappearances. We will continue to forcefully
call for justice and accountability. Those responsible
for the catalogue of horrors that mark daily life in
Syria, including chemical and terrorist attacks, torture
and sexual violence, sieges and attacks on hospitals,
schools and other civilian infrastructure, must be held
accountable. Those outrages continue in large part
because the perpetrators have so far enjoyed impunity.
As the Secretary-General said earlier this week,
“Security Council resolutions are only meaningful
if they are effectively implemented”. The United
Nations acknowledges Russia’s announcement of a
daily five-hour pause for eastern Ghouta. In addition
to Mr. Lowcock’s briefing and what the International
Committee of the Red Cross has stated, we respectfully
remind all parties that resolution 2401 (2018) demands
the sustained delivery of humanitarian aid for a
minimum of 30 consecutive days. The Secretariat
and relevant agencies are united and pulling in one
direction towards the immediate and continuous
cessation of hostilities that can be sustained beyond 30
days for unimpeded aid delivery. We also urgently need
to get humanitarian aid and services in and the sick and
critically wounded evacuated from besieged eastern
Ghouta and other locations. We are ready to deliver.
The Secretary-General has repeatedly reminded
parties of their absolute obligation under international
humanitarian law and human rights law to protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure. Earlier this
month, Emergency Relief Coordinator Lowcock told
the Council (see S/PV.8186) in no uncertain terms that
that is an obligation, not a favour. He has just updated
us all on the humanitarian situation and provided an
update on the United Nations readiness to deliver aid
and services, and the tireless efforts of humanitarians
to reach all in need, wherever they are. But right now we
must address the particular needs of those in besieged
eastern Ghouta.
Resolution 2401 (2018) affirms that the cessation
of hostilities shall not apply to military operations
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
Al Qaida, the Al-Nusra Front, and
“all other individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities associated with Al-Qaida or ISIL, and other
terrorist groups, as designated by the Security
Council”. (resolution 2401 (2018), para. 2).
In our view, that rightly maintains the parameters
set out in resolution 2254 (2015), but there must be
18-05507

28/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

a frank assessment of what that means in relation to
the humanitarian tragedy that we are witnessing in
eastern Ghouta.
First, we condemn all violations of international law
by all parties, including shelling from eastern Ghouta,
which has injured or killed civilians in Damascus.
The scale of the Government’s indiscriminate military
attacks against eastern Ghouta — an area with a
civilian population of 400,000 — cannot be justified
based on targeting Jabhat Al-Nusra fighters. Efforts to
combat terrorism do not supersede obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Secondly, the United Nations has not seen any
confirmation by the Government of Syria of its
commitment to implement resolution 2401 (2018),
although at the resolution’s adoption Syria’s Permanent
Representative to the United Nations said,
“As a State, we bear a responsibility towards our
citizens and we have a sovereign right to counter
terrorism” (S/PV.8188, p. 12).
Thirdly, yesterday the Head of the Syrian
Negotiations Committee transmitted to the SecretaryGeneral a letter on behalf of the three major non-State
armed opposition groups — Jaysh Al-Islam, Faylaq
Al-Rahman and Ahrar Al-Sham — and civil groups in
eastern Ghouta regarding their full commitment to the
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018). Specifically,
they committed to ensuring the necessary environment
for United Nations humanitarian access as well as,
“to expel all elements of Hay’at Tahrir Al-Sham,
Jabhat Al-Nusra and Al-Qaida and all who belong
to these groups from eastern Ghouta”.
Fourthly, the United Nations has no independent
verified reports that those three non-State armed
opposition groups in eastern Ghouta created a
coordination centre, as has been alleged regarding
Jabhat Al-Nusra, nor has the United Nations seen any
public announcement by those groups of such a centre.
Jaysh Al-Islam has denied that claim. What the United
Nations can verify is that non-State armed opposition
groups in eastern Ghouta, over the past 24 hours,
have expressed their readiness in writing to evacuate
Jabhat Al-Nusra fighters. Previous negotiations on
that issue among those groups and key members of
the International Syrian Support Group humanitarian
task force in Geneva and Damascus have not resulted
in success.

S/PV. 8195

Alleviating the tragic situation in eastern Ghouta
has the Council’s full attention. Yet we cannot forget
that resolution 2401 (2018) demands a cessation of
hostilities throughout Syria. Violence continues in
Afrin, Idlib and the eastern part of the country. Council
members have heard about the humanitarian challenges
and suffering of the people in those areas as well. I
would like to take this opportunity to emphasize that
developments in those areas will undoubtedly render
the situation in Syria even more complex. There will
be no sustainable solution if the Council’s resolutions
are not implemented. That will require that the parties
step back from the brink and fulfil their obligations to
end the fighting in Syria. All our efforts will be in vain
if there is no serious investment in a political solution.
As Council members are aware, resolution 2401
(2018) calls on all Member States to use their influence
with the parties to ensure the implementation of the
cessation of hostilities. The United Nations calls for
a renewed commitment by all concerned Member
States to work seriously to implement the cessation of
hostilities. The United Nations also cautions against
drawing the Organization into monitoring exercises.
That has been tried in the past without success — not
for lack of trying — but in the absence of political will
among Member States to underpin United Nations
efforts. Member States, especially those working
within the Astana and Amman arrangements, should
use their resources and clear influence over the parties
to ensure the implementation of a sustained cessation of
hostilities throughout Syria.
The conflict in Syria continues to threaten regional
and international stability because the warring parties
believe there is a military solution. There is not. The
United Nations remains convinced that a political
solution is the only way forward. Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura is pressing forward on facilitating
the establishment of a constitutional committee in
Geneva, as part of the overall intra-Syrian political
process towards the full implementation of resolution
2254 (2015), for which the United Nations requires
the positive and constructive engagement of both
negotiating delegations. Special Envoy De Mistura will
need the full support of the Council and the international
community as a whole if the United Nations efforts
are to have a chance of reinvigorating a serious and
meaningful political process. I trust that he will have
that support.

18-055075/22

S/PV.8195

The situation in the Middle East

The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Feltman
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I make my remarks
today on behalf of Sweden and Kuwait as co-penholders
for the humanitarian track of the Security Council’s
work on the situation in Syria.
I would like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock once
again for a very sobering update. We share his sense
of urgency following the adoption of resolution 2401
(2018) last weekend to fully take advantage of the 30day pause so that the United Nations and its partners
can dispatch life-saving aid convoys and begin medical
evacuations. Since the resolution’s adoption, we have
been asked, as penholders, when the resolution would
take effect and to whom it would apply. We are very
clear: the resolution took effect upon its adoption and
applies to all parties across the entire country. The
clock is ticking. There is no time to lose.
Let me also sincerely thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman
for his briefing today. We share his deep concern
concerning reports of the flagrant lack of compliance
with the ceasefire in eastern Ghouta.
We would like to extend our sincere appreciation
to all members of the Council for their constructive
cooperation, which enabled the adoption of resolution
2401 (2018). The resolution represents decisive and
meaningful action by the Council in response to
the calls from the United Nations, the humanitarian
community and, above all, the civilian population
in Syria. However, the value of a resolution is not in
its adoption, but in its implementation. We must now
all build on the spirit of cooperation that led to the
resolution’s adoption and work together to ensure that
it is enforced. Compliance with the resolutions of the
Security Council is not optional; it is an obligation of
all Member States.
The humanitarian community stands ready to do
its part. Having adopted this resolution, the Council
must do its part. For the next few weeks, let us seize the
opportunity that this resolution represents and focus
on its implementation. We would like to make four
concrete recommendations on the way forward.
First, existing de-escalation agreements must be
complied with most urgently in eastern Ghouta. We
call on the three Astana guarantors to spare no effort
6/22

28/02/2018

to achieve this end. Resolution 2401 (2018) clearly
demands that all parties cease hostilities; air strikes,
the ground offensive and shelling must stop.
We take note of the initial positive indications from
armed opposition groups in eastern Ghouta that they
are ready to comply with the resolution. We also note
their commitment to expel the Al-Nusra Front from the
area. We must build on this, and we call on those with
influence over armed opposition groups to secure their
commitment to the cessation of hostilities. Clearly the
Council has demanded in resolution 2401 (2018) that
the Syrian Government cease all military operations
without delay.
Secondly, as Mr. Lowcock has told us, the United
Nations and its implementing partners in the field
are ready to commence life-saving convoys and
medical evacuations. We urge the Syrian authorities to
immediately issue facilitation letters for the convoy to
Duma to proceed this week as a necessary first step.
It can no longer be business as usual; the Council has
demanded weekly convoys to all areas and populations
in need.
Thirdly, existing structures to strengthen
compliance with and monitoring of the cessation must
urgently be activated. We look to the Chairs of the
Task Force on the Ceasefire of the International Syria
Support Group to undertake more frequent meetings,
which are needed at least on a weekly basis. The
Amman operations room should also be utilized. We
see merit in making a clearer link between monitoring
mechanisms and the Security Council.
Fourthly, the Council must remain actively seized
of this matter. Sweden and Kuwait will request an
open briefing from the incoming presidency on the
Secretary-General’s report on implementation and
compliance that is due 15 days after the resolution’s
adoption. We should also stand ready to meet and take
appropriate action at any time necessary so as to ensure
implementation of this resolution.
Finally, we welcome any efforts to de-escalate
violence and to allow and facilitate humanitarian access
in Syria, but let us be clear — resolution 2401 (2018)
demands a 30-day, nationwide ceasefire, with immediate
access for weekly convoys and medical evacuations. A
five-hour ceasefire does not meet the requirements of
the resolution. The resolution is not primarily about
the evacuation of civilians, but demands humanitarian
access to civilians and medical evacuations. The
18-05507

28/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

cessation of hostilities must be implemented fully and
without delay. It is imperative that all parties uphold
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law at all times.
Last Saturday’s unanimous action reinforced the
legitimacy and credibility of the Security Council (see
S/PV.8188). Today’s briefings demonstrate that there is
no time to rest on the laurels of this achievement. We
must now move without delay to ensure our action here
last Saturday is translated into the relief and assistance
expected by the millions of people affected by this
conflict. It is now incumbent on all the parties and all
those with influence over the parties to spare no effort
and use all channels available in order to advance the
full implementation of resolution 2401 (2018).
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I want to thank Mark Lowcock and Jeffrey Feltman
for their very clear briefings.
I would like today to focus my remarks on our
shared road map, namely, the full implementation of
resolution 2401 (2018), which we adopted unanimously
last Saturday (see S/PV. 8188). On behalf of France, I
would like to express three main messages today.
My first message is that we must not pay lip service.
The situation on the ground remains dramatic and has
not improved in recent days. Since the adoption of
resolution 2401 (2018), the offensive against the eastern
Ghouta has continued relentlessly. France, of course,
strongly condemns these indiscriminate bombings,
which affect inhabited areas and civil infrastructure.
In this context, the disastrous humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate. No United Nations convoy has
been able to reach the eastern Ghouta or any of the other
besieged areas, no emergency medical evacuation has
been carried out, no siege has been lifted. The Syrian
regime is maintaining its stranglehold on the civilian
population and is methodically pursuing its policy of
destruction. More than 400,000 people remain under
siege in eastern Ghouta, including 130,000 children.
The demand sent by the United Nations to authorize
a priority convoy for Duma, the main city in eastern
Ghouta, has not received any response from the Syrian
authorities to date.
My second message is this. The resolution adopted by
the Security Council on 24 February makes very specific
demands on the parties. Hostilities must cease without
delay in order to establish a lasting humanitarian truce
for at least 30 days, in order to allow both the delivery

S/PV. 8195

of humanitarian aid and the evacuation of the wounded
and sick. Let me stress this point. These demands are
perfectly clear and cannot be distorted or reinterpreted.
Contrary to what some would have us believe, the
demands made by the resolution are absolutely clear.
Our responsibility today is to implement, fully and in
their totality, the provisions that we have unanimously
adopted. If we do not that, what credibility can be given
to our commitments? What credibility can be given to
Security Council resolutions?
The United Nations and its partners tell us that they
are ready to deliver aid to the people of eastern Ghouta
and other priority areas. There is therefore not a minute
to lose because every minute that passes can turn lives
upside down.
At the conclusion of difficult negotiations, the
Council managed to unite in the face of the gravity of the
humanitarian situation and the escalation of the Syrian
conflict in recent months. We must now work together,
in the same spirit of unity, to effectively implement on
the ground the resolution we unanimously adopted.
This is my third message.
Following yesterday’s meeting in Moscow with
French Foreign Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian and his
Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, France is putting
forward four concrete proposals for making progress
and for doing so without delay.
The first is to ensure that all parties implement
the cessation of hostilities that resolution 2401 (2018)
demands. I note that the three main opposition groups
present in eastern Ghouta as well as Nassar Al Hariri,
head of the High Negotiations Committee of the Syrian
opposition, have written to the Secretary-General
and to the President of the Council to state that they
would respect the truce. It is therefore urgent in the
extreme — if I can put it that way — that the Damascus
regime also unambiguously express its willingness
to respect the Council resolution and to formalize it
in writing.
We have taken note of the Russian proposal of a
daily five-hour humanitarian truce. It is a positive
first step, but it is insufficient. We must go further.
Resolution 2401 (2018) demands of the parties a
minimum period of 30 consecutive days of cessation of
hostilities. Respecting that demand is non-negotiable.
That goal requires more than just symbolic declarations
or political posturing. At a minimum, it requires that
humanitarian personnel be allowed to do their work.

18-055077/22

S/PV.8195

The situation in the Middle East

These workers are used to taking risks on a daily basis,
but the parties must allow them to do their work. Given
that the opposition groups have formally committed
to doing just that, the regime must do so as well, and
without delay. To that end, supporters of the regime,
beginning with Russia, must bring the necessary
pressure to bear.
Our second proposal, by way of a demand, pertains
to the need to immediately open the relevant, clearly
identified checkpoints — beginning with Wafideen — in
order to allow the access of priority convoys of the
United Nations. We therefore demand that the Syrian
authorities submit without delay the necessary letter to
facilitate the deployment of humanitarian convoys.
Thirdly, it is extremely urgent to allow medical
evacuations for the most critical cases, giving priority
to children. The Syrian Arab Red Crescent indicates
that 1,065 people need emergency medical evacuations.
We have not a minute to lose.
Finally, France considers it essential to create a
monitoring mechanism to ensure the implementation
of resolution 2401 (2018) and compliance with the
resolution by the parties. We are working diligently to
establishing that mechanism now.
Those are the French proposals to address the urgent
need to put an end to the bombing and protect civilians,
who beyond resolution 2401 (2018), are protected under
international humanitarian law. It is also crucial to
intensify our efforts to reach a political solution in the
framework of the Geneva process and resolution 2254
(2015). It is the only way out of the conflict and the only
way to prevent a looming escalation of tensions. France
will not deviate from that path. The overall credibility
of the Security Council and the responsibility of each of
its members are crucially at stake today in the context
of the Syrian tragedy.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-Generals Lowcock and Feltman for
their clear, factual briefings and for reiterating to all
of us on the Security Council the ongoing horror of the
conflict in Syria — and in particular in eastern Ghouta,
because that is where it is clear the situation is most
dire by a huge order of magnitude.
It was five days ago (see S/PV.8188) that we sat in
this Chamber and all of us raised our hands in support
of a 30-day ceasefire, which we hoped would provide
some relief to Syria’s people. That was a desperately
8/22

28/02/2018

needed step, one that came too late for many. In eastern
Ghouta alone, Médecins Sans Frontières reported that
at least 630 people were killed and 3,000 injured in the
week before resolution 2401 (2018) was adopted, with
women and children representing nearly 60 per cent
of the wounded and 50 per cent of the deceased. We
also continue to condemn attacks on Damascus from
eastern Ghouta.
Let us recall the demands of our resolution. It
called for at least a 30-day ceasefire without delay
to allow for the delivery of humanitarian aid and
medical evacuation. “Without delay” means right now,
immediately — that there should be no delay. We all
voted for those demands and we committed to using
our influence to ensure that. In response, Russia has
declared a five-hour daily humanitarian window. That is
not what the Council demanded, nor what Russia agreed
to use its influence to ensure. A five-hour window
has not delivered and cannot deliver any meaningful
improvement on the ground. Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock has made clear that the United Nations cannot
get humanitarian convoys in and out within that time
frame, as has the International Committee of the Red
Cross. Humanitarian pauses of a few meagre hours are
no substitute for a sustained ceasefire, which is vital
to ensuring the delivery of life-saving humanitarian
assistance and medical evacuations. If Russia is able to
deliver a five-hour pause, let it deliver a 24-hour pause,
as it agreed on Saturday.
Let us now take stock of the situation in Syria, and
specifically in eastern Ghouta, where the situation is at
its most desperate. Let us review if any real change has
occurred in the past five days. Has the resolution been
implemented? Has there been a ceasefire? Has there
been any delivery of humanitarian aid or any medical
evacuations? Has the adoption of the resolution brought
any relief to the people of Syria?
The fighting has not stopped. All of the main
armed opposition groups have committed to the
full implementation of resolution 2401 (2018). The
Al-Assad regime has not, and has in fact ignored the
resolution we adopted. Reports of attacks and air
strikes by pro-regime forces continue. Twenty-two air
strikes reportedly took place even during Russia’s socalled humanitarian pause. And, as if it could not get
any worse, there have been disturbing reports of the use
of chlorine gas. Doctors in eastern Ghouta reported to
the Syrian-American Medical Society that 16 patients,
including six children, were suffering from symptoms
18-05507

28/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

indicative of exposure to chemical compounds,
following an alleged regime attack on Sunday — only
one day after the resolution was adopted. Since Saturday
not a single aid convoy has been able to access eastern
Ghouta to provide relief to the desperate civilians. The
World Health Organization estimates that 1,000 people
are now in need of medical evacuation from eastern
Ghouta. None have been evacuated since the resolution
was adopted.
The consequences of the failure to implement the
resolution are clear: the casualties continue to rise
and the horror continues. The Syrian Observatory for
Human Rights reports at least 14 civilians, including
three children, were killed on Sunday. In short, in the
words of one doctor from eastern Ghouta, “Nothing
has changed.”
It is the responsibility of us all to ensure that
resolution 2401 (2018) is enacted in full. In the words
of my Foreign Secretary, the Al-Assad regime must
allow the United Nations to deliver humanitarian aid,
in compliance with resolution 2401 (2018), and we
look to Russia and Iran to make sure this happens, in
accordance with their own promises.
I implore all those with influence over the Syrian
regime to act now to ensure that the ceasefire that
they supported in the Chamber is implemented in full
and immediately. To do anything less is an affront to
the Council, the United Nations and the international
system that we live by. We will continue to monitor the
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018) and commit
to returning to the Council regularly until we see
it respected.
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
Every time the Security Council attempts to address
the humanitarian crisis in Syria, we take a small leap of
faith. I say “we” in reference to the Security Council.
I speak of faith because all Council members and most
States Members of the United Nations still genuinely
try to uphold the responsibilities under the Charter
of the United Nations, including abiding by and fully
implementing Security Council resolutions. Despite
the grim updates we heard today, we must maintain the
hope that we can help the Syrian people. If we do not
have that hope, we are wasting our time here.
Just four days ago, the Security Council took
another leap of faith. We adopted resolution 2401
(2018), demanding a 30-day ceasefire for all of Syria,
unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access to

S/PV. 8195

deliver desperately needed food and medical supplies,
and immediate and unconditional medical evacuations
based on need and emergency. Our goal was clear and
simple. The Al-Assad regime and its supporters have
been pummelling eastern Ghouta, where 400,000
people live under siege and constant bombardment.
Resolution 2401 (2018) demanded that the assault stop.
That was the Council speaking in one, clear voice. The
opposition groups operating in eastern Ghouta have
made clear their commitment to the ceasefire. The Free
Syrian Army, Jaysh al-Islam, the Al-Rahman Legion
and Ahrar al-Sham all committed to implementing
resolution 2401 (2018).
Against all odds, we hoped that Mr. Al-Assad
might respect the resolution, cease hostilities and allow
unfettered humanitarian access to all those who need
it. Against all odds, we hoped that Russia would use
its influence to ensure Mr. Al-Assad’s commitment to
resolution 2401 (2018). Once again, that hope has been
crushed because so far, for the people of eastern Ghouta,
nothing has changed. Despite the unanimous call for
a ceasefire, the regime’s attacks continue unabated.
Hundreds of Syrians have been killed or injured since
we adopted the resolution on Saturday. What is worse is
that less than 24 hours after we demanded the ceasefire,
there were reports that the Al-Assad regime again used
chlorine gas as a weapon. Such attacks demonstrate
Syria’s complete and utter contempt for the Council and
the United Nations.
On Monday one human rights organization
reported 18 attacks that defied the Council’s demands.
On Tuesday another organization reported at least 23
air strikes and four barrel bombs in eastern Ghouta.
Syrians on the ground are reporting that Tuesday was
worse than Monday with regard to strikes from the
regime. How can that be? On the humanitarian front, as
Mark Lowcock stated, the Al-Assad regime has allowed
no deliveries of assistance into eastern Ghouta — not
one. Opposition groups in the area have expressed
their commitment to allowing aid in, but the Al-Assad
regime still says no.
Since we adopted resolution 2401 (2018), Russia
has announced a daily five-hour humanitarian pause
in the aerial bombing of civilians in eastern Ghouta,
which is cynical, callous and in flagrant defiance of
the demands of resolution 2401 (2018). The cessation of
hostilities is for at least 30 days — every day, all day.
Russia does not get to unilaterally rewrite the terms of
the resolution. It negotiated it and voted for it. Russia,

18-055079/22

S/PV.8195

The situation in the Middle East

Iran and the Al-Assad regime are not even trying to
hide their intentions. They are asking civilians to leave
eastern Ghouta on the false premise that they can then
attack anyone left in the area as much as they would
like. Let us call the actions what they are. Mr. Al-Assad
and his allies want the civilians of eastern Ghouta to
walk into the arms of a regime that has been attacking
and starving them for the past seven years. That is not
a humanitarian gesture. They do not care if the 400,000
people of eastern Ghouta suffer, as long as they can
continue to pursue their military and political objectives.
We know what Iran, Syria and the Al-Assad regime
are doing because they have done the same thing in the
past. It is the same playbook they used for Aleppo in
2016. Once again, we, including Russia, demanded in
the Security Council Chamber that Mr. Al-Assad stop
the bombing, and yet Russia, Iran and Mr. Al-Assad
continue their attacks, defying the wishes of the
Council and of the international community. Because
we have been through this before, we know what Russia
will say today. It will say that there are terrorists in
eastern Ghouta so that the Al-Assad regime can bomb
as ferociously and indiscriminately as it wants and kill
as many civilians as it wants. That defies the principles
governing the laws of war. The Al-Assad regime should
not be allowed to bomb and starve its own people into
submission under the guise of counter-terrorism. That
Russian argument makes a mockery of the Council and
of international law.
Russia also accuses the United States of somehow
being responsible for humanitarian crises in Syria,
but such accusations are ludicrous. The United States
does not block humanitarian aid in any area. In fact,
the United States has provided more than $7 billion
in humanitarian aid in response to the crisis. The
Council must not fall for Russia’s misdirections. When
the ceasefire was adopted unanimously on Saturday,
including by the Russians, Ambassador Haley stated
that our resolve to stand by our demands in the
resolution would be tested. It has come to pass. Despite
everything that has happened since Saturday, we are not
casting aside the ceasefire in Syria; just the opposite.
We would like to redouble our efforts in the Security
Council to implement it, but the only way to change the
situation on the ground is for all of us — every single
one of us — around the table and each State Member
of the United Nations to speak the truth about what
is happening.
10/22

28/02/2018

The past four days should show us that when it
comes to demanding a ceasefire, it is not enough to say
that all parties should show restraint or commit to the
ceasefire because in eastern Ghouta there is only one
party dropping barrel bombs, gassing the Syrian people
and denying deliveries of food and medical assistance.
It is the Al-Assad regime, operating with the full
support of Russia and Iran.
On Saturday we stated that the only way to restore
the credibility of the Council was to make the ceasefire
a reality. Russia, Iran and the Al-Assad regime have
not complied with the Council’s demands and have not
silenced their guns. Unless we take action, they will
stop at nothing to destroy eastern Ghouta and we will
again fail to help the Syrian people.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, let me
thank Under-Secretaries-General Lowcock and Feltman
for their briefings.
In my statement I will address three points:
implementation, implementation and implementation.
First, I will speak about the implementation of
the cessation of hostilities. Since the Council adopted
resolution 2401 (2018) on Saturday, civilians are still
dying in eastern Ghouta and elsewhere in Syria. The
humanitarian disaster continues worsen. We need a
full, nationwide cessation of hostilities and we need it
now. The Russian proposal for a humanitarian corridor
and pauses of five hours per day cannot be a substitute
for a humanitarian pause of 30 consecutive days, as
demanded in resolution 2401 (2018). Those five hours
do not meet the obligations under the resolution and
are not enough for the United Nations to be effective
in delivering aid to the entire area of Ghouta, as UnderSecretary-General Lowcock just stated.
We call upon the parties to the conflict and on
those with influence on the parties to show decisive
action and stop the violence. As Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman stated, three armed opposition
groups in eastern Ghouta have announced that they
are committed to fully implementing resolution 2401
(2018). We expect the regime to do the same. The air
strikes, the shelling and the shooting must stop. For
the credibility of the Council, it is crucial that its
resolutions be fully implemented. That is the obligation
of all States Members of the United Nations, under
the Charter.
18-05507

28/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

The Kingdom of the Netherlands repeats the call
made by the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Federica
Mogherini, to the Astana guarantors. She called on the
Foreign Ministers of Russia, Iran and Turkey to
“take all necessary steps to ensure that the fighting
stops, the Syrian people are protected and that
urgent humanitarian access and necessary medical
evacuations are taking place”.
My second point is about the implementation of
humanitarian access. Resolution 2401 (2018) calls for
sieges of populated areas, including eastern Ghouta, to
be lifted immediately, and demands safe, unimpeded
and sustained access for humanitarian convoys. As
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock just explained, the
United Nations stands ready with 45 trucks to deliver
essential aid to eastern Ghouta. But the necessary
facilitation letters are still lacking, and the security
conditions do not permit those deliveries. At this point,
more than 1,000 people are in urgent need of medical
care, but they are still trapped in eastern Ghouta. If
they are not given the care they need in hospitals in
Damascus or elsewhere, they may die. The United
Nations and the Security Council have consistently
pleaded for these medical evacuations, and yet there
are still no developments with regard to them. We also
need to see access to aid for those fleeing the fighting
in Afrin. More generally, there should be delivery
of humanitarian aid to the areas that are not under
Government control. As Mr. Feltman just said, we
should reach all who are in need, wherever they are.
My third point is about implementing the protection
of civilians. The exception on the cessation of hostilities
in paragraph 2 of the resolution allows targeted action
against terrorists who are designated as such by the
Council. However, that does not mean that absolutely
anything is allowed. International humanitarian law
applies to all military combat operations and counterterrorism actions. The principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution must be respected in
all circumstances. The civilians in the conflict must
be protected. There is talk of humanitarian corridors
for civilians who want to leave eastern Ghouta, but
evacuations should always be voluntary. We are
concerned about the possibility that humanitarian
corridors will be used for forced population transfers.
Civilians cannot be forced to leave, and neither
should they be forced to stay. If voluntary evacuations

S/PV. 8195

do take place, we will call on the United Nations to
monitor them.
Currently, the most urgent humanitarian situation
is in eastern Ghouta and Idlib, but needs remain high
elsewhere in Syria as well. We welcomed the January
delivery of aid to Rukban, but we want to stress the
importance of sustained access and a durable solution.
As others have said today, the demining activities
in Raqqa should be increased, and the Kingdom of
the Netherlands is doing its part in that regard. The
media coverage of the issue of the exploitation of
Syrian women in exchange for aid is very disturbing.
There should be no tolerance of such behaviour, as the
Secretary-General and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs have already said. The probity
of any United Nations implementing parties should be
beyond any doubt.
In conclusion, we must ensure that resolution 2254
(2015) is fully implemented. There can be no military
solution to the conflict, and we call on all the parties
to engage seriously in the United Nations-led political
process as a matter of urgency. The suffering of the
people of Syria has lasted for more than seven years.
For the sake of the millions of women, children and
men trapped in this horrendous war, it is high time
that all parties started putting the protection, interests
and well-being of the Syrian people on the top of their
agenda. Yesterday, my Minister, Ms. Sigrid Kaag, said
that humanitarian access and the protection of civilians
are cornerstones of international humanitarian law.
They are part of our shared values and shared humanity.
The Security Council must do justice to those values
and to our shared humanity.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you for convening today’s meeting, Mr. President,
and for the briefings by Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Feltman
on the situation in Syria.
On Saturday, when we adopted resolution 2401
(2018) after long and complex negotiations, we
highlighted the commitment that Council members
have shown to achieving a humanitarian ceasefire in
Syria. As we said at the time, it will be crucial to closely
monitor its proper implementation and to maintain the
Council’s unity with regard to its responsibility to
protect the civilian population, in line with international
law and international humanitarian law.
Four days in, we are still being forced to lament
and condemn the attacks on civilians and to reiterate

18-0550711/22

S/PV.8195

The situation in the Middle East

our calls for the immediate and comprehensive
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018). As the
Secretary-General has pointed out, Council resolutions
make sense only if they are effectively implemented.
The credibility of the Security Council as a whole,
and of those of its members with the greatest potential
influence on the ground in particular, is at stake. In the
light of this, we want to emphasize that the cessation of
hostilities that the Council has demanded clearly covers
the whole of Syrian territory, including eastern Ghouta
and Afrin, and should last for a minimum of 30 days. If
we are to ensure that, in our view we should mobilize
the International Syria Support Group’s Ceasefire
Task Force. It is essential to ensure that all the parties
to the conflict comply with the ceasefire provided for
in resolution 2401 (2018), and that the Council is able
to closely monitor that compliance. In that regard, we
support the four recommendations outlined by Sweden
and Kuwait.
We must remind the Syrian authorities of their
responsibility to protect their people, and we firmly
condemn the military operations in eastern Ghouta
and other areas of the country that have continued even
after the adoption of resolution 2401 (2018). However,
we welcome the strenuous efforts of the Organization,
and of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs in particular, to prepare 45 trucks carrying
supplies and ready to enter eastern Ghouta as soon as
the necessary permits are granted. The first report on
the implementation of resolution 2401 (2018) will be
presented in less than two weeks, and we hope that it
will be able to inform us that the humanitarian crisis
caused by the Syrian conflict has been alleviated,
because we cannot wait any longer. It is the Security
Council’s duty to continue working relentlessly to
achieve what we have all unanimously agreed on.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I very much appreciate
today’s clear and informative briefings by Mr. Lowcock
and Mr. Feltman, and I would like to share a few
thoughts from Poland’s point of view.
Since the Council’s adoption on Saturday of
resolution 2401 (2018), we have been seeing yet more
extremely worrying developments on the ground. As I
said in my last statement on the subject (see S/PV.8188),
the heavy fighting in Syria has unfortunately not only
continued but is increasing. In that context, we should
persist in our efforts to take every possible action to
ensure the resolution’s full and safe implementation.
We call on all to work to alleviate the suffering of
12/22

28/02/2018

civilians, including children, by giving them free and
safe access to humanitarian assistance. That should
include voluntary evacuation, which should be strictly
overseen by the United Nations and its implementing
partners and based solely on medical need, in order
to ensure that the process is genuinely voluntary. We
would like to stress that all the relevant actors should
use all their influence to help to improve the conditions
on the ground immediately.
We urgently call for a cessation of hostilities
throughout all of Syria for 30 days, as stipulated
in resolution 2401 (2018). In that context, it is also
important to note that the cessation of hostilities may
also offer an opportunity for the talks being held under
United Nations auspices in Geneva to gain momentum,
so that a political solution can finally be reached.
For that reason, we call on all parties to fulfil their
commitments to the existing ceasefire agreements.
It should be emphasized that the implementation
of the ceasefire announced by resolution 2401 (2018)
should ensure the safe entrance and stay of humanitarian
and medical personnel without prejudice to their health
or life. When such personnel enter hard-to-reach areas,
we should know precisely how long they can stay while
delivering assistance under the ceasefire, otherwise
their lives could also be in danger.
In conclusion, let me stress the importance of
maintaining the unity of the Council on the question
of the implementation of humanitarian resolutions.
The unanimous adoption of the resolution is just the
beginning of the process. We call on all actors with
influence on the ground to take all steps necessary to
ensure that the fighting stops, that the Syrian people are
protected and, finally, that urgent humanitarian access
is enabled and that the necessary medical evacuations
can take place.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
and Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for their respective briefings.
Once again, we would like to say how appalled we
are at the terrible situation suffered by the Syrian people,
as the past two months have been the most violent since
the start of the conflict, and civilians, primarily women
and children, are the ones that are suffering the gravest
consequences of this intensification of the war. We call
the attention of the Security Council to the continuing
18-05507

28/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

violations of international law, especially international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
as these attacks have targeted civilian infrastructure
such as hospitals, schools and homes.
My delegation would like to express once again
its gratitude to the delegations of Sweden and Kuwait
for their work in promoting the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2401 (2018), which imposes a cessation
of hostilities throughout Syria, which is as urgent as
it is necessary. We urge the parties to implement the
resolution immediately in order to speed up access
of humanitarian assistance without any restrictions,
allow urgent medical evacuations and the entry of
humanitarian convoys, and ensure the protection of
hospitals and medical facilities, especially in eastern
Ghouta, Idlib and north of Hama.
We wish to underscore once again the need for
continued cooperation and coordination among the
Syrian Government and the various humanitarian
assistance agencies, so that the delivery of humanitarian
assistance can be effective, especially in hard-to-reach
areas, and to prevent administrative obstacles from
derailing or negatively affecting the deployment of the
required humanitarian assistance.
We also stress the need to begin, as soon as possible,
humanitarian mine-clearing in areas that require it, in
particular in the city of Raqqa, to allow the return in
dignified and safe conditions of people who were forced
to flee their homes because of the conflict.
As we have stated previously, we believe that if our
aim is to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people in
the face of armed violence, the Security Council has
the major challenge of maintaining its unity so as to
ensure that this organ’s decisions are implemented. We
reiterate that the solution to this conflict can be found
only through an inclusive political process based on
dialogue and coordination, led by the Syrian people
and for the Syrian people, that will make it possible to
reach a peaceful solution among all parties involved.
With this in mind, we wish to highlight the various
forums for dialogue, specifically the Astana process, at
which de-escalation zones were agreed on that must be
respected by all parties. We will be closely following
the next round of the process.
We wish also to highlight the other opportunities
for dialogue that could make it possible to reach further
compromises to achieve a definitive end to hostilities,
such as the Sochi national dialogue, which is aimed at

S/PV. 8195

strengthening the Geneva political process, with respect
for the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Syria and its right to choose its own political, economic
and social system without any external pressure
or interference.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): Côte d’Ivoire thanks Mr. Jeffrey Feltman and
Mr. Mark Lowcock for their respective briefings on
recent developments in the situation in Syria following
the adoption by the Security Council of resolution 2401
(2018), on the humanitarian situation in Syria. My
delegation commends the Secretary-General for his
unstinting efforts as part of the political dialogue among
the Syrian parties with the aim of arriving at a lasting
solution to the protracted crisis ravaging that country.
In that regard, my country welcomes the holding of
intra-Syrian peace talks on 25 and 26 January in Vienna
in the framework of the Geneva process, followed by the
talks held in Sochi on 29 and 30 January. My delegation
cherishes the hope that the proposals stemming from the
Sochi talks, including the establishment of a committee
tasked with drawing up a new constitution, will receive
consistent attention from the international community,
as part of the concerted quest to find a lasting solution
to the crisis in Syria.
The situation on the ground is deeply alarming.
Military operations that include the use of
non-conventional weapons are leading to mass
displacements of people, the loss of human lives,
injuries and the destruction of public infrastructure,
including hospitals and schools. The grave humanitarian
crisis spawned by the fighting led to the adoption by
the Security Council this past Saturday, 24 February,
of resolution 2401 (2018), with a view to the cessation
without delay of hostilities for a 30-day period to enable
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in
need as well as medical evacuations.
My delegation notes with regret that the adoption
of the resolution did not contribute to restoring calm
on the ground. The ceasefire proposed was shortlived, despite the numerous appeals for a cessation
of hostilities. Even the very minimum one called for
by the Russian Federation, an ally of the Damascus
Government, on Monday 26 February did not lead
to a positive response. Air raids and rocket launches
continue on the ground, thereby obstructing the work
of humanitarian personnel.

18-0550713/22

S/PV.8195

The situation in the Middle East

We deplore the ongoing loss of life among
humanitarian workers — 22 United Nations personnel
and 66 staff members or volunteers of the International
Red Cross — and we deplore also the material
damage that has been wrought, which includes the
destruction of 25 vehicles and 44 facilities, according
to the information we have received. Nonetheless,
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the fact that United Nations
humanitarian agencies and their partners have managed
to assist people in need by conducting 1,567 deliveries.
My country reaffirms that a resolution of the
crisis in Syria must be part of an inclusive dialogue
and political process, as set out in the road map under
resolution 2254 (2015). In that regard, my country
calls for full compliance with the 30-day ceasefire,
in accordance with resolution 2401 (2018), which
will not only allow humanitarian actors to respond
to critical emergencies but also create the conditions
for a return to the negotiating table by all parties to
the Syrian crisis. To that end, Côte d’Ivoire urges the
members of the Security Council to unite and surmount
their differences in order to send a message of hope
and solidarity of the international community to the
Syrian people.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): As usual, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs Mark Lowcock and UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman
just gave us detailed briefings on the humanitarian
and political situation in Syria. Those were the first
briefings to be delivered to the Security Council
following the unanimous adoption of resolution 2401
(2018), on 24 February. I take this opportunity to
thank both Under-Secretaries-General, as well as to
acknowledge the willingness of the United Nations and
its partners to send convoys of trucks with the necessary
humanitarian aid and begin medical evacuations as
soon as conditions on the ground allow.
As Secretary-General António Guterres said two
days ago in his statement before the Human Rights
Council, “Security Council resolutions are only
meaningful if they are effectively implemented”. The
Republic of Equatorial Guinea hopes resolution 2401
(2018) is meaningful in that way in order to relieve the
affected population of the suffering it has endured,
especially in eastern Ghouta, that is, we hope for it to
be immediately implemented.
14/22

28/02/2018

We want to reiterate that the Syrian conflict has no
military solution. The opponents therefore must take a
seat at the negotiating table to engage in direct and frank
dialogue, without exclusions, however complicated it
may be to do so. It must be the Syrians who determine
the future they want for their country. The international
community must redouble its efforts in making sure the
opponents engage in negotiations, and the countries
that have influence need to wield it to establish trust,
with the ultimate goal of achieving lasting and just
peace in Syria. We commend the intention expressed by
the largest opposition groups — Jaysh Al-Islam, Faylaq
Al-Rahman and Ahrar Al-Sham — to respect the
ceasefire, and we invite all the other parties involved to
take the same decision.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that
the only reason that the humanitarian situation remains
of concern is because the opponents do not agree
on negotiating to reach a peace agreement, which
consequently causes more civilian victims, leads to
the destruction of hospital facilities and hampers
humanitarian aid operations. The conflict has recently
intensified around the town of eastern Ghouta and
some other parts of Syria, which has resulted in civilian
casualties, the destruction of a considerable number
of medical and relief facilities and the obstruction of
humanitarian relief operations led by the United Nations.
Equatorial Guinea is very touched and horrified by
the critical situation the Syrian people are experiencing,
and we must not show indifference to so much pain and
suffering. It is therefore imperative that the parties to
the conflict implement and uphold the relevant Security
Council resolutions, especially the most recent,
resolution 2401 (2018), including allowing access to
humanitarian aid, halting hostilities and ultimately,
cooperating with the United Nations in its efforts to
assuage the conflict and make humanitarian operations
effective by ensuring aid deliveries reach the affected
populations and evacuating the sick and seriously
injured so that they can receive the necessary medical
care. The international community, while striving to
help Syria, must not forget the neighbouring countries
that have welcomed refugees and shown a spirit of
solidarity worthy of praise.
I would like to conclude my statement by expressing
well-deserved tribute to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and all those who work with
it on the ground for their bravery and determination in
fulfilling their humanitarian mission to deliver aid to
18-05507

28/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8195

those in need. We encourage them to persist in their
noble efforts.

Astana process and that positive developments be taken
advantage of to improve the humanitarian situation.

Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I join others in thanking
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and UnderSecretary-General Feltman for their comprehensive
and sobering briefings.

My country stands for a solution in Syria based
on resolution 2254 (2015), the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) and agreements on the de-escalation
zones reached through the Astana process. We regret
the lack of full agreement and close coordination
among the key stakeholders in managing the Syrian
crisis. We also attach great importance to strengthening
the inter-Syrian political dialogue with greater support
from the world community. Lastly, Kazakhstan notes
the need to establish closer interaction among the
leading stakeholders in Syria, in particular between the
Russian Federation and the United States, to improve
the political process and ensure positive changes on the
humanitarian track.

Kazakhstan welcomed the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2401 (2018). That document should be
urgently implemented to ensure a comprehensive
ceasefire in Syria. The ceasefire regime should be
implemented fully, especially in the areas of eastern
Ghouta, southern Idlib and northern Hama, to resolve
their long-accumulated acute humanitarian problems,
deliver aid to the most difficult regions and evacuate
the wounded and sick.
Turning to the situation on the ground in the
country, according to our humanitarian colleagues,
over the past 78 hours and to our deep regret, military
operations continued to be reported in besieged eastern
Ghouta, resulting in deaths, including women and
children. Attacks on Damascus from eastern Ghouta
are also continuing. To our great disappointment, a
Syrian Arab Red Crescent warehouse in a Damascus
suburb was reportedly struck by shelling. During the
same period, attacks on the city of Damascus and the
governorate resulted in 14 deaths and 214 injured.
We are glad to know that the United Nations
has mobilized and is ready to immediately support
life-saving aid convoys in several areas in eastern
Ghouta. We therefore call on the Council members
and the wider United Nations membership to assist
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) in operationalizing the delivery of
humanitarian assistance in eastern Ghouta, as well
as in carrying out hundreds of medical evacuations.
We echo the United Nations calls on all parties to
facilitate unconditional, unimpeded and sustained
access to all people in need throughout the country
and take all measures to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including schools and medical facilities,
as required by international law. It is equally important
to ensure, in close coordination with OCHA, the
protection of medical and humanitarian workers. We
must also insist that parties support United Nation
agencies in the fulfilment of their mandates. In that
context, Kazakhstan proposes that all-round assistance
be provided to the inter-Syrian negotiations through the

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for their briefings.
China commends the United Nations aid agencies
for their humanitarian relief efforts in Syria. The
security situation in various parts of Syria, including
Damascus and eastern Ghouta, has escalated recently,
causing significant civilian casualties. We sympathize
profoundly with the suffering of the Syrian people and
condemn all acts of violence against innocent civilians.
The parties concerned should take immediate measures
to de-escalate the tensions in line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
The Council’s unanimous adoption of resolution
2401 (2018) demonstrates the consensus and unity of
its members on the humanitarian issue in Syria. We
appreciate the positive efforts of the parties concerned.
China welcomed Russia’s announcement by Russia that
it will implement the ceasefire measures and assist
with the evacuation of people from conflict areas. We
call on the parties in Syria to put an immediate end to
hostilities in accordance with the resolution, actively
coordinate with United Nations relief efforts and ensure
safe humanitarian corridors in the relevant areas.
A political settlement is the only viable solution
to the Syrian issue. The Syrian National Dialogue
Congress was recently held successfully in Sochi and
has had positive results. Special Envoy de Mistura is
making ongoing efforts to advance the Syrian political
process. The international community should support
the Syrian parties in resuming dialogue and negotiations
under the auspices of United Nations mediation as soon

18-0550715/22

S/PV.8195

The situation in the Middle East

as possible and in seeking a solution that is acceptable
to all parties through a Syrian-owned and -led political
process. That is the only way to fundamentally ease the
humanitarian situation in Syria and end the suffering of
the Syrian people without delay.
Terrorist organizations are still launching attacks
in Syria, causing significant civilian casualties and
impeding United Nations humanitarian relief efforts.
The international community should strengthen its
cooperation on counter-terrorism, adopt unified
standards and resolutely combat all terrorist
organizations that are designated as such by the
Security Council.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Mark Lowcock and Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman for their comprehensive briefings.
We would like to express our gratitude to the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners for
their continuing efforts to provide humanitarian
assistance to millions of Syrians. As Mr. Lowcock
said, the humanitarian crisis in Syria continues to be
a devastating one. Military activities in various parts
of the country, including eastern Ghouta, have affected
the ability of the United Nations to deliver lifesaving
assistance to all in need. As the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/138) says, the conflict and other
obstacles have had a disastrous effect on the level of
humanitarian access.
In order to address those challenges and to
alleviate the Syrians’ suffering, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2401 (2018),
demanding the institution without delay of a cessation
of hostilities for at least 30 consecutive days throughout
Syria so as to ensure the safe, unimpeded and sustained
delivery of humanitarian aid and services and medical
evacuations. As we all emphasized on Saturday after
welcoming the resolution’s adoption (see S/PV.8186),
what is now required is its full and comprehensive
implementation with the immediate engagement of all
parties and those with influence on them. Of course,
we understand and appreciate the fact that the United
Nations is ready to provide immediate humanitarian
aid across the country. However, as Mr. Lowcock just
highlighted, there are still military activities in various
areas. In that regard, we call on all the parties to fully
implement resolution 2401 (2018) for the sake of the
Syrian people, who have continued to bear the brunt of
the conflict for almost eight years.
16/22

28/02/2018

We appreciate any measure taken by Member
States to facilitate the implementation of the ceasefire,
including the humanitarian pause and humanitarian
corridor announced by the Russian Federation. At the
same time, it is obvious that more needs to be done to
fully implement the resolution. It is therefore imperative
to take urgent and coordinated action to bring about an
immediate ceasefire, thereby ensuring that the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners have safe,
sustained and needs-based access in order to deliver
humanitarian aid to all Syrians in need of assistance.
In conclusion, it is ultimately a comprehensive,
Syrian-led political solution, facilitated by the United
Nations on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015), that can
sustainably end the humanitarian tragedy in Syria.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
and Under-Secretary-General Feltman for their
briefings. By the way, at the outset I would like to take
advantage of this opportunity to ask Mr. Lowcock
where the United Nations is getting its evidence and
data on deaths in Damascus, for instance. According
to the Syrian authorities’ information, for example, just
since 22 January, 12 people have died in Damascus,
while the United Nations figure is 11 for the whole
month. Where is he getting his information from? The
White Helmets, maybe?
Today, as has been usual recently, the United States
delegation devoted its statement to Russia. It told us that
it knew what we were going to say today, which it does
not. And I am pleased about that, because it means that
it did not see our statement before the meeting began.
On 24 January, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2401 (2018), in an important decision
aimed at improving the humanitarian situation in Syria,
especially in areas where the danger of military clashes
remains or there are obstacles of one kind or another to
the civilian population’s access to essential assistance.
Today many questions have been asked — emphatic
questions, rhetorical questions, questions aimed
directly at us. We answered the questions asked of us
during our discussion at the adoption of resolution 2401
(2018). There are a lot of people here who like to pick
citations from the resolution that they like and forget
the ones that do not suit them. If I may, I will quote two
extracts from it, from paragraph 1 and paragraph 10.
18-05507

28/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

(spoke in English)
“Demands that all parties cease hostilities
without delay, and engage immediately to ensure full
and comprehensive implementation of this demand
by all parties, for a durable humanitarian pause for
at least 30 consecutive days throughout Syria, to
enable the safe, unimpeded and sustained delivery
of humanitarian aid and … medical evacuations”.
“[U]nderscores the need for the parties to agree on
humanitarian pauses, days of tranquillity, localized
ceasefires and truces to allow humanitarian
agencies safe and unhindered access to all affected
areas in Syria”.
(spoke in Russian)
Has everyone read the resolution? We have said,
and we will say it again, that any sustained pause must
be preceded by an agreement between the parties on
de-escalation. The demands that military activity end
overnight are either the result of a misunderstanding of
the realities or a deliberate exploitation of this human
tragedy. The statement by the United States delegation
simply rewrote resolution 2401 (2018). What sort of
joint effort, such as the Permanent Representative of
France called for today, can we talk about in these
circumstances after what we heard today in the United
States delegation’s statement? Russia has announced
the establishment in eastern Ghouta of daily five-hour
humanitarian pauses. Everything possible is being done
to ensure that they function successfully. Specifically,
medical and temporary accommodation posts have
been equipped, ambulance teams organized, motor
transport provided. We call on the United Nations,
the International Committee of the Red Cross and
other recognized humanitarian organizations to join
these efforts.
However, on the very first day, the militias took
advantage of the announcement of the pause to go on
the offensive. The same thing happened on the second
day. The mortar shelling continued, including in the
humanitarian operations corridors. Not a single person
was able to leave the danger area. We took note of
the relevant letters submitted on behalf of the illegal
armed groups. We were told previously that the most
convenient way of informing Council members about
them was being sought. It has been found and it is
indeed highly original — directly through the work
e-mail addresses of all the political coordinators,
meaning that someone deliberately sent the relevant

S/PV. 8195

contact information to dubious individuals from the
ranks of the radical Syrian opposition. It is very similar
to the situation that occurred when information about
the closed negotiations on humanitarian resolutions
became available to Western media agencies.
However, we hope that the opposition leaders are
serious and that their deeds will match their words. We
are expecting clear guarantees in that regard from the
militias’ foreign sponsors, many of whom are seated
around this table. The first thing that is needed is a
definitive repudiation of the terrorist organizations.
It has to be understood that terrorists continue to be
a legitimate target of military operations, and we will
not stand on ceremony with them. Overall, we have to
decide on the most effective way to neutralize Jabhat
Al-Nusra in eastern Ghouta. Why can’t some members
show a willingness to cooperate on that issue? Or do
they not want to?
The information background to this issue is
overheated to the point of no return. If we had not
adopted resolution 2401 (2018), it is difficult even to
imagine what the Western media outlets would have
made of it or how they would have portrayed Russia.
But even now, when the resolution has been adopted,
our Western partners act as if everything in it pertains
solely to Damascus and Russia, and that its successful
implementation depends almost entirely on the will of
our two countries, while they, the self-styled champions
of humanity, somehow imagine that they have an
exclusive right to lecture us on the subject. In various
media outlets, especially American ones, there have
been false allegations that we mock the tragedy of this
war and the situation in eastern Ghouta, and that we say
that the campaign is exaggerated and fake.
I will ask these humanistic gentlemen once again:
Where were they when American aircraft blew Raqqa
off the face of the Earth? Where were the cries and
the hand-wringing? Months have passed since the
terrorists were banished from that city and yet it is still
uninhabitable. On top of that, there are new reports
of 24 civilian casualties from Coalition air strikes in
Deir ez-Zor province. Who are they — second-class
citizens? Or when innocent people die from democratic
bombs, is that somehow immaterial — perhaps even
honourable? We urge the United Nations — in fact, we
insist — to send an assessment mission to Raqqa as
soon as possible, and that the Coalition, which is in de
facto control of the area, give it all necessary support.
We also expect that instead of establishing quasi-

18-0550717/22

S/PV.8195

The situation in the Middle East

administrations in areas liberated from the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, the Coalition leadership
will come up with a plan to turn them over to the central
authorities, in consideration of the Security Council’s
repeated affirmations of Syria’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. That would be a great deal more
constructive than the relentless quest to find what is a
non-existent basis in international law for maintaining
its presence on Syrian territory.
If Council members have interesting ideas on
how to raise the profile of local Government and find
effective ways to rebuild the ethnic and religious
balance that existed before the war, they should present
them to the Syrians in the negotiations in Geneva and
let them decide the issues for themselves through the
mediation of the United Nations. We also demand that
the Coalition open humanitarian access to the territory
it is occupying around the Al-Tanf military base in
order to bring aid to the residents of the Rukban camp
as soon as possible. By the way, that is also a provision
of resolution 2401 (2018).
It is not for nothing that we keep saying that
what is going on is painfully reminiscent of the
situation in eastern Aleppo when the West unleashed
a wave of monstrous anti-Russian hysteria. We are
the only country being asked to implement resolution
2401 (2018). We are being criticized for instituting
humanitarian pauses. Some claim that there are not
enough of them. Demands, demands, demands. For
some reason, someone is always bossily demanding
something of Russia. Britain’s Foreign Secretary has
altogether decided that he is the prosecutor who is
threatening to punish our country. Apparently, he called
for today’s meeting to be convened. He said so himself.
The Russian Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing
Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic is making daily
and hourly efforts to achieve a cessation of hostilities,
establish humanitarian pauses and ease the suffering
of civilians. May I ask what other members have done
to implement resolution 2401 (2018)? Has even one of
their countries lifted a finger? Have they brought their
influence to bear on those whom they consider the
moderate opposition? Have they persuaded them to lay
down their weapons and stop taking hostages?
The hugely complex issue that the Syrian conflict
represents is being used for unscrupulous purposes. The
rivers of tears roll down only when the next stronghold
where militias and terrorists mingle is threatened, at
18/22

28/02/2018

which point an unheard-of level of action kicks in. The
real aim is the regime, as some members like to refer to
the lawful Syrian authorities. Any hint of its success in
fighting terrorism on its own territory is a thorn in their
side. They are ready to use any means to stop it.
This is a warning. We know about the chemical
evidence being fabricated in order to blame Damascus.
We know about the meetings on the subject, where they
are being held and who is taking part in them. Today
we once again heard unsubstantiated allegations about
the Syrian Government’s use of chemical weapons.
I am tired of asking if members understand the
futility of Damascus using chemical weapons from
both a military and a political point of view, and the
completely believable probability of militias using
chemical provocations. I think they do understand
it perfectly, but they persist in seeking an excuse for
military intervention. United States officials, and the
head of the Foreign Office and others, have already
talked about military strikes against Syria, and it is
obvious where that intellectual activity is heading.
We urge everyone to stop the dirty tricks and join the
concerted efforts to alleviate the humanitarian situation
in Syria by implementing the resolution we have just
adopted. We hope that the United Nations generally and
Mr. Lowcock personally, as Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, will rise to the occasion.
We have circulated a draft presidential statement
on the resolution’s implementation. We have placed it
under the silence procedure until 1 p.m., and we call on
the Council to adopt it. We hope that there will be no
objections before one o’clock. I will take the liberty of
reading it out.
(spoke in English)
The Security Council, with reference to its
resolution 2401 (2018), urges all parties to implement
it and, to this end, further urges all armed groups and
all Member States with influence on them to ensure
the safety of the announced humanitarian corridors for
evacuation from eastern Ghouta. The Security Council
calls for the establishment of similar humanitarian
corridors in Al-Tanf and Rukban. The Security Council
requests the Secretary-General to expeditiously send a
mission to Raqqa to assess humanitarian needs there.
18-05507

28/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

(spoke in Russian)
And by the way, we, like the other members of
the Security Council, believe that there can only
be a political solution to the Syrian conflict. We are
doing everything we can to achieve that, and certainly
somewhat more than those who have been spreading
fire and fury today. We propose, as we have always
proposed, that they join in these efforts, rather than
throw up road blocks in an attempt to serve their own
geopolitical agendas.

S/PV. 8195

2401 (2018), keeping in mind that, as co-penholders,
we are committed to closely follow its implementation,
including ensuring a briefing by the Secretariat 15 days
after the adoption of the resolution.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
In accordance with to rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic to participate in this
meeting.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

First of all, the delegation of Kuwait aligns itself
to the statement made by the representative of Sweden
on behalf of our two countries as co-penholders on the
issue of Syria. We thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, UnderSecretary General for Humanitarian Affairs, and
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for their briefings. Four days after the
adoption of resolution 2401 (2018), which demands that
all parties cease hostilities throughout Syrian territory
for 30 days, I would like to make the following points.

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Syrian Government has examined the fortyeighth monthly report of the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, and, yesterday morning, as
usual, we sent a formal letter to the Secretary-General
and to the President of the Security Council setting forth
the position of the Syrian Government on the report.

We have said from the outset that resolution 2401
(2018) is only the first step towards improving the
humanitarian situation in Syria. However, to date we
have not seen the implementation of the provisions of
the resolution — not even a partial implementation — as
we heard from Mr. Lowcock this morning, in particular
in eastern Ghouta. The Council demonstrated unity
in adopting the resolution and it is up to us now to
ensure that all its provisions are implemented in full
and immediately in order to alleviate the suffering
of our brethren in Syria and to protect civilians. The
resolution is binding on all, in accordance with Article
25 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Secondly, we welcome the fact that the United
Nations is ready to come to eastern Ghouta and other
besieged areas so as to deliver all kinds of aid and
assistance to those that need them. We call on all the
parties to the conflict in Syria to uphold international
humanitarian law and abide by the provisions of the
resolution, which cover all the various aspects that are
causing the daily suffering of the Syrian people.
Thirdly, we underscore the importance of
members of the Council making their contribution
by spurring all the parties to the conflict in Syria to
immediately implement the provisions of resolution

We are realistic. We know well that the United Nations
is not a charitable organization. That is clear given that
it has been unable to implement the principles of the
Charter and international law since its inception — and
the Palestinian question is a case in point. There have
been other failures by the United Nations: in Iraq,
Libya, the former Yugoslavia, Grenada — for those
who have forgotten Grenada — Nicaragua, and the list
goes on. However, I hope we can preserve the United
Nations as an organization even as it continues to lack
charitability. I would now like to make the following
points.
First, the Syrian Government is fully committed
to the principles of international law and international
humanitarian law, as well as Syrian law and the Syrian
Constitution, all of which stipulate that the Syrian
Government has the responsibility to ensure the safety
and security of Syrian citizens and protect them from
terrorist groups.
Secondly, the current report, just like previous
reports, has a great flaw, namely, that the authors of
the report continue to rely on politicized sources, open
sources and unreliable figures. At the same time, the
report continues to ignore credible Government sources
and even the reports issued by the representatives of
the United Nations in Syria. Those representatives,
along with the reports they have submitted to the
United Nations in New York, acknowledge the efforts

18-0550719/22

S/PV.8195

The situation in the Middle East

of the Syrian Government and its cooperation on the
humanitarian issue. However, none of this information
that reaches New York appears to be mentioned in the
report, as if by miracle.
Thirdly, the Syrian Government condemns the
authors of the report — the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs — especially
after the adoption of resolution 2401 (2018), for their
failure to mention the Turkish aggression against the
Syrian city of Afrin. That aggression has claimed the
lives of many people, including women and children,
destroyed public and private facilities and has led to
the displacement of the city’s inhabitants and a severe
shortage of humanitarian goods. However, Afrin is not
eastern Ghouta, eastern Aleppo, Fo’ah or Kefreya.
Fourthly, the Syrian Government fully rejects
the failure of the authors of the report to mention the
catastrophic impact of the so-called International
Coalition and its members. The Coalition, which
has claimed the lives of hundreds of civilians and
members of the Syrian forces who are fighting Da’esh,
committed two new massacres yesterday that claimed
the lives of 29 civilians and injured dozens, most of
them women and children, in the villages of Sha’fa
and Thahret Allouni in eastern Deir ez-Zor. It appears
that the International Coalition is focused on this part
of eastern Deir ez-Zor because it is home to civilians
who do not host Da’esh or Al-Nusra Front terrorists.
The Coalition has also destroyed the city of Raqqa,
as my colleague the representative of the Russian
Federation just noted. My Government calls once again
for dismantling this illegitimate aggressive Coalition
and for an immediately stop to its crimes against the
Syrian people.
The Russian military issued a communiqué today
saying that the areas under the control of the allies
and agents of the United States in Syria are witnessing
the worst humanitarian crisis currently in the country.
Those areas have become black holes, just like the black
holes in outer space.
With regard to the situation in eastern Ghouta,
the Syrian Government believes that the current
deterioration in the situation is due to the fact that
terrorist groups there have launched attacks against
residential zones and military targets. Up until
yesterday, they had launched more than 2,180 missiles
20/22

28/02/2018

and mortars against the city of Damascus. Those attacks
claimed the lives of 66 civilians and injured 474 others.
Government forces have been forced to respond
to those attacks and to carry out their constitutional
responsibility in guaranteeing security and safety for
the citizens. My Government condemns the use, by
the authors of the report, of the term “besieged areas”
when considering the situation in eastern Ghouta, in
rural Damascus. Under pressure from influential
countries in and outside of the Council, they continue
to deliberately ignore the fact that people in eastern
Ghouta are besieged from within by the various armed
terrorist organizations operating there. Those terrorist
organizations are exploiting civilians and using them
as human shields. They are seizing and monopolizing
humanitarian assistance, distributing the aid to their
supporters or selling it at exorbitant prices, as was the
case in eastern Aleppo.
Syria regrets the failure of the authors of the report
to refer to the suffering of thousands of kidnapped
people who are in eastern Ghouta prisons and other
places where the terrorist groups are spread. The
kidnapped people include women, children and elderly.
These people were kidnapped from their homes and
places of work and have been subjected to the worst
forms of torture. There are civilians, including from city
of Adra and from Latakia, who were kidnapped from
their homes five years ago. The Syrian Government
also condemns the statements by the Secretariat and
reports of the Secretary-General, which continue up till
now to disregard the suffering of 8 million civilians in
the capital Damascus as a result of hundreds of missiles
and mortars launched daily from terrorist groups within
eastern Ghouta.
The accusations by the authors of the report, like
those of the Western countries that have influence
on them, that the Syrian Government is allegedly
besieging Ghouta have been consistently refuted. They
have proven to be unfounded, as we have seen in recent
reports noting that the Saudi regime provided “aid”
to eastern Ghouta in February. That proves, first, that
eastern Ghouta is not besieged and, secondly, that it is
possible to access it. In particular, the terrorist groups
in Ghouta continue to receive arms and munitions from
Governments that support terrorism, including Saudi
Arabia’s so-called humanitarian assistance.
The Syrian Government is more committed than
anyone to protecting its citizens across Syria. In that
18-05507

28/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

regard, it has taken all necessary measures to protect
its citizens and to respond to the attacks of terrorist
groups in eastern Ghouta. We have sought to protect
these civilians from the terrorists by establishing a
humanitarian corridor to ensure their exit from eastern
Ghouta. We announced the humanitarian corridor only
hours after the adoption of resolution 2401 (2018) in
order to ensure the safety of civilians — in cooperation
with our Russian friends and allies. We have provided
them with shelter, food, medicine and medical care at
the expense of the Syrian Government, not the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
The Syrian Government has also called on members
of the armed groups to lay down their weapons, cease
their terrorist activities inside residential areas and
engage in national reconciliation efforts. However,
those terrorist groups, including the Al-Nusra Front,
Jaysh al-Islam and Faylak ar-Rahman, have forcibly
prevented civilians from reaching the corridor, as some
members of the Council may know. They also sought to
target the humanitarian corridor after it was announced,
through the use of mortars.
As for the letter sent by the terrorist Mohamed
Alloush, it is a clear indication that he rejects the exit
of civilians from Ghouta. It is clear that he wants to
use them as human shields. There seems to be a new
trend in the United Nations to circulate a letter from
a terrorist group as an official document. That is an
innovation at the United Nations. There is no respect
for the Member States concerned.
We have followed closely the way resolution
2401 (2018) was adopted and today’s statements and
briefings. We can clearly say that the main goal behind
the adoption of the resolution is neither to reach a clear
truce or ceasefire, as some may claim, nor to protect
civilians and meet their needs. The main goal was to use
the Security Council once again as a means to prevent
any progress by the Syrian army and its allies in the
fight against the terrorist groups that are targeting the
city of Damascus. I say that for the thousandth time.
How else to explain the fact that the resolution fails to
refer to any Council resolution on counter-terrorism?
Who can explain to us the strong resistance of some
States during the negotiations on the draft resolution
to any text that excludes Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front
and the terrorist groups affiliated with them from the
supposed ceasefire? For three days, the Council has
continued to negotiate the issue of whether to include
or exclude them.

S/PV. 8195

The false humanitarian propaganda on the situation
in eastern Ghouta coincided with another campaign
under the supervision of the United States, claiming the
use of chemical weapons again in Syria, in areas under
the exclusive control of terrorists or, I should say, the
White Helmets. Today, The New York Times published
a Tin-Tin style, childish report claiming that there is
cooperation on the chemical issue between my country
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The
article is a full-page report on the front page of The New
York Times. It seeks to tarnish the image of the Syrian
Government and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. It ends by saying that this information is
not substantiated.
“Though experts who viewed the report said
the evidence it cited did not prove definitively that
there was current, continuing collaboration between
North Korea and Syria on chemical weapons.”
That is a word-for-word quote from The New York Times.
It seems that The New York Times is not up to date
on what is going on in the world. It seems that the New
York Times does not know that the American vessel,
the MV Cape Ray, destroyed the chemical arsenal
voluntarily submitted by the Syrian Government after
joining the Chemical Weapons Convention and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), as a full member. That is old information,
déjà vu, as is said in French. However, it seems that The
New York Times has decided to address this issue today.
I will read a communiqué that we received just
now of information that I think should be taken into
consideration when addressing the issue of the use of
chemical weapons in Syria. And I can tell the Council
that terrorists will use chemical weapons in Syria. On
the morning of 20 February, four days ago, three Turkish
trucks carrying chlorine entered Idlib governorate
through the Bab Al-Hawa crossing. I think that The New
York Times should verify that information. Two trucks
stopped in the village of Qalb Loze in Idlib, and the third
continued its way to Al-Habit village in northern Idlib.
Information available to the Syrian Government points
to the fact that terrorists are currently preparing for a
chemical weapon using the substance of chlorine on a
large scale and to then accuse the Syrian Arab Army
of using such weapons. Those terrorists have clear
instructions from Western and Turkish intelligence to
fabricate a chemical attack before 13 March, because

18-0550721/22

S/PV.8195

The situation in the Middle East

it is on that date that the eighty-seventh session of the
Executive Council of the OPCW will be held.
According to the information I received just now,
the two trucks are currently in the school of Qalb Loze
village. Other cars and terrorists are also currently in
the school, which they have turned into a warehouse
for chemical weapons. As for the third truck, it is
currently in a centre belonging to the Hay’at Tahrir
Al-Sham, which is a Turkish agent, in the north-eastern
part of Al-Habit village. A vast number of terrorists are
currently unloading the truck there. In providing the
Security Council with this information, we affirm that
these terrorists, at the instructions of their operators,
will use these chemical weapons before 13 March.
The main responsibility for ending hostilities lies
with those countries that have real influence with
terrorist groups in Ghouta and other parts of Syria.
They should compel these terrorist groups to stop their
terrorist activities and allow civilians to leave those
areas, which are used by these groups as a base to
launch their terrorist attacks.
There is in this Organization a group of five
countries that are shedding tears over the humanitarian
situation in Syria. Unfortunately, some of them are
members of the Council. They have invited Member
States to watch a movie about the White Helmets, two
days from now in the Economic and Social Council
Chamber here at the United Nations. Some members

22/22

28/02/2018

of the Council are advocating for a group that has been
designated as a terrorist group by the Council. I hope
that the Council will address the information I have
provided seriously and appropriately.
The President (spoke in Arabic): As this is the
last scheduled meeting of the Council for the month
of February, I would like to express the sincere
appreciation of the delegation of Kuwait to the members
of the Security Council, especially my colleagues the
Permanent Representatives, their respective staff and
to the secretariat of the Council for all the support they
have given to us.
Indeed, February has been a busy month, and
one in which we rallied to consensus on several
important issues within our purview. We could not
have done it alone or without the hard work, support
and positive contributions of all the delegations and
the representatives of the Secretariat, as well as all
the relevant conference service officers, interpreters,
translators and security staff.
As we end our presidency, I know I speak on
behalf of the Council in wishing the delegation of the
Netherlands good luck in the month of March.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

18-05507
