A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/5
7 November 1996

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 28
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/51/L.4)]
51/5. Universal Congress on the Panama Canal
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 50/12 of 7 November 1995 supporting the
convening of the Universal Congress on the Panama Canal, which is to be held
at Panama City from 7 to 10 September 1997,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 50/12, 1/
Taking into account resolution 1376 (XXVI-0/96) of the General Assembly
of the Organization of American States entitled "The Panama Canal in the
Twenty-first Century" and resolution 1379 (XXVI-0/96) on the Universal
Congress on the Panama Canal, both adopted on 6 June 1996, in which,
inter alia, the General Assembly of the Organization of American States noted
with satisfaction the harmonious transition process in which the Governments
of Panama and the United States of America are participating, through their
diplomatic missions, the Panama Canal Commission, the Interoceanic Region
Authority and the Transition Commission,
Having considered the letter dated 27 September 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Panama to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, 2/ outlining the work being done by the Government of Panama in
connection with the holding of the Universal Congress on the Panama Canal and

1/

A/51/281.

2/

A/51/477.

96-77449

/...

A/RES/51/5
Page 2

indicating the progress made by the Organizing Commission for that Congress,
under the direction of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Bearing in mind that on 7 September 1977 the Panama Canal Treaty and the
Treaty concerning the Permanent Neutrality and Operation of the Panama Canal,
known as the Torrijos-Carter Treaties, were signed in Washington, which
stipulate that, at noon on 31 December 1999, the Canal, including all
improvements, is to come under the control of the Republic of Panama,
Acknowledging the importance that the international community attaches
to the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the
Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco) and the positive implications that the
strengthening of the nuclear-weapon-free regime established by that Treaty has
for the permanent neutrality of the Panama Canal,
Welcoming the fact that, in anticipation of the holding of the Congress,
Panama has ratified the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 3/
universally recognized as the framework for the adoption of national, regional
and global measures in maritime matters, in harmony with chapter 17 of
Agenda 21 4/ adopted at the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development,
Reaffirming the utility of the Panama Canal for international maritime
transport and the growth of the world economy, and the need to tackle the
problems of interoceanic communication in the twenty-first century,
Noting with appreciation the activities being undertaken in various
spheres by Governments, organizations and programmes of the United Nations
system and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations in
support of the holding of the Universal Congress,
Recognizing that the next stages of preparation and organization of the
Congress require increased efforts and the availability of greater resources,
1.
Notes with satisfaction the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 50/12; 1/
2.
Reiterates its firm support for the initiative of the Government
of Panama, and urges it to continue to intensify its efforts to organize the
Universal Congress on the Panama Canal at Panama City from 7 to
10 September 1997;

3/
Official Records of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law
of the Sea, vol. XVII (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.V.3), document
A/CONF.62/122.
4/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and
Vol. I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions Adopted by
the Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
/...

A/RES/51/5
Page 3

3.
Renews its appeal to Member States generously to assist the
Government of Panama, and calls upon intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to do likewise;
4.
Again urges the competent organs, programmes and specialized
agencies of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Environment Programme and the
International Maritime Organization, to make every effort to provide
assistance from within existing resources for the holding of the Universal
Congress on the Panama Canal;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its fifty-second session a report on the implementation of the present
resolution;
6.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-second
session the item entitled "Universal Congress on the Panama Canal".
40th plenary meeting
24 October 1996
