United Nations

S/PV.4085

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fourth Year

4085th Meeting
Wednesday, 22 December 1999, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Jeremy Greenstock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Petrella
Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Buallay
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fonseca
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Fowler
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Chen Xu
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Dejammet
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Eboumy
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Jagne
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Mohammad Kamal
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Andjaba
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. van Walsum
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Granovsky
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr. Türk
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ms. Soderberg

Agenda
The situation in East Timor

00-22123
99-86813 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation
concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
The meeting was called to order at 11.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

4085th meeting
22 December 1999
I think a special word of appreciation is due to the
Government of Japan, which made a significant
contribution to the success of the conference, both as host
of the conference and as a major donor.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in East Timor
The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council’s prior consultations, and in the
absence of objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Hédi Annabi,
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Annabi to take a seat at the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations on the situation concerning East
Timor.
I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/1999/1248, letter dated 14
December 1999 from the Secretary-General transmitting a
letter dated 10 December 1999 from the Permanent
Representative of Australia to the United Nations and the
fifth periodic report on the operations of the International
Force, East Timor (INTERFET).
I now call on Mr. Annabi, Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations.
Mr. Annabi: I should like to begin this briefing on
the situation concerning East Timor with an expression of
deep appreciation to the Governments that participated in
the donor conference held in Tokyo on 16-17 December.
That conference was, in our view, very successful. Pledges
were made amounting to a total of $522 million, covering
humanitarian assistance, administration and capacitybuilding for self-government and reconstruction and
development. The timely disbursement of these funds will
ensure that the United Nations will have the resources
required for the large and complex tasks it has undertaken
in East Timor. We are most grateful for this support, and

2

The preparations for the Tokyo conference involved
exceptionally close cooperation between the United
Nations and ita agencies and programmes, the World
Bank, the International Monetary Fund and, of course, the
representatives of the people of East Timor.
Turning to the security situation, the situation has
remained largely stable. There have been isolated cases of
verbal and sometimes physical abuse of returning refugees
on the grounds that they had supported autonomy rather
than independence during the popular consultation, but no
serious casualties have resulted. The fighters of
FALANTIL remain in their cantonment area at Aileu,
from where some minor incidents of indiscipline have
been reported.
The military observers of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) are
deployed throughout the territory and have also set up 11
liaison posts on both sides of the border with West Timor
to ensure appropriate liaison between the International
Force, East Timor (INTERFET) and the Indonesian armed
forces and to facilitate the return of refugees.
The planning for the establishment of UNTAET’s
military component is proceeding in close consultation
with INTERFET. The transition from INTERFET to the
United Nations is to take place during the month of
February, from the beginning to the end of that month, on
the basis of an agreed concept that will ensure that a
strong operational capacity will be maintained throughout.
While much of UNTAET’s force will come from
INTERFET, a number of important assets will need to be
brought in from abroad. These include, in particular,
engineering units and helicopter support. The Force
Commander, as the Secretary-General has announced, will
be an officer from the Philippines and the Deputy Force
Commander will be an officer from Australia.
Turning now to the return of refugees and the
humanitarian situation, globally the humanitarian situation
has improved, although it remains very difficult in the
wake of the extensive destruction that took place
following the announcement of the results of the popular
consultation. The coordination of humanitarian relief
activities among United Nations agencies, government

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
agencies and non-governmental organizations has been very
effective.
Ensuring the voluntary return of refugees remains a
top priority of UNTAET. As of yesterday, close to 120,000
refugees had returned. Despite the agreement between
INTERFET and the Indonesian forces, which was reached
on 22 November under the auspices of Ambassador
Holbrooke, there has been no significant increase in the rate
of return. Several factors, I think, may account for this; one
of them is continued intimidation and misinforming of
refugees in West Timor by militias; another is the lack of
infrastructure, aggravated by the rainy season, which may
be acting as a deterrent. In addition, there are indications
that the number of refugees still in West Timor do not
foresee, for various reasons, or do not wish, for various
reasons, to return in the immediate future to East Timor.
Relations between UNTAET and the East Timorese
are very good. UNTAET is administering East Timor in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1272 (1999),
in close cooperation and consultation with the Timorese, as
envisaged under that resolution. To this end, UNTAET has
established the National Consultative Commission of East
Timor, which will be the primary mechanism for
cooperation with the East Timorese. The Commission is
chaired by Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative and Transitional
Administrator, and will be composed of 15 members. Seven
of them are designated by the Council of National
Resistance of East Timor (CNRT), a broad coalition that
favoured independence; Mr. Jose Alexandre Gusmão, also
known as Xanana Gusmão, and Mr. Jose Ramos Horta,
who returned to East Timor on 1 December after 24 years
in exile, are the acknowledged leaders of the CNRT. Three
members of the Commission are designated by political
parties that supported autonomy and one by the Catholic
Church, and four will represent UNTAET.
The first meeting of the National Consultative
Commission was held on 11 December, and the next
meeting is scheduled to take place on 28 or 29 December.
The Council will create sectoral committees that will
comprise East Timorese and international experts. Members
of the Consultative Commission attended the donor
conference in Tokyo as part of the United Nations
delegation, including Mr. Xanana Gusmão, who addressed
that meeting.
While two of the seats allocated to the pro-autonomy
parties have yet to be filled, the fact that their participation
was readily agreed to by the CNRT is a positive sign as

4085th meeting
22 December 1999
regards prospects for national reconciliation. There have
also been meetings between CNRT representatives and
pro-autonomy groups abroad. Another positive
development was the meeting on 12 December between
Xanana Gusmão and Mr. João Tavares, a militia leader,
and the subsequent announcement by the latter of the
militia’s disbandment.
The establishment of good relations between East
Timor and Indonesia is also high on UNTAET’s agenda.
At the end of November, Mr. Gusmão visited Jakarta at
the invitation of President Wahid. Mr. Gusmão was
warmly welcomed by President Wahid and other senior
Indonesian officials, who assured him of their
determination to build friendly relations with East Timor.
They also undertook to assist in a number of areas,
including the release of all remaining East Timorese
political prisoners, and I am happy to report that this has
occurred since then.
Mr. Vieira de Mello also visited Jakarta earlier this
month, where he met with President Wahid and other
senior officials. They discussed, among other things, the
establishment of an Indonesian representation in Dili, the
resumption of flights between Indonesia and East Timor
by Indonesian carriers and future commercial links and
cooperation on banking and financial services. It was also
agreed, subject to a decision by the Indonesian Cabinet,
to constitute a working group with UNTAET
participation, which is to work out measures to end militia
harassment of East Timorese refugees still in West Timor.
The Secretary-General has invited President Wahid to
visit East Timor, and President Wahid has accepted and
indicated that he will visit at an early opportunity.
Turning to governance and public administration,
UNTAET has now established a skeleton administration
in East Timor, including an effective presence in each of
the 13 districts of East Timor. The immediate priorities
for the administration are the restoration of essential
infrastructure, the provision of basic social services, the
recruitment of civil servants and the revival of commerce
and trade. A total of 275 civilian police are deployed
throughout the territory, and UNTAET is making every
effort to begin the training of Timorese police by the
beginning of February.
INTERFET, together with United Nations police,
continues to uncover the bodies of persons who were
killed during the period leading up to and after the ballot
on 30 August. Steps have been taken to record and secure
the evidence for further investigation once the requisite

3

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year

4085th meeting
22 December 1999

expertise and facilities are available. The United Nations is
working with several Governments that have offered
assistance. The Special Rapporteurs on extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions and on the question of
torture and violence against women visited East Timor from
4 to 10 November. The international commission of inquiry
established by the Commission on Human Rights visited
East Timor from 25 November to 8 December. Both groups
are expected to report to the General Assembly in the near
future.
I wish to acknowledge with appreciation the assistance
of those Governments which have given us the names of
experts for the broad range of functions that UNTAET has
to carry out in East Timor. However, there are still
significant gaps in the staffing of UNTAET, particularly in
the fields of labour and social affairs. We are also searching
for an appropriate official to serve as the ombudsperson.
UNTAET will be working with the East Timorese
civil servants, whose recruitment will begin in the near
future. The Timorese have agreed that the civil service,
which used to be subsidized from Jakarta, should be much
reduced to a size that East Timor can afford and can itself
sustain once UNTAET leaves. UNTAET is in the process
of setting up a commission, composed mainly of East
Timorese, to deal with the appointment of civil servants and
to determine salaries and other conditions of employment.
The President: I
comprehensive briefing.

thank

Mr. Annabi

for

his

Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): The
question of East Timor has proved to what extent success
can be found in reaching a solution to a problem, however
large, with the cooperation of the parties concerned and the
assistance of the United Nations.
It is certainly true that this large operation would not
have succeeded without the genuine will shown by
Indonesia to reach a solution, a will later translated into
recommitment to the agreements it has entered into. We
should also like to pay tribute to Portugal for the efforts it
made in the process.
Rebuilding East Timor economically and
administratively is of utmost importance. Such rebuilding
cannot be separated, under any circumstances, from national
reconciliation and the building of good relations between
East Timor and its neighbours, in particular with Indonesia.
Such a relationship must be based on cooperation and on
setting the past aside and looking to the future.

4

Among the tasks to be undertaken by the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor is the
increasing and coordinating of assistance to displaced
persons and returnees. In this regard, greater support
should be provided by donor countries, and we are
pleased to note the positive results of the pledging
conference held recently in Tokyo. Financial pledges
made at that conference will help the United Nations in
its work in East Timor.
We would also like to express our satisfaction at the
means used to ensure the safe return of refugees to their
homes in East Timor. In this regard, we would like to
convey our gratitude and appreciation to the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor, under
the leadership of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for East Timor,
for its efforts. We wish it every success in transforming
the International Force, East Timor (INTERFET), from a
multinational force to a United Nations peacekeeping
operation.
Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): First I
wish to commend you, Mr. President, for holding this
open session today. Quite often when crises fall from the
front pages of the newspapers, the Council’s attention can
get swayed to other crises, and I think, particularly with
respect to East Timor, that it is crucial that the
international community remain engaged. I also appreciate
the update from Assistant Secretary-General Annabi.
I think that overall one would have to say that great
progress has been made over the last year, starting with
the United Nations leadership in organizing the
consultation, the international community’s mobilization
to ameliorate the circumstances following the disturbances
that occurred in the wake of the consultation, and the
swift move of both the multinational Force, led by the
Australians, and the United Nations leadership.
I think that overall the United Nations operations
and the multinational Force are going well and are
working quite well in a unique arrangement. I think one
must give due credit to the very stellar leadership of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Sergio Vieira de Mello. He has displayed command and
control and laudatory leadership in what is a very difficult
situation on the ground, and I think he deserves the
applause and credit of this body.
There has been substantial progress on the ground,
due in large part to the leaders on the ground in East

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Timor but also to the very direct engagement of the
international community. I would like to welcome in
particular Mr. Gusmão’s meeting with the former prointegrationists as well as the militia’s subsequent decision
to lay down its weapons. I think that these are both
significant developments that will help to stabilize the
situation on the ground.
The transition to the Blue Helmets will occur early
next year, as Mr. Annabi told us in his briefing, and I think
all indications are that that will go quite well. We are also
quite pleased with the results of the Tokyo pledging
conference. To date the United States has provided $34.9
million to the international humanitarian effort, and we
have also provided $30 million to the United Nations
appeal to assist refugees and displaced persons. The United
States also hopes to provide additional assistance in
development and capacity-building for the people of East
Timor, as well as assistance to small farmers.
It is important, I think, that the United States remain
an active partner with East Timor and with the international
community and other donors, and that it remain engaged in
the ongoing reconstruction efforts. That said, there are
concerns that we continue to have about the situation on the
ground. Certainly we are deeply troubled by the information
provided by Mr. Annabi about the failure to achieve an
increase in the return of the inhabitants of East Timor. We
certainly had hoped that that would move forward in a
more timely fashion, and this is something that the United
Nations and the international community must keep as a
priority. We also believe that it is time for the Government
of Indonesia to resettle from the camps those East Timorese
who opt to remain primarily in Indonesia.
We certainly look forward to reading the report of the
international commission of inquiry. I think it is important
to support that Commission as well as the Indonesian
commission of inquiry, and that their investigations bring
out the facts of what happened in the violence that took
place in East Timor.
The need for accurate information about conditions in
East Timor is crucial, as is complete and safe access by
international workers. I believe that it is important that the
facts come out in this case, not just on the conditions but
also with respect to any additional evidence of the killings
that have occurred in East Timor. I think that certainly we
would all want those responsible to be held accountable for
this.

4085th meeting
22 December 1999
Lastly, I think the international community has made
an enormous investment in East Timor, and with
continued leadership and international engagement, the
people of East Timor will be assured of a secure, peaceful
and prosperous future.
Mr. Fowler (Canada): I would like to begin by
thanking Mr. Annabi for yet another excellent and
comprehensive briefing and by extending Canada’s
appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, and all the
men and women of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and the
International Force, East Timor (INTERFET), as well as
those involved in the delivery of humanitarian assistance
in both East and West Timor. As a result of their
coordinated efforts to date, as well as the efforts of the
East Timorese themselves, East Timor has made truly
remarkable progress.
We are now beginning to move beyond the most
pressing security challenges to the challenges of postconflict reintegration, reconstruction and development.
However, the plight of those still in West Timor remains
a source of serious concern to us. There are persistent
reports that pro-autonomy militias continue to intimidate
refugees in camps in West Timor and are hindering their
return, including through the use of an active
disinformation campaign. We therefore urge the
Government of Indonesia to take further steps to address
the situation so as to ensure that all displaced persons
who wish to return can do so in safety and in dignity.
In this regard we welcome the agreement reached
between Mr. de Mello and the Indonesian Minister of
Defence to establish a joint working group. We anticipate
that this group will move urgently to address the concerns
of the displaced and facilitate their early return and
resettlement.
Mr. de Mello’s efforts to streamline UNTAET and
to improve coordination and consultation with the people
of East Timor are especially welcome. We are pleased to
note that the early tension which marked UNTAET’s
relationship with the National Council for East Timorese
Resistance (CNRT) appears to have been resolved. The
establishment of the National Consultative Commission
should help to engage the East Timorese more fully in the
process of transition and administration and, of course,
will help to foster indigenous capacity for selfgovernance.

5

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
We understand that, while plans have not yet been
finalized, the transition from INTERFET to UNTAET
should begin in mid-January 2000 and should end by 28
February. As we have stated repeatedly, this mission could
have been and should have been a United Nations
peacekeeping operation from the beginning, and I am
pleased therefore that our Canadian soldiers will wear blue
helmets before they leave at the end of March.
Once established, a peacekeeping operation
commanded and funded by the United Nations will increase
the regional legitimacy of the force and will attract greater
Asian participation. It will also relieve the financial burden
assumed by those that have contributed to INTERFET.
Sharing such a burden among the wider international
community is the essence of our collective security
arrangements, which we believe underpin this Organization.
I do not know whether other members of the Council
will be fully aware of the extent of the enormous financial
contribution which the Government and the people of
Australia have made, on behalf of us all, to this mission, or
of the fact that, in order to pay for the operation, a special
and significant tax has been levied on all Australians above
a certain income level. While this extraordinary generosity
on the part of the Government and the people of Australia
is deeply appreciated — and it is certainly admired by my
Government — this is not the way the United Nations was
supposed to operate.
The establishment of a rapidly deployable headquarters
would, of course, have contributed enormously to the goal
of deploying this and other United Nations peacekeeping
missions more quickly and more effectively; we regret
extremely that progress on this front within the Secretariat
has been so very marginal.
Canada fully supports the efforts of the international
commission of inquiry, as well as those of the Indonesian
National Commission on Human Rights. Anyone found
responsible for human rights violations should, of course,
be brought to justice. We understand that the commission
of inquiry should be submitting its report soon, and we
hope that the commission of inquiry and the Indonesian
National Commission on Human Rights will continue to
cooperate and to share information in order to increase the
effectiveness and credibility of their respective findings.
Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): Thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open meeting on East Timor. We are
grateful also to Mr. Annabi for his comprehensive briefing.

6

4085th meeting
22 December 1999
At the outset, my delegation would like to speak a
word of praise for the personnel of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and
of the International Force, East Timor (INTERFET), for
the excellent work they are doing.
In April of this year the Brazilian delegation asked
the Secretary-General to brief the Security Council on the
incidents that had taken place in Dili on the preceding
weekend. That request for information marked the
reactivation of an item that had been dormant in the
agenda of the Council. That was only the beginning of the
final chapter of a long and painful process in the direction
of self-determination for East Timor. The Security
Council utilized all instruments available, including the
highly successful mission led by Ambassador Andjaba.
East Timor is an important source of lessons for the
Council in its future action.
The Brazilian people have always fully supported the
goal of an independent East Timor. In April, however, we
did not suspect that so much suffering was still to come.
Today’s briefing marks the start of the reconstruction
of East Timor. The very positive response by the
international community to the donors conference held in
Tokyo last week surpassed our best expectations. We
understand that much of the resources pledged at that
conference are still dependent on legislative approval and
are to be disbursed over a three-year period. We hope that
the commitments undertaken in Tokyo will be secured.
Brazil commends Japan and Portugal for their
generosity. Brazil is going to make a modest contribution
to the trust fund, and is ready to support East Timor in
training human resources as well as through the provision
of technical cooperation. In that context I note that
Ambassador Roque Rodrigues, Chef de cabinet of
Mr. Xanana Gusmão, is visiting Brazil and has been
received by our highest authorities.
The Tokyo meeting highlighted the good results that
fluid cooperation among Member States, the United
Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions can yield.
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and Mr. Jean-Michel
Severino, the World Bank’s Vice-President, East Asia and
Pacific Region, deserve our applause for their leadership
in steering the meeting. That kind of leadership will be
necessary in the coming task of promoting post-conflict
peace-building and national healing. The reconstruction of
the physical infrastructure will have to be matched with

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
a political effort for further reconciliation in the transition
to independence.
Brazil considers that the National Council for East
Timorese Resistance (CNRT) has a very important role in
that regard. We are encouraged by the actions of the CNRT
leadership, such as the meeting held in Singapore at the
beginning of the month between CNRT officials and former
pro-integration politicians, which translated into deeds the
aspiration expressed by Xanana Gusmão while in prison to
unite the East Timorese. That attitude of forgiveness should
not prevent the implementation of a thorough investigation
to establish responsibility for the violence that was
unleashed upon the East Timorese.
We still have security problems, as Mr. Annabi clearly
indicated. We have learned that some of the so-called
militias have been dissolved. But others continue to prevent
internally displaced persons from returning to East Timor.
It is necessary to create the conditions for their return.
With the support of the international community,
UNTAET will assist in the building of democratic
institutions in East Timor and in the economic rehabilitation
of the territory.
Brazil’s present term on the Security Council will end
in a few days. We will continue to work to support the
Council and the United Nations in the fulfilment of their
responsibilities with regard to East Timor. After
independence, when UNTAET will have left the country,
the United Nations will continue to have a role in assisting
the Timorese people to build a prosperous and democratic
country.
Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We too express our gratitude to the Assistant
Secretary-General, Mr. Annabi, for his comprehensive
briefing.
We note with satisfaction the recent positive trend in
the situation in East Timor, which is reflected in Australia’s
fifth periodic report on the operations of the International
Force, East Timor (INTERFET) (S/1999/1248, annex). That
report speaks of good prospects for achieving security and
indicates that the threat posed by militias has essentially
been eliminated. In that connection I should like to
emphasize the importance of a well-planned transition from
INTERFET to a United Nations peacekeeping operation,
which will be the objective of a comprehensive transition
plan.

4085th meeting
22 December 1999
East Timor faces a multitude of tasks, dealing with
which will require support from the international
community and the active involvement of the East
Timorese themselves. Exceptionally important in that
connection is the establishment of a mechanism for
consultation with the inhabitants of the territory, of
institutions of self-government and of other institutions of
civil society.
Needless to say, the situation in East Timor is not
free of problems, as we can see from the note by the
Secretary-General of 10 December 1999 on the situation
of human rights in East Timor (A/54/660) and from
media reports of the recent discovery of mass graves in
the territory. There is also the urgent issue of temporarily
displaced persons.
Nonetheless, progress towards normalization in East
Timor is evident. We are convinced that a climate
conducive to this has been created largely thanks to
United Nations staff, first and foremost the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello.
In conclusion, I must reaffirm that Russia intends to
participate in the activities of the various components of
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor.
Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): First, we
want to thank Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his
briefing. The Chinese delegation is very gratified by the
continued stability of the situation of East Timor. We are
very happy to note that the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) is being
smoothly deployed, and we pay tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Vieira de
Mello, and his staff for having done a tremendous amount
of work in extremely difficult conditions on the ground.
It is our consistent view that the United Nations
presence in East Timor is for the purpose of helping the
East Timorese realize independence and self-reliance. The
principle that this depends mainly on the East Timorese
themselves should be maintained, and, to the extent
possible, more local people should be brought into this
process and encouraged to play a positive role. Therefore,
we fully support the work of the Consultative
Commission of East Timor, which, in our view, is a good
way to allow the local people to participate in the
decision-making process. We welcome the positive result
of the donor conference held in Tokyo, which we believe

7

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
will facilitate the laying of a solid financial foundation for
East Timor’s transition to independence. Only when
reconciliation has been realized can peace and independence
be possible in East Timor. We have taken note of the fact
that Mr. Gusmão has indicated his commitment to work for
conciliation among all parties, particularly between the prointegration party and the pro-independence party. He has
also indicated that he is willing to fully cooperate with
UNTAET. We acknowledge this with deep appreciation.
We hope that the International Force, East Timor, will
soon be turned into a United Nations peacekeeping
operation, and in this regard, the Secretariat should
accelerate the relevant preparatory work. We also hope that
the composition of the peacekeeping force will be more
balanced.
To conclude, China supports the work of UNTAET
and will continue to provide personnel and financial help
within its capabilities.
Mr. Türk (Slovenia): Mr. President, I wish to begin
by expressing our appreciation to you for enabling the
Security Council to consider the recent developments in
East Timor in the present format. We believe that an open
briefing is most suitable, since the issue of East Timor has
been receiving serious attention, not just from Security
Council members, but also from many other United Nations
Member States present today.
I wish to make a few brief remarks concerning the
major issues referred to in the briefing by the Assistant
Secretary-General, Mr. Hédi Annabi, who briefed us with
his usual sense of comprehensiveness and lucidity, and I
thank him for the briefing. The donor conference in Tokyo
was an extremely important event. It was aimed at raising
funds to help rebuild East Timor and ended with over $500
million in pledges. We wish to express our appreciation for
the generous attitude of many donors, which testifies to
their true commitment to address the urgent and long-term
needs of East Timor. We would particularly like to stress
the fact that this was achieved in close and coordinated
partnership among the world financial institutions, the
United Nations and the East Timorese.
From among the political and factual problems on the
ground, we consider the problem of the safe and timely
return of refugees to be of paramount importance. We note
with satisfaction the agreement on establishing a joint
border commission, brokered by Ambassador Holbrooke
during his visit last month to the region, which addresses
the problem of the return of refugees.

8

4085th meeting
22 December 1999
But the picture presented by Mr. Annabi today
remains bleak. Clearly, further efforts are needed. In that
context, we wish to lend our full support to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
others present on the ground in the effort to assure the
return of refugees in safety and dignity.
We would like to express our appreciation to
Australia, as the leading nation, for the periodic reports
on the operations of the International Force, East Timor
(INTERFET), and we emphasize the importance of the
lead taken by the regional States in that operation. We
commend INTERFET for the effective implementation of
its responsibilities under the Security Council resolution.
We are hopeful for INTERFET’s early transition to a
fully-fledged peacekeeping operation. We are confident
that a period of transition from INTERFET to the United
Nations peacekeeping force will be carefully managed so
as to ensure continuity during that period. We believe that
the remarks and explanations provided to us by
Mr. Annabi today were extremely reassuring in that
regard.
Given the scope and nature of the violations of
human rights and humanitarian law that have taken place
in East Timor, Slovenia has all along supported the need
for investigations into crimes and into the efficient
delivery of justice. We believe that full reconciliation and
a new, prosperous future for East Timor will be possible
only if built on a platform of justice, equality and the rule
of law. In this context, we welcome the recent report on
the joint mission to East Timor undertaken by the three
Special Rapporteurs, in accordance with the Commission
on Human Rights resolution of 27 September 1999. We
note the recommendations made in that recently published
report. We look forward to the report by the commission
of inquiry, which is due at the end of this month.
Another important element in rebuilding East Timor
is the reconciliation process, which is essential for
achieving stable conditions for sustainable development.
We strongly hope that the next round of reconciliation
talks will make further progress in this area.
We would like to emphasize the strong commitment
and interest of the East Timorese themselves in
constructively contributing to all aspects of shaping their
common future. In that context, we welcome the
establishment of the National Consultative Commission as
the essential instrument for the meaningful participation
of East Timorese in decision-making and for
strengthening the independence process of East Timor.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Finally, we would like to express our appreciation to
the Secretary-General, his Special Representative,
Mr. Vieira de Mello and all others participating in the effort
to bring peace and post-conflict reconstruction in East
Timor.
Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to join those who have expressed their gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for having organized this discussion. I would
also like to thank Mr. Annabi for the information he has
given us, which enables us to make an up to date appraisal
of the situation in East Timor.
The information is generally positive, and this is
obviously a source of satisfaction for the members of the
Security Council. Ambassador Fonseca has rightly recalled
that it was Brazil that, in April, began alerting Council
members to the evolution of the situation. I think, in
hindsight, we can see that the past months have for once
given us an example of effective and positive action by the
Security Council. The credit goes to one of the members of
the Council, Brazil, and obviously to the effective action
taken by Portugal, and then, through the crisis of doubt in
September, to the efforts of successive Presidents of the
Security Council — all of this, I think, should be recalled.
Today the indications regarding the functioning of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), I repeat, lead us to be rather optimistic. All of
this no doubt is attributable to the clear-cut objectives of
the Special Representative, in particular his emphasis on the
idea of national reconciliation. I believe that when a senior
official of the United Nations shows such a commitment,
when he engages the efforts of the entire fine staff he has
been able to put together, positive results are guaranteed.
Thus, we are seeing meetings between militia chiefs
who were considered opposed to independence and the
current leaders of the Timorese pro-independence
movement. We are seeing such meetings being organized,
we are seeing institutions of all sorts established, including
both administrative and judicial institutions. We are seeing
the achievement of national pacification and reconciliation,
a goal of United Nations missions, both here and in other
situations throughout the world. I believe that given these
developments a most sincere tribute should be paid to
Mr. Vieira de Mello and to the team he has put together.
Positive results can already be seen. I believe one such
positive result was already seen at the donors meeting. The
international community is witnessing an undertaking that
is succeeding, and it is responding generously to the

4085th meeting
22 December 1999
appeals that are being made. The donors conference that
was held recently in Tokyo produced results that
exceeded expectations.
This is clearly for the good, and I also believe that
here for once we can make a comparison between the
situation in this Asian region and what is happening in
Europe. People often talk about a double standard, a
disproportionality between what is done for Europe and
what is done for the rest of the world. I believe that what
we should bear in mind is the generosity that has been
shown as regards Timor, assistance that has come not
only from the European Union but also in the form of
bilateral aid from a number of countries of the region —
I am thinking of Japan, of Australia, of Thailand; in fact,
I am thinking about almost all the countries of Asia,
which have responded to the appeal with most generous
bilateral assistance. I would hope that such generosity
could also be shown as regards another region, Kosovo,
which certainly has need of financial support from the
international community if we wish to give the United
Nations Mission there the same chance of succeeding as
that of the current mission in Timor.
Positive results are also being seen in the return of
refugees, although we are aware that there are still several
tens of thousands of refugees who have not been able to
return. In this regard, I would like to ask Mr. Annabi if
these statistics can be explained either by the fact that
refugees are of their own will refusing to return or by
other reasons. In spite of the security conditions in East
Timor, in spite of the will to achieve national
reconciliation that has been confirmed by UNTAET and
by the Timorese leaders who have come together around
Mr. Vieira de Mello — in spite of all this positive news,
are there some refugees who are of their own will
refusing to return to East Timor, or is it because of
logistical problems, the conditions of roads, transportation
problems, and so forth.
The second positive piece of information is clearly
the rapid transformation of an operation that in the
beginning was authorized by the Security Council, but of
an intergovernmental nature, into a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. In this regard, I must note my
complete endorsement of the ideas so forcefully presented
by the Canadian representative. He was without doubt
correct in stressing that this operation must be a United
Nations operation.
As in this case, the reality is often that in order to
act rapidly we are sometimes led to use the formula of

9

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
giving Security Council authorization for a multinational
force. In this case Australia is deserving of the praise it has
received for taking the principal responsibility for the
burden of this operation and for assuming the costs that
have already been rightly noted by Ambassador Fowler.
Again, this is explained by the urgency of the situation and
by the need to act quickly. This has not been our only
experience with such a case. We have seen similar cases in
Africa, as well as in Europe, with operation Alba.
Nonetheless, the members of the Security Council who
emphasize that our objective should be the deployment of
a genuine United Nations operation with obligatory
financing are right. This is why I, like Ambassador Fowler,
can only be pleased that in the very near future the
transformation of the mission in East Timor will take place
and that we are going to undertake a peacekeeping
operation.
The only question that I would like to pose to Mr.
Annabi in this regard is whether the high figure that has
been projected — more than 8,000 men just for this
operation, with all the costs entailed — is it possible that at
some future date this figure could realistically be reduced,
while ensuring, of course, that the security conditions are
maintained.
Here again, we have a situation that seems to be
progressing satisfactorily on the ground. Bearing in mind
the importance of maintaining the processes under way to
promote human rights, which are linked to the
strengthening of national reconciliation, is it not possible
that the size of the military part of the operation could be
reduced? It is up to the Secretariat to provide us
information in this regard.
I repeat, the total cost of the operation is large. It is
perfectly justified. It is producing positive results. Let us
keep this in mind when we consider the situation in
Kosovo, where the international community’s financial
involvement is, unfortunately, not so great.
Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank Mr. Annabi. From the information he has
provided and from the latest report of the International
Force, East Timor (INTERFET), we note with satisfaction
that the situation in East Timor has improved markedly. We
commend the International Force and all the participating
countries for the excellent job they are doing. In particular,
I would like to mention the work being done with such
dedication and professionalism by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of the

10

4085th meeting
22 December 1999
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello. His arrival in
the territory last November gave a great boost to the
expansion of UNTAET and to the planning of a true
peacekeeping operation.
As regards security, we are glad to see that at
present there are no significant threats to peace and that
during recent weeks there have been no significant
incidents. This is essential for the return of displaced
persons, for the reduction of the forces of INTERFET and
for the success of UNTAET in general.
We think it is very positive that, in the area of
border management, the Indonesian authorities and
INTERFET are maintaining cooperative relations on the
basis of the memorandum of technical understanding
signed on 22 November.
We are grateful to the Philippines and Australia for
having provided military staff for this operation.
We are concerned by the humanitarian situation, in
particular the serious problem of refugees in West Timor
and elsewhere in Indonesia who need to return to East
Timor. Over 110,000 have already done so, but much
remains to be done. In this regard, it is essential, through
INTERFET and the military component of UNTAET that
is to replace it, to ensure the safety of humanitarian
personnel. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees should also have access to all
refugee camps.
We are concerned about the apparent ongoing
intimidation of refugees by the militia to prevent their
return. However, the meeting of Mr. Gusmão with the
militia leaders would seem to indicate that the
intimidation will cease.
Finally, we wish to express our satisfaction with the
success of the meeting of donors held in Tokyo last week.
The high level of response, exceeding $500 million, is
clear manifestation of the international community’s
support for East Timor.
Mr. Kamal (Malaysia): First and foremost, my
delegation would like to commend you, Sir, for holding
the open briefing on the situation in East Timor this
morning. This is very much in line with our consistent
position calling for more transparency in the work of the
Council, particularly as the issue is of great interest to
many Members of this Organization.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
We would like to thank Mr. Annabi for his very
comprehensive and yet succinct briefing this morning. We
note with satisfaction the relative calm and stable situation
in East Timor, which we hope will be conducive to the
reconciliation efforts that are being undertaken among the
East Timorese. In this regard, we welcome the recent
meeting between Mr. Gusmão and the pro-autonomy
leaders, particularly with Mr. João da Silva Tavares, and
the subsequent announcement of the formal dissolution of
the militia organization and the hand-over of weapons to
the Indonesian army.
It is our firm belief that all East Timorese, of any
political backgrounds and persuasion whatsoever, have a
place in the future independent East Timor. We therefore
urge the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) to assist further, in close consultation
with the East Timorese leadership, towards a successful
process of reconciliation among them.
We were also gratified to hear from Mr. Annabi of the
good relations that have existed between the Government of
Indonesia and the East Timorese, particularly when he
mentioned the recent visit of Mr. Gusmão to Jakarta, where
he was warmly welcomed by President Abdurrahman
Wahid of Indonesia. The other developments he
mentioned — the release of the East Timorese political
prisoners, the proposed opening of Indonesian
representation in Dili, the resumption of lighting, the future
commercial bank and the intention of Abdurrahman Wahid
to visit East Timor — are all very positive and we welcome
them.
In this regard, as my delegation has stated before in
Council debate, in shaping the future of East Timor, due
recognition should be given to the unique roles that
Indonesia and Portugal have played in the context of history
and, in the case of Indonesia, also in the geopolitical
context. It is important that the future East Timor
Government come to terms with this reality and begin the
process of forging constructive and mutually beneficial
relationships with them, especially with its important
neighbour. We believe that this relationship is also the wish
and desire of both countries, particularly Indonesia, which
is physically inseparable from East Timor, with which it
shares land and sea boundaries. UNTAET can assist in
laying the groundwork for such cooperation.
We hope that all the refugees will be repatriated as
soon as possible to their homes and given assistance to
rebuild their lives. In this regard, we welcome and
commend the cooperation and commitment of the

4085th meeting
22 December 1999
Government of Indonesia to International Force, East
Timor (INTERFET) and the United Nations, culminating
in the signing of the memorandum of technical
understanding on border management, which represents a
positive step forward in managing the border regions and
signals a new level of cooperation between the Indonesian
Government, INTERFET and UNTAET. Even more, we
are of the view that it will help to ensure the safe and
secure return of displaced persons to East Timor.
We also wish to commend all the donor countries
that participated in and contributed to the recent
successful donors meeting in Tokyo recently. This is
indeed testimony to the acute concern and support of the
international community for the East Timorese people in
the preparations for their independence in the near future.
In conclusion, as a regional neighbour, Malaysia
looks forward to a future independent East Timor’s
playing a full and constructive role in regional affairs and
to its integration with the region.
Mr. Jagne (Gambia): My delegation would like to
thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting in this format.
We are also grateful to Mr. Annabi for his important and
useful briefing.
Since the announcement of the results of the popular
consultation, the United Nations, together with the
Governments concerned, has made enormous progress in
seeing to it that the wish of the East Timorese people for
an independent East Timor is being implemented. My
delegation would therefore pay tribute, in particular, to
the Government of Indonesia for its vital cooperation
throughout this period, without which we would not have
reached the point where we are today.
We would also like to pay a special tribute to
Australia and the countries which have contributed troops
to the International Force, East Timor (INTERFET).
Without their timely intervention, the situation in East
Timor would have been something else altogether.
My delegation is glad to note that the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) has
now been established and its military observers deployed.
We note with satisfaction that international staff of the
United Nations are arriving in East Timor and starting
their work. My delegation welcomes the appointment of
Sergio Vieira de Mello as the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative and transitional administrator for East
Timor. There could not have been a better choice.

11

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
We were heartened to learn that relations between
UNTAET and the East Timorese are very good. This
augured well for the donor conference, reported to have
been very successful. We join others in thanking the
Government of Japan for its preponderant role, as both host
and donor, in making it a resounding success.
It is also pleasing to note that UNTAET has
established a skeleton administration. The Government of
the Gambia has contributed a sizable number of civilian
police and is ready to contribute more. We are also willing
to provide civil servants to work with UNTAET.
My delegation also notes with satisfaction the laudable
efforts being made by President Wahid and Mr. Gusmão to
place East Timorese-Indonesian relations on a firm footing.
We hope that the international community will continue to
support these commendable initiatives.
Finally, we have every reason to believe that, apart
from the problems associated with the lack of infrastructure
and the fate of the large number of refugees still in West
Timor, the future of East Timor is very promising indeed.
The Ambassador of France made reference to the
generosity of the donor community regarding East Timor
and wished that the same degree of generosity was
extended to other regions. My delegation cannot agree more
with him that by demonstrating the same zeal, the same
resolve, the same degree of enthusiasm and the same degree
of generosity we would succeed as a community of nations
in making this small planet that we all share a much better
place for present and future generations and would assure
all our children and their children’s children a bright, bright
future.
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Mr. President, I thank you
for organizing this open briefing. I want to take this
opportunity also to thank Mr. Annabi for the comprehensive
briefing on the situation in East Timor.
My delegation is gratified by the progress being made
with the establishment of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and is pleased
that its deployment remains on schedule. We regard this as
important to ensure that the transition from the International
Force, East Timor (INTERFET) to a United Nations
peacekeeping operation takes place as soon as possible. In
this regard, we pay a special tribute to Mr. Vieira de Mello
and his staff for the efforts they are making under difficult
conditions.

12

4085th meeting
22 December 1999
With regard to the security situation, my delegation
is glad to note from the briefing and the latest INTERFET
report that there are no significant threats to peace and
security in East Timor. Thanks in particular to the clampdown on militia activities and the negotiation efforts, we
trust that situation will further improve. In this
connection, we commend the leadership provided by
Australia, and we thank all the countries that have
provided troops and contributed to the work of
INTERFET.
A less positive aspect is our concern about the
continuation of intimidation by militias in West Timor,
which hampers the repatriation of refugees. We welcome
the undertaking by Mr. Tavares to disband his militia
group and hope that the repatriation rate will now
increase. At the same time, we are convinced that the
prosecution of captured militia members under a new
judicial system could further serve as a deterrent for other
criminal militia activities.
I also want to take this opportunity to commend the
efforts of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to, inter alia,
inform the refugees about repatriation conditions in East
Timor. These methods are crucial in the process of
restoring refugee confidence and in order to counter
militia propaganda.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend my
colleague, Ambassador Holbrooke, who is not here with
us today, for the success achieved during his recent visit
to East Timor. Ambassador Holbrooke’s visit had a very
positive impact on the plight of the refugees in West
Timor, as he managed to attract more attention to their
situation, which in turn resulted in more concrete steps
being taken with regard to them.
We also welcome the establishment of relations
between the leaders in East Timor and in Indonesia, and
the visit by Mr. Gusmão to Jakarta at the invitation of the
President of Indonesia is very much welcomed. These
efforts must be supported by the international community.
Last but not least, my delegation welcomes the
excellent response by the international aid donors in
Tokyo, who pledged more than the amount estimated by
the World Bank for East Timor’s reconstruction. We hope
that these pledges will turn into reality to fund
reconstruction and humanitarian efforts in that ravaged
country over the next few years.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year

4085th meeting
22 December 1999

I would also like to echo the sentiments expressed by
Ambassador Dejammet with regard to the need for
increased donor response to other situations in other parts
of the world.

Nations, in particular Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for their courage
and perseverance in working in such a difficult
environment and context.

Mr. Eboumy (Gabon) (spoke in French): My
delegation also wishes to thank the presidency for having
convened this briefing and Mr. Annabi for the very useful
information he has provided us.

In conclusion, we trust that the administration of
East Timor will plan to establish friendly and normal
relations with all its neighbours, in particular with
Indonesia.

On 30 August 1999, in the popular consultation held
throughout the territory, the East Timorese people spoke out
in favour of a transition to independence. Last November
the People’s Consultative Assembly of Indonesia ratified
the result of that referendum. Today, as a result of this
positive evolution, and also as a result of our actions,
including Security Council resolution 1272 (1999) of 25
October 1999, East Timor has a Transitional Administration
entrusted with a complex and well-defined mandate to
move the country towards self-government. Supported by
the International Force, East Timor (INTERFET), we are
confident that the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) will be able to
fulfil its task successfully. However, it should be noted that
the financial and material support of the international
community, including that of the international financial
institutions, remains necessary if the UNTAET mandate is
to be successful. In this regard, we welcome the pledges
recently made in Tokyo.

Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): We thank you, Mr.
President, for calling this open meeting and Mr. Annabi
for his briefing.

Now, when East Timor is ready to stand
independently, there are many challenges to overcome,
particularly those related to reconstruction and development.
However, working together, the Timorese people will be
able to achieve their objectives. In this connection, we
encourage all refugees and displaced persons to return to
their towns and villages so that they can participate in the
building of new institutions and in the reconstruction of
their future country.
Regarding the militias that continue to intimidate and
disseminate misinformation, we ask them to accept the new
circumstances. We wish to remind them that continuous
flagrant violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law will not go unpunished. Furthermore, we
are confident that the cooperation of all will be helpful to
shed light on the cases of grave violations of human rights
that took place immediately after the popular consultation.
We wish to pay a tribute to the members of the
International Force, East Timor, the personnel of the
humanitarian organizations and the personnel of the United

Circumstances have changed considerably and very
much for the better since the last time the Council had an
open debate on the subject of East Timor, which was on
11 September 1999. The new situation is also reflected in
the fact that the General Assembly has decided to drop
the item on the question of Timor from its agenda and
include a new item on the agenda of the fifty-fifth
session, entitled “The situation in East Timor during its
transition to independence”.
The Netherlands wishes to pay tribute to the
countries participating in the multinational Force — the
International Force, East Timor (INTERFET) — which
has been essential in establishing a safe and secure
environment, without which the current process of
reconstruction could not have begun. I would like to
mention in particular the lead nation, Australia, and the
participation of Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) countries. They have demonstrated their will to
take on responsibilities for security in their region. This,
of course, is the region to which East Timor belongs.
The Netherlands is encouraged by the positive
developments in the relationship between East Timor and
Indonesia. We understand that President Wahid intends to
visit East Timor on 17 January, and we consider this step
of great importance.
Of course, despite the improvements of the past few
months, it should be realized that the people of East
Timor are only at the beginning of a long process of
rehabilitating their economy and society and building the
institutions of a modern democratic State in which the
rule of law prevails. As members of the Security Council
have repeatedly stressed, the international community has
a duty to help the East Timorese on this difficult road.

13

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
The Netherlands notes with satisfaction that,
through a variety of channels, both multilateral and
bilateral, aid is being offered. Mr. Annabi reminded us that,
at the donor conference in Tokyo last week, $522 million
was pledged. The Government of the Netherlands will
donate approximately $7.3 million to the United Nations
consolidated inter-agency appeal for East Timor. An initial
contribution has already been made to the trust fund for the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor.
During the new fiscal year, a further $2.3 million will be
made available to that fund. Money left over from our
contribution of $220,000 to the United Nations Mission in
East Timor (UNAMET) trust fund can also be used for
similar purposes under the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). Finally, $1.8
million has been donated to the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC).
The diversity and intensity of international aid is, of
course, very satisfying. However, in a sense, there can also
be too much aid. The local absorption capacity of East
Timor has to be taken into account. We have to make sure
that East Timor does not become permanently dependent on
outside aid instead of independent.
Furthermore, as with every complex operation
involving several aid organizations, there is also the risk of
a lack of synergy of aid efforts. We would be interested in
hearing the views of the Secretariat on these considerations,
including its thoughts concerning division of labour and of
competences among the organizations involved.
We welcome the emphasis in the Secretary-General’s
report to the General Assembly on the need for the
international community to work in close consultation and
liaison with the East Timorese themselves. The
Netherlands, as well as other Council members, has made
the same point on previous occasions, and we are therefore
pleased to see that agreement has been reached on the
establishment of a National Consultative Commission. The
Secretary-General states in his report that, through this
consultative mechanism, UNTAET will ensure that the
needs and wishes of the East Timorese people are fully
represented in the implementation of the transitional
administration.
There is another issue to which the SecretaryGeneral’s report rightfully draws our attention: that those
responsible for grave violations of human rights must be
held accountable for their actions. Both international and
Indonesian investigative activities are taking place. We
would like to hear the Secretariat’s views on the

14

4085th meeting
22 December 1999
interrelationship between these activities. We have
received the report on the joint mission to East Timor
undertaken by the three Special Rapporteurs of the
Commission on Human Rights, and we hope that the
report of the United Nations Commission of Inquiry will
also be presented as soon as possible.
These reports can constitute important steps in the
process of East Timorese reconciliation. From the
perspective of my own country, I must mention one
particular instance of human rights violations, namely the
murder in East Timor in September of the Dutch
journalist Sander Thoenes. We understand that
INTERFET has concluded its investigation into the matter
and now expect its report to be made available to the
Secretary-General without delay.
Finally, while we speak in positive terms about
developments in East Timor, there are still tens of
thousands of refugees stuck in camps in West Timor and
elsewhere in Indonesia. Mr. Annabi mentioned that close
to 120,000 refugees had returned. INTERFET, FRETILIN
and the Indonesian armed forces (TNI) have agreed on
arrangements for the safety of border crossings. Can we
conclude that the message that it is safe to return to East
Timor has come through to the refugees and that the
efforts to intimidate them into staying are now subsiding?
Mr. Annabi mentioned the following reasons why
refugees might not return: misinformation, a lack of
infrastructure in areas to which refugees wish to return,
and the absence of a wish to return in the immediate
future for a variety of reasons. My delegation would
appreciate receiving more detailed information on this
matter. We cannot simply conclude that the matter is
complex because we are dealing with such a mixed bag
of motives. Some of these reasons fall under the heading
of logistics, but intentional disinformation comes close to
intimidation, and intimidation comes close to force. To
that extent, we are dealing with an unresolved political
problem.
Precisely because the Indonesian Government has
adopted such a positive attitude in so many respects, we
feel the Council should remind it today that under
resolution 1272 (1999) it continues to be responsible for
the safe return of refugees.
The President: I shall now make a brief statement
in my capacity as the representative of the United
Kingdom.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
The United Kingdom very much shares the consensus
of views around this table about the progress that has been
made in East Timor and endorses the tributes that have
been paid to those responsible for that progress. We also
share the continued concern, particularly about the plight of
refugees, in East and West Timor, and about accountability
for human rights abuses.
Let me just say a word about the Tokyo donor
conference, the results of which we very much welcome.
This was an important contribution to the reconstruction of
East Timor and to its smooth transition to independence. It
is all the more welcome because the United Nations and the
World Bank do not always cooperate so well together.
The United Kingdom pledged some $20 million over
the three-year period to come. Although that is rather less
than our commitment, for instance, to Sierra Leone, it is
still a substantial sum. The funds will be channelled to
UNTAET and to the World Bank trust funds, according to
evolving needs. We need to be certain that these funds are
used to ensure a simple, flexible and sensitive approach to
East Timor’s requirements which is well coordinated by
UNTAET and by the World Bank. Disjointed bilateral
approaches would risk overwhelming East Timorese
capacity, so we want to underline this need for proper
coordination of the most welcome funding that is now
available.
I resume my functions as President of the Security
Council.
I call on Mr. Annabi to respond to the comments and
questions that have been raised.
Mr. Annabi: One set of questions related to the
decrease in the rate of return of refugees from West Timor.
As I said, we feel that this is due to a combination of
factors. Some misinformation and intimidation is still going
on, and that, of course, is one factor. According to the
information we have, the fact that there has been extensive
destruction in the territory and that some of the refugees are
not sure that they will have a home to return to is possibly
another factor. And finally, the third factor is probably the
fact that those in West Timor who had voted in favour of
autonomy — and let us not forget that more than 20 per
cent of the East Timorese voted in favour of autonomy —
may not wish to return to East Timor at the present time,
or may not feel comfortable about doing so for one reason
or another. One hundred twenty thousand have returned,
and we may be reaching the point where some do not wish
to return, at least in the immediate future.

4085th meeting
22 December 1999
We hope, however, that the working group whose
establishment was agreed upon with the Indonesian
authorities during the Special Representative’s visit to
Jakarta, and which will look at all these issues, can help
improve the situation and enable us to move quickly
towards a situation where we have more clarity as to the
exact wishes and intentions of those who are left in West
Timor, so that those who wish to return can indeed return
in safe conditions and so that those who do not wish to
return can be resettled elsewhere.
There was also a question by the representative of
France regarding the strength of the United Nations
peacekeeping force. We believe — and this is the
assessment of all the experts concerned — that it is wise
and prudent that the peacekeeping force taking over from
the multinational force should be a strong, credible force,
and that it should be endowed with a credible deterrent
capacity. It will be smaller than the multinational force;
when I visited East Timor at the end of November I was
informed that the International Force, East Timor
(INTERFET) had more than 11,000 troops in East Timor.
The United Nations force which will take over during
February will have more than 8,000 troops.
But it is a fact that the security situation has
improved, and we welcome this. We must, in this regard,
pay tribute to INTERFET for the excellent work it has
done to restore peace and security in the territory. If the
present trend continues — and we have no reason to
believe that it will not — certainly the Secretary-General
will reassess the situation in due course and will not
hesitate to come back to the Security Council with
proposed reductions if he feels they can be safely
undertaken. I can assure the Council that he will not wish
to keep more troops in East Timor than are necessary to
implement the mandate as foreseen in resolution 1272
(1999).
Finally, on coordination and division of labour
regarding the implementation of the assistance that has
been offered to East Timor, we have made an unusual
effort to present to donors a comprehensive picture on the
humanitarian assistance side, on requirements for
administration and for creating a self-government
capacity, and on longer-term reconstruction and
development

15

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
requirements. We have made an effort to present an
integrated picture, and I can assure the Council that we will
continue to do what we can to ensure proper coordination
in the implementation of these programmes, to avoid, as
much as we can, overlap and duplication among various
agencies.
The President: I think it would be right on behalf of
the whole Council to thank the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations for its hard work on East Timor as part of the
very considerable burden it is undertaking at the moment.
I would also ask the Assistant Secretary-General please to
convey to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in East Timor, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello
, and to his team our warm appreciation for what they have
achieved thus far in the interim administration.
There are no further speakers on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

16

4085th meeting
22 December 1999
