V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Commiltee

Bearing in mind its resolution 37/133 of 17 December
1982, in which it decided to include Djibouti in the list of
the least developed countries,
Having examined the summary report of the SecretaryGeneral, 158
Noting the critical economic situation of Djibouti and
the list of urgent and priority projects formulated by the
Government that require international assistance,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to organize an international programme of economic assistance for Djibouti;
2. Notes with appreciatwn the assistance already provided or pledged to Djibouti by Member States, organizations of the United Nations system and other organizations;
3. Draws the attention of the international community
to the difficult economic situation confronting Djibouti
and to the severe structural constraints to its development;
4. Renews its appeal to Member States, the appropriate
organs, organizations and programmes of the United
Nations system, regional and international organizations
and other intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, as well as international financial institutions, to provide assistance bilaterally and multilaterally,
as appropriate, to Djibouti in order to enable it to cope
with its difficult economic situation and to implement its
development strategies, including the programme of assistance that was presented at the round-table conference of
development partners convened by the Government of
Djibouti in November 1983;
5. Requests the appropriate specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system to maintain and increase their current and future programmes of
assistance to Djibouti, to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an effective international programme of assistance and to report periodically to him on
the steps they have taken and the resources they have
made available to help that country;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessarv
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Djibouti;
(b) To keep the situation in Djibouti under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and the international financial institutions
concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1986, of the current status of the special programme of economic assistance for
Djibouti;
(c) To report on the progress made in the economic situation of Djibouti and in organizing and implementing the
special programme of economic assistance for that country
in time for the matter to be considered by the General
Assembly at its forty-first session.
120th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/228.

Assistance to the drought-stricken areas of
Ethiopia

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/201 of 17 December 1984
and Economic and Social Council resolutions 1984/S of 17
158 Ibid., sect. VI.
159 A/401431.

183

May 1984 and 1985; I of 24 May 1985 on emergency
assistance to the drought victims in Ethiopia,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to the drought-stricken areas of Ethiopia, 159
Noting with appreciation the unprecedented effort made
by the Secretary-General to mobilize international humanitarian assistance for the drought victims in Ethiopia,
Noting further with satisfaction the able manner in which
the Office for Emergency Operations in Africa has effectively handled its task of co-ordination and the admirable
manner in which the organs and organizations of the
United Nations system, including the specialized agencies,
have carried out their roles,
Having heard the statement made by the Commissioner
for Relief and Rehabilitation of Ethiopia on 12 November
198S 160 concerning the current situation in the droughtstricken areas,
Aware that, despite adequate rain, the emergency situation still exists in most parts of the country,
Recognizing that, owing to insufficient agricultural
input, full advantage could not be taken of the rain,
Convinced that long-term solutions are imperative in
dealing with the root causes of the tragic human drama
that has recently unfolded in the disaster-stricken areas,
I. Commends the international community for its
cmrpassion, solidarity and generous response to the tragic
situation in Ethiopia;
2. Expresses its deep gratitude to all States, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and individuals that have provided emergency humanitarian
assistance to Ethiopia;
3. Commends further the relentless efforts made by the
Secretary-General through the Office for Emergency Operations in Africa, in particular those of the Assistant Secretary-General for Emergency Operations in Ethiopia, in
mobilizing and co-ordinating emergency humanitarian
assistance for the drought victims in Ethiopia;
4. Appreciates fully the unprecedented role played by
the organizations and programmes of the United Nations
system - in particular, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the Office
of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, the
World Health Organization, the United Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and the International
Labour Organisation -- which they have carried out in a
concerted and efficient manner to save the lives of millions
of people in Ethiopia;
5. Urges all Member States, organs and organizations
of the United Nations system, including the specialized
agencies, and non-governmental organizations to assist the
Government of Ethiopia in its efforts to provide for the
emergency needs of the drought victims and to deal with
the problem of medium-term and long-term recovery and
rehabilitation;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to mobilize international assistance for relief and
rehabilitation, including assistance to the victims of
drought who want either to return to their villages of origin
or to settle in areas less prone to drought, and to report to
the Economic and Social Council, at its first regular session
of 1986, on the response of the international community
to these efforts.
120th plenary mcetmx
17 December /985
160 (~tficial Records td tht' ( ;,,ner.;i ·hS( mhfr. J·ort1eth \, ,.H1>n. ,j,;e<·,,,,d
< (~mmll:n·. 31st meeting, pa1a'i. _::3 . )J
