General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

52
Resolution
No.

36/98
36/99
36/100
36/101
36/102
36/103
36/104

36/81.

Title

Item

Dare of adoption

PaKr

H. Study on all the aspects of regional disannament
L Strategic arms limitation talks
J. Review of the membership of the Committee on Disannament
K. Disarmament and international security
L. Study on the relationship between disarmament and international security
Israeli nuclear armament (A/361757)
Conclusion of a treaty on the prohibition of the stationing of weapons of any kind
in outer space (A/36/758)
Declaration on the Prevention of Nuclear Catastrophe (A/36/759)
Development and strengthening of good-neighbourliness between States (A/36/760)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security
(A/36/761) ..
Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention and Interference in the Internal
Affairs of States (A/36/761)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Preparation of Societies for Life in Peace
(A/36/761)

55 (e)
55 Ul
55 (a)
55 (i)
55 (j)
56

9 December I 981
9 December 1981
9 December 1981
9 December 1981
9 December 198 I
9 December I98 I

73
73
74
74
75
75

128
135
57

9 December I981
9 December I981
9 December 1981

76
76
77

58 (a)

9 December I981

77

58 !bl

9 December 1981

78

58 (c)

9 December 1981

80

Second special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarmament
A
PREPARATIONS FOR THE SESSION

The General Assembly,
Recalling section III of its resolution 33/71 H of 14 December 1978, in which it decided to convene a second
special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament in 1982 at United Nations Headquarters in New York,
Having considered the report of the Preparatory Committee for the Second Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to Disarmament, 1
1. Endorses the report of the Preparatory Committee
for the Second Special Session of the General Assembly
Devoted to Disarmament and the recommendations contained therein for the session to be held in New York from
7 June to 9 July 1982;
2. Endorses also the recommendation of the Preparatory
Committee to meet in New York from 26 April to 14 May
1982 in order to continue consideration of substantive issues
related to the session, including the implementation of the
decisions and recommendations adopted by the General
Assembly at its tenth special session, the first special session
devoted to disarmament, for incorporation in the document
or documents to be adopted at the second special session
devoted to disarmament, and any remaining organizational
and procedural matters;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the members of the
Preparatory Committee for their constructive contribution
to its work;
4. Invites Member States to submit to the SecretaryGeneral, not later than 31 March 1982, further views on the
substantive issues related to the second special session devoted to disarmament, including the implementation of the
decisions and recommendations adopted by the General
Assembly at its tenth special session;
5. Requests all Member States engaged in bilateral, regional or multilateral negotiations on disarmament issues
outside the framework of the United Nations to submit appropriate information on such negotiations to the General
Assembly, in accordance with paragraph 27 of the Final

1
Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/36/49 and Corr. I).

Document of the Tenth Special Session of the Assembly, 2
before the second special session devoted to disarmament;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to render to the Preparatory Committee all necessary assistance for the completion of its work.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981
B
PREVENTION OF NUCLEAR WAR

The General Assembly,
Alarmed by the threat to the very survival of mankind
posed by the existence of nuclear weapons and the continuing arms race,
Recalling that removal of the threat of a world war-a
nuclear war-is the most acute and urgent task of the present
day,
Reiterating that it is the shared responsibility of all Member States to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of another world war,
Recalling the provisions of paragraphs 47 to 50 and 56
to 58 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session
of the General Assembly ,2 the first special session devoted
to disarmament, regarding procedures designed to secure
the avoidance of nuclear war,
Considering that prevention of nuclear war and reduction
of the risks of nuclear war are matters of the highest priority,
which should be considered by the second special session
of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament,
Reiterating the vital interest of all the peoples of the world
in disarmament,
Aware of the special responsibility of nuclear-weapon
States,
1. Urges all nuclear-weapon States to submit to the
Secretary-General by 30 April 1982, for consideration at
the second special session of the General Assembly devoted
to disarmament, their views, proposals and practical suggestions for ensuring the prevention of nuclear war;
2. Invites all other Member States that so desire to do
likewise;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its second special session devoted to dis2

Resolution S- IOI 2.

Ill.

armament a report contammg the views, proposals and
practical suggestions referred to in paragraph 1 above, as
well as those received from other Member States.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

36/82.

53

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Reduction of military budgets
A

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned about the ever-spiralling arms race and
growing military expenditures, which constitute a heavy
burden for the economies of all nations and have extremely
harmful consequences for international peace and security,
Reaffirming the provisions of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, according
to which gradual reduction of military budgets on a mutally
agreed basis, for example, in absolute figures or in terms
of percentage ?<)ints, particularly by nuclear-weapon States
and other militarily significant States, would be a measure
that would contribute to the curbing of the arms race and
increase the possibilities of reallocation of resources now
being used for military purposes to economic and social
development, particularly for the benefit of the developing
countries,3
Reaffirming that it is possible to achieve continued and
systematic reductions in military budgets without affecting
the military balance to the detriment of the national security
of any State,
Recalling its resolution 34/83 F of I I December 1979,
in which it considered that a new impetus should be given
to endeavours to achieve agreements to freeze, reduce or
otherwise restrain, in a balanced manner, military expenditures, including adequate measures of verification satisfactory to all parties concerned,
Recalling also the Declaration of the 1980s as the Second
Disarmament Decade, 4 which provides that during this period renewed efforts should be made to reach agreement on
the reduction of military expenditures and the reallocation
of resources thus saved to economic and social development
especially for the benefit of developing countries.
Recalling further its resolution 35/ 142 A of 12 December
1980, in which it requested the Disarmament Commission
to continue at its session to be held in 1981 the consideration
of the item entitled "Reduction of military budgets" and,
in particular, to identify and elaborate on the principles
which should govern further actions of States in the field
of the freezing and reduction of military expenditures, keeping in mind the possibility of embodying such principles
into a suitable document at an appropriate stage,
Having considered the report of the Disarmament Commission5 on the work accomplished during its session in
1981 and taking into account the proposals and ideas submitted by Member States concerning the principles which
should govern further actions of States in the field of the
freezing and reduction of military expenditures, and which
are contained in the working document annexed to the Commission's report,
Aware of the various proposals submitted by Member
States and of the activities carried out so far within the
framework of the United Nations in the field of the reduction
of military budgets,
'Ibid., para. 89.
4
Resolution 35/46, annex.
5
Official Records of the General Assemhlv. Thirtv-sixth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/36/42).

Considering that the identification and elaboration of the
principles which should govern further actions of States in
the field of the freezing and reduction of military budgets
and the other current activities within the firamework of the
United Nations related to the question of the reduction of
military budgets should be regarded as having the fundamental objective of reaching international agreements on
the reduction of military expenditures,
I. Reaffirms the urgent need to reinforce the endeavours
of all States and international action in the area of the reduction of military budgets, with a view to reaching international agreements to freeze, reduce or otherwise restrain
military expenditures;
2. Reiterates the appeal to all States, in particular the
most heavily armed States, pending the conclusion of agreements on the reduction of military expenditures, to exercise
self-restraint in their military expenditures with a view to
reallocating the funds thus saved to economic and social
development, particularly for the benefit of developing
countries;
3. Requests the Disarmament Commission to continue
at its session to be held in 1982 the consideration of the
item entitled ''Reduction of military budgets'', taking into
account the provisions of General Assembly resolution
35/ 142 A as well as those of the present resolution and other
relevant proposals and ideas, with a view to identifying and
elaborating on the principles which should govern further
actions of States in the field of the freezing and reduction
of military expenditures, keeping in mind the possibility of
embodying such principles into a suitable document at an
appropriate stage;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Reduction of military budgets'·.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981
B
The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned about the arms race, its extremely
harmful effects on world peace and security and its deplorable waste of human and economic resources,
Alarmed by present tendencies to increase further the rate
of growth of military expenditures,
Considering that gradual reductions of military expenditures on a mutually agreed basis would be a measure that
would contribute to curbing the arms race and would increase the possibilities of reallocating resources now being
used for military purposes to economic and social development, particularly for the benefit of the developing
countries,
Convinced that such reductions could and should be carried out on a mutually agreed basis without affecting the
military balance to the detriment of the national security of
any State,
Reaffirming its conviction that provisions for comparability and verification will have to be basic elements of any
agreement to reduce military expenditures,
Recalling the fact that these matters are being studied by
the Group of Experts on the Reduction of Military Budgets,
established in pursuance of General Assembly resolution
35/ 142 8 of 12 December 1980, and that this Group is
expected to submit its report before the second special session of the Assembly devoted to disarmament, to be held
from 7 June to 9 July 1982.
Recalling further that a standardized system for international reporting of military expenditures has been rec-
