S/2018/416

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 May 2018
Original: English

Letter dated 2 May 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995), I have the honour to
transmit the fifty-third report on the implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, covering the period from 2 2 October 2017 to 21 April 2018,
which I received from the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina (see
annex).
I should be grateful if you could bring this report to the attention of the members
of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

18-06935 (E)

040518

*1806935*

S/2018/416

Annex
Letter dated 26 April 2018 from the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina addressed to the Secretary-General
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995), which requested the
Secretary-General to submit to the Council reports from the High Representative in
accordance with annex 10 of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the Conclusions of the London Peace Implementation
Conference of 8 and 9 December 1995, I herewith transmit the fifty -third report of
the High Representative for Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I would kindly ask for this report to be distributed to the Security
Council members for their consideration.
This is my nineteenth regular report to the Secretary-General since assuming
the post of High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and European Union
Special Representative on 26 March 2009. The present report covers th e period from
22 October 2017 to 21 April 2018.
Should you or any Council member require any information beyond what is
provided in the attached report or have any questions regarding its contents, I would
be pleased to provide you with it.
(Signed) Valentin Inzko

2/23

18-06935

S/2018/416

Fifty-third report of the High Representative for
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina
Summary
This report covers the period from 22 October 2017 through 21 April 2018. While
the institutions and political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina have managed to
deliver incremental progress on some of their commitments related to Euro -Atlantic
integration processes, the last six months have also seen a notable deterioration in
terms of divisive public rhetoric and respect for the rule of law within the country.
Crucial domestic issues related to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Election Law and the
Criminal Procedure Code have remained unresolved, as many parties in authority are
focused on consolidating power and playing to their respective voting bases ahead of
the electoral campaign season. In its interim report on Bosnia and Herzegovina
published along with the 2018 enlargement package on 17 April, the European
Commission similarly noted that tensions between parties had slowed the pace of
reform.
Among positive developments, the most notable achievement during the
reporting period was the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities’ handover of answers to
the European Commission questionnaire in February, an important step i n the
country’s attempts at becoming a European Union candidate country in the future.
Another positive development was the adoption of a set of excise laws, which, along
with other conditions, resulted in the completion of the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) review and approval of the second disbursement of funds under the Extended
Fund Facility arrangement, on 9 February.
Other notable developments included the trilateral meeting in March between the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency and the presidents of Serbia and Croatia. Also, in
February the Financial Action Task Force announced that Bosnia and Herzegovina is
no longer subject to special monitoring by the Task Force, having made progress in
addressing previously identified strategic deficiencies in its efforts concerning
anti-money-laundering and combating the financing of terrorism.
Despite these positive developments, major challenges remain. The next general
elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina are expected to take place in October 2018, yet
the formation of authorities after the vote could prove extremely difficult if changes
to the Election Law are not agreed that would regulate the indirect election of delegates
to one of the chambers of the Federation parliament. As previously reported, the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court struck down provisions of the law
regulating elections to the Federation House of Peoples in July 2017, having declared
these parts of the law unconstitutional in its December 2016 decision in the Ljubic
case. The failure to constitute the Federation House of Peoples following the elections
would prevent the election of the new Federation president and vice -presidents, who
are responsible for nominating the new Federation Government, and would also
prevent the election of Bosniak and Croat delegates to the Bosnia and Herzegovina
House of Peoples, one of the two houses of the state-level parliament.
With the announcement of elections expected in May and the elections
themselves in October, the relevant authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina must agree
on electoral changes that would enable the smooth co nduct and implementation of the
results of the 2018 general elections. As the Peace Implementation Council Steering
Board political directors outlined in their December 2017 communiqué, “as an
immediate priority, the 1 December 2016 decision of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
18-06935

3/23

S/2018/416

Constitutional Court, which specifically concerns the elections to the Federation
House of Peoples, must be implemented, and not made more challenging by combining
it with political demands”.
An equally pressing issue has arisen concerning the Bosnia and Herzegovina
judiciary. In June 2017, the Constitutional Court declared as unconstitutional several
provisions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Criminal Procedure Code regulating special
investigative measures in criminal proceedings. As the d eadline of six months has
passed without the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliament correcting the issue, the Court
could soon rule on non-enforcement, leaving the judiciary without the tools necessary
for fighting organized crime and corruption. This would rep resent a very serious
setback to the rule of law.
During the reporting period, I continued to urge the leadership of the
Herzegovina-Neretva and some other cantonal assemblies to act to harmonize these
cantons’ constitutions with a decision of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional
Court from 2000 and with the Federation Constitution, in order to ensure the equality
of Serbs as a constituent people, and officially recognize the Serb language and
Cyrillic alphabet.
Another cause for concern has been the continuation and escalation of divisive
and destabilizing rhetoric from prominent political figures on all sides. For example,
continuing a long-term trend, the Republika Srpska President has continued to deny
the statehood of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to advocate for the eventual secession
of the entity. During the reporting period, public comments were also made glorifying
convicted war criminals and calling for the return of a Republika Srpska army. The
Croat member of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency has mused about the further
internal division of the country, while other Croat politicians have threatened the
dissolution of the country if the current electoral issues are not resolved to their
satisfaction.
Under the authority vested in me under annex 10 of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, I reiterate that the entities have no
right to secede from Bosnia and Herzegovina and that the Agreement guarantees the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the internal
constitutional position of the entities.
In addition, I must express my concern over comments made by a number of
political figures about the possibility of future conflict if the country were to break
apart. These included comments by the Federation Prime Minister about the
production of military equipment and subsequent comments by the Bosniak member
of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency, which went further, suggesting that a
rearming effort was under way in preparation for a hypothetical war scenario. These
comments followed controversy earlier in the reporting period about the purchase of
long-barrel weapons by the Republika Srpska police.
There is far too much unhelpful and provocative rhetoric in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. All public figures must choose their words carefully and responsibly.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a single multi-ethnic sovereign state consisting of two
entities, in which all citizens — the three constituent peoples and others — live and
work together, and elected officials above all have a responsibility to contribute to
peace and reconciliation.

4/23

18-06935

S/2018/416

I. Introduction
This is my nineteenth regular report to the Secretary-General since assuming
the post of High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2009. It provides a
narrative description of progress made towards goals outlined in previous reports,
registers factual developments, logs relevant citations and provides my impartial
assessment of the implementation of the General Framewor k Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in key areas within my mandate. I have focused on
addressing these areas in line with my responsibility to uphold the civilian aspects of
the Agreement. I have thus continued to encourage the Bosnia and Herze govina
authorities to make progress on the five objectives and two conditions necessary for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative and worked to preserve measures
previously undertaken to implement the Agreement.
I continue to direct my energies towards fulfilling my mandate in accordance
with annex 10 of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and relevant Security Council resolutions. Additionally, my Office
wholeheartedly supports the efforts by the European Union and the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) to assist Bosnia and Herzegovina in moving forward on
closer integration with those bodies.

II. Political update
A.

General political environment
The ethno-political division in Bosnia and Herzegovina persists. The longlasting policy of the Republika Srpska to challenge the state -level institutions has
spilled over to the Federation. These ongoing trends, which have strengthened over
the years, negatively affect the functionality of the state an d Federation authorities
and hold back the resolute integration of the country into Euro -Atlantic structures.
Although there are several pending issues the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
must address, the political parties have already begun their p re-electoral campaigns
well ahead of the October 2018 general elections.
At the state and Federation levels, the opposing views of the predominantly
Bosniak Party for Democratic Action and the Croat party, the Croati an Democratic
Union partners in the ruling coalitions at both levels — over necessary amendments
to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Election Law continue to damage relations between
them. Meanwhile, their fellow partner, the predominantly Bosniak Party for a Better
Future, has threatened to leave the ruling coalitions at both levels and increasingly
votes with the opposition. At the Federation level, the Government has been unable
to complete appointments to the Federation Tax Administration, while neither house
of the Federation Parliament met for more than two months from late January to
mid-April.
In the Republika Srpska, after several turbulent sessions of the Republika Srpska
National Assembly in the previous period, the ruling coalition and opposition parties
made a half-hearted attempt to draft an agreement on cooperation, but owing to the
lack of consensus among the parties, no agreement materialized. Although the ruling
coalition is effective at moving its agenda forward, it continues to undermine itself
through the frequent anti-Dayton and anti-state rhetoric by some of its leading
officials.
Authorities at all levels continue to disregard or reject binding decisions of the
judiciary, as the Federation-based parties have made little effort on their own towards
reaching a political agreement that would address the issue of the Federation House

18-06935

5/23

S/2018/416

of Peoples in line with the decision of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional
Court in the Ljubic case. In the city of Mostar, Bosnia and Herzegovina, citizens have
not elected local representatives since 2008 because of another unimplemented
Constitutional Court decision. For its part, the Republika Srpska continues to reject
judgments of both the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court and the Bosnia
and Herzegovina State Court concerning the registration of defence property and the
celebration of “Republika Srpska Day” on 9 January.
Reflecting an overall disregard for the rule of law, authorities have persistently
failed to implement European Court of Human Rights’ rulings in the Sejdic & Finci
and related cases, leaving in place discrimination against the right of certain persons
to stand for public office.

B.

Decisions of the High Representative during the reporting period
Despite ongoing challenges to the rule of law and the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina during the reporting period, I have
continued to refrain from using my executive powers, in accordance with the policy
of the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board emphasizing local ownership
over international decision-making.

C.

Five objectives and two conditions for closure of the Office of the
High Representative
Progress on objectives
During the reporting period, the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities made
limited progress towards meeting the requirements of the 5+2 agenda set by the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board as necessary for the closure of the Office of
the High Representative.
State and defence property
The process of registration of prospective defence property under the ownership
of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina continued during the reporting period. The
term “prospective defence property” refers to a defined list of immovable assets that
are needed by the Bosnia and Herzegovina armed forces and should be registered to
the Bosnia and Herzegovina State in accordance with the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitution, the Agreement on Succession Issues, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Law
on Defence and relevant Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency decisions.
To date, 31 military locations located in the Federation falling under the
category of prospective defence property have been successfully registered, 27 to the
ownership of the State in relevant land records, and 4 others for use by the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Ministry of Defence or the Bosnia and Herzegovina armed forces.
There are several additional properties in various phases of the registration process.
To their credit, the competent state-level institutions have expedited their efforts to
drive this process forward, mainly focused on clarifying and resolving various
technical legal difficulties related to some prospective defence locations.
At the same time, the registration process for prospective defence property on
the territory of the Republika Srpska remains blocked due to political obstruction.
The Republika Srpska Geodetic Administration has rejected several registration
requests owing to what it claims is the “non-existence of a valid legal basis”. Highranking Republika Srpska officials have made it clear in public statements that the
Republika Srpska authorities have no intention to implement the final and binding

6/23

18-06935

S/2018/416

decision of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Court in the case of the prospective defence
location in Han Pijesak, in open violation of the principle of the rule of law.
Concerning the issue of non-prospective defence and other state property, the
Office of the High Representative remains concerned over violations of the Law on
the Temporary Prohibition of Disposal of State Property of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
better known as the State Property Disposal Ban. This law was enacted by the High
Representative in March 2005 and subsequently adopted by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly on 30 March 2007, with the aim of creating
effective measures for protecting the property interests of the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina prior to the enactment of appropriate legislation. However, in the
intervening period, it appears that transfers and disposals of state property assets
occurred contrary to the provisions of the law, as is the case with several
non-prospective defence locations on the territory of the Republika Srpska.
In this regard, it is important to underline that violations of the State Property
Disposal Ban, which are null and void under the law, represent a serious challenge to
the rule of law and directly damage the established property rights and interests of
the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Furthermore, such violations may potentially
produce numerous legal, practical and financial complications for both parties
involved, who falsely believe that they acquired property rights on the basis of such
transactions, and for the responsible public institutions. This is why the responsible
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina must conduct a thorough analysis of all cases
in which violations of the ban or other illegal actions or irregularities occurred in
relation to disposal and various forms of transfer and allocation of state property
assets.
The adoption of comprehensive state-level legislation that fully acknowledges
and adopts the principles of the 2012 Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court
decision — which established that the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina is titleholder
of all state property and that the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly is
exclusively responsible for regulating the issue — remains an important and urgent
task.
Fiscal sustainability
In accordance with my mandate, including my coordination responsibilities, the
Office of the High Representative continued to follow, analyse and report on
developments and legislative actions related to fiscal sustainability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This included monitoring and reporting to the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board on the activities of the Governing Board of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Indirect Taxation Authority, on which the Office of the High
Representative is the only representative of the international community, and the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Fiscal Council.
While the Indirect Taxation Authority Governing Board met regularly during
the reporting period, long-outstanding issues remained unresolved, such as
adjustments to revenue distribution coefficients and debt settlements between the
entities. At its 22 March meeting, the Board could not agree on a methodology for the
allocation of road toll revenues intended for highway and road construction, holding
back the disbursement of 64.7 million marka (KM) in accumulated funds, as well as
future revenues from road tolls under new excise legislation.
Additionally, the Indirect Taxation Authority faces the enforcement of a 2015
decision of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Court obliging it to pay more than 15 million
KM to the Republika Srpska for default interest on Feder ation debts to the Republika
Srpska in 2009 and 2010 (settled in 2011) as well as penalty interest on this amount.
The total amount due is now close to 30 million KM. Both the debt itself and the
18-06935

7/23

S/2018/416

failure to settle it result from continued entity disputes o ver indirect tax revenue
allocation and their non-compliance with the regulations in force, yet the Indirect
Taxation Authority is being held responsible. The enforcement of the court decision
is in process and could have serious and far-reaching consequences for the Indirect
Taxation Authority and, by extension, fiscal stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Bosnia and Herzegovina Fiscal Council met three times during the reporting
period and focused mainly on issues relevant to the country’s cooperation with IMF.
Brcko district
My office continued to provide expert assistance to the Brcko District
authorities at their request in preparing by-laws and addressing issues relevant to the
implementation of four key pieces of financial legislation adopte d in June 2016,
which aim to further integrate the Brcko District with the Bosnia and Herzegovina
legal system, facilitate implementation of the Bosnia and Herzegovina economic
programme negotiated with IMF, and empower the District with instruments for
increasing fiscal transparency, fighting the grey economy and generating revenues.
My office also continued to provide expert support to the Brcko District Finance
Directorate in preparing a new law on budget.
In October, the Brcko District authorities sought the intervention of the Brcko
District Supervisor and the assistance of my office over a threat of boycott of
government sessions and then again over problematic legislative proposals related to
police appointments. The engagement of the Supervisor and my Office with the
relevant political parties and District officials helped the District government resume
its work, while the police legislation was not pursued further. Moreover, my office
oversaw the process of the selection and appointment of the B rcko District Deputy
Police Chief, contributing to an orderly appointment.
In February, the Supervisor, with the support of my office, facilitated a possible
compromise to unlock long-awaited progress on the Brcko Port modernization
project, thereby reducing one cause of political tensions in the District and allowing
for the disbursement of international financial assistance. There is also an ongoing
concern over the potential continued non-implementation of the amendments to the
Decision on Protection of Civilian Victims of War, which corrected discriminatory
provisions for the victims of rape and sexual abuse in Brcko.
Although the Brcko District public utility company concluded a contract on
29 December with the Republika Srpska electricity provider o n electricity supply to
Brcko in 2018, the continued practice of last-minute agreements puts Brcko in a
vulnerable negotiating position in securing continued electricity to its residents.
Entrenching the rule of law
Concerning the entrenchment of the rule of law in the areas of migration and
asylum, my office continues to assist and support the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities in implementing the 2015 Bosnia and Herzegovina Law on Foreigners and
the 2016 Bosnia and Herzegovina Law on Asylum.

D.

Electoral issues
Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court decision in the Ljubic case and the
forthcoming general elections
As previously reported, in December 2016, the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court found several provisions of the Election Law pertaining to the
indirect election of delegates from the cantonal assemblies to the Federation House

8/23

18-06935

S/2018/416

of Peoples unconstitutional. Acting on a request from Bozo Ljubic (a former Bosnia
and Herzegovina parliamentarian) to review these portions of the law, the Court also
ordered the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly to correct the
unconstitutional provisions within six months. Since the parliament did not do so, the
Court deleted the provisions in a separate decision in July 2017.
The absence of these provisions of the election law regulating the election of
delegates to the Federation House of Peoples could complicate the process of forming
authorities at the Federation entity and Bosnia and Herzegovina state levels after the
forthcoming general elections in October 2018. To begin with, until the Federation
House of Peoples is constituted, the Federation entity parliament will not be able to
pass legislation. Additionally, the Federation president and vice -presidents cannot be
elected, since the Federation House of Peoples plays an important role in this
responsibility. Without a Federation president and vice -presidents, a new Federation
entity government cannot be nominated. Finally, the state-level legislature would also
be affected, since the Federation House of Peoples elects some of the delegates to the
second chamber of the state parliament, the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of
Peoples.
Although a number of parties have proposed legislation during the reporting
period to address the problem, none of these proposals were the result of consultation
and negotiation between the Croat and the Sarajevo -based parties. Both sets of
amendments were introduced without prior consultation and constituted more of a
statement of maximalist positions than attempts at reaching a compromise. In
November, the Social Democratic Party and Democratic Force proposed a new law at
the Federation level to address the Federation House of Peoples issue, but this
proposal also had little chance of adoption.
Given the urgency of the situation, the European Union and the United States
embassy in Bosnia and Herzegovina have been facilitating talks between the political
parties. This process has my support and the support of my Office. Nevertheless, the
responsibility remains with the domestic political leaders, in particular the parties
represented in the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly, to negotiate a
solution that will enable the adoption of the necessary amendments to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Election Law. My office continues to closely follow developments
regarding the implementation of the Ljubic case decision and its potential impact on
the 2018 general elections and the process of government formation thereafter.
Kristo case pending before the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court
The issue of elections to the Federation House of Peoples has been further
complicated by a new request, from January 2018, submitted by the then-Chair of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives, Borjana Kristo, challenging
amendments to the Federation Constitution regulating elements of the election of
delegates to the Federation House of Peoples. Although elements of this question are
regulated in both the Federation Constitution and the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Election Law, the Ljubic case only dealt with the law. The more recent request relates
to one of the principles set forth by the Federation Co nstitution concerning the
composition and selection of delegates of the Federation House of Peoples, which
stipulates that, “in the House of Peoples there shall be at least one Bosniak, one Croat
and one Serb from each Canton that has at least one such del egate in its legislative
body”.
At its 109th plenary session, on 22 March, the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court completed a preliminary deliberation of the request (case
No. U 4/18) and determined that it would decide on the case in a later ple nary session.
On 28 March, the Constitutional Court invited my office to provide written
18-06935

9/23

S/2018/416

observations with regard to the request in this case in an amicus curiae capacity, as
the provisions in question were enacted by the High Representative in 2002 and we re
never subsequently adopted by the Federation Parliament. Although the minimum
representation rule being challenged was part of the original Federation constitution
enacted under the Washington Agreement, my predecessor extended this rule to apply
to the Serb caucus of the House of Peoples in 2002, when the House was restructured
to include Serbs and so-called “Others”. It is the common practice of the court to
invite my Office to provide an amicus curiae brief when it is deliberating on an issue
affected by a previous decision of the High Representative.

E.

Challenges to the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Challenges to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
During the reporting period, statements continued to be made that challenged
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Republika Srpska
President Milorad Dodik was again the most frequent exponent of such
proclamations, which included calls for and predictions of Republika Srpska
independence, 1 denials of the sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina and references
to the Republika Srpska as a State. 2 Statements were made by both the President of
Republika Srpska, Milorad Dodik, 3 and the Croat member of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Presidency, Dragan Covic, 4 on the possible territorial reorganization of
the Federation. Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Peoples delegate Mario Karamatic
threatened the dissolution of the country if the electoral reform issues were not
resolved. 5
Glorification of war criminals and rejection of war crimes verdicts
Following the November 2017 conviction by the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia of former Republika Srpska military commander
Ratko Mladic of genocide and other war crimes, the Republika Srpska President and
other prominent political figures praised general Mladic as a “hero”. 6 During the
reporting period, the confirmation of earlier war crimes convictions against six f ormer
Croat military and political leaders in the Prlic et al case similarly resulted in

__________________

“I guarantee that [Republika Srpska] independence will fall into our laps like a ripe apple.
[Bosnia and Herzegovina] is unsustainable. If the [Republika Srpska] were to leave [Bosnia and
Herzegovina] right now, we would not have any single problem to exist like an independent
state. If I could make the [Republika Srpska] independent without any human casualties, I would
go for it. My policy is to attain that goal by political means. ” Milorad Dodik, Novosti,
13 November 2017.
2
“Today’s gathering is a tribute to the [Republika Srpska]. The Serb people to day have two states
— Serbia and the [Republika Srpska].” Milorad Dodik, Sputnik, 9 January 2018.
3
“I think that a third entity, which would have equal rights that the [Republika Srpska] and the
Federation have now, would significantly strengthen the Cr oat position.” Milorad Dodik,
Vecernji List, 15 March 2018.
4
“I am sure that we will achieve our equality. Will that be secured through three federal units or
six, that’s now a question of artistry. There must be an agreement. I can dream of a third ent ity. I
can dream of some other organization …” Dragan Covic, Croatian TV 1, “Sunday at Two”,
17 December 2017.
5
“Rest assured that if amendments to the Election Law do not come and if Croats are not able to
elect their own representatives, that will be the end of [Bosnia and Herzegovina]”, Mario
Karamatic, Direktno.hr, 9 January 2018.
6
“The verdict is not a surprise but will strengthen the attitude of the Serbian people that General
Mladic is a hero and a patriot. In an impossible situation, he organized the [Republika Srpska]
Army to save the Serbian people from genocide.” Milorad Dodik, N1, 22 November 2017.
1

10/23

18-06935

S/2018/416

unfortunate revisionist statements from a number of Croat leaders, including the Croat
member of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency. 7 In January, the Croat majority
in the Canton 10 Assembly adopted a “Declaration of the Croat people”, which
condemned the Tribunal’s verdict in the case.
The fact that almost 25 years after the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, senior
political figures continue to deny the judgments of a n international tribunal and
glorify war criminals is extremely harmful for the process of reconciliation.
Inflammatory rhetoric about possible war scenarios
I am concerned about the recent readiness by some public figures to make
irresponsible statements referencing the possibility of a return to conflict. In March,
the leader of the Party for a Better Future, Fahrudin Radoncic, threatened war in case
of the creation of a third entity. 8 More recently, significant controversy was caused
by two statements by Bosniak presidency member Bakir Izetbegovic, describing in
detail weapons production in the Federation and stating that such weapons were not
only for export but to “respond” in case of a potential war scenario. 9 These statements
followed similar comments reportedly made by the Federation Prime Minister.
Potential Republika Srpska referendum on the state judiciary and the authority of the
High Representative
In November 2017, the Republika Srpska National Assembly repealed its 2015
decision to hold a referendum in the Republika Srpska on the validity of the
legislation on the Bosnia and Herzegovina Court and Prosecutor ’s Office and the
applicability of these institutions’ decisions on the territory of that entity, as well as
on the authority and decisions of the High Representative. However, at the same time
the Republika Srpska National Assembly adopted conclusions to revisit the
referendum in the future and on organizing a petition in the Republika Srpska on the
same topics.
While the repeal of its previous decision is welcome, the conclusion to revisit
the referendum at a later date is still of concern. While the Republika Srpska
authorities have the right to organize referendums on matters falling within the
constitutional responsibilities of the entity, a referendum on the issues at hand falls
outside this authority and would constitute a challenge to the sovereignty of Bosnia
__________________

“The verdict is a crime against every [Croatian Defence Council] officer and all Croat people and
as such will not contribute to reconciliation in [Bosnia and Herzegovina], which is today most
needed.” Dragan Covic, Oslobodjene, 29 November 2017.
8
“I am telling him that, if he comes to Sarajevo, he should leave the idea of third entity in his
suitcases in Banja Luka. At the price of a general war on the territory of the whole [Bosnia and
Herzegovina], there will be no third entity. We do support compromise, we do support
agreement, we do support talks with everyone and we do know how to talk, but everyone must
know where are the boundaries below which we did not go even in 1992 and we will not do it
now either.” Fahrudin Radoncic, Dnevni Avaz, 16 March 2017.
9
“We will consolidate our defence industry. We will manufacture mobile howitzers, we have
already built a rifle, we will manufacture drones, we will consolidate the manufacture of all
types of ammunition and rocket systems, etc. It is intended for the market, but also for any ‘God
forbid’ scenario.” Bakir Izetbegovic, TV1, 12 April 2018.
“Back in ‘92 people sold cows to buy. They paid three or four thousand marks for a rifle. Never
again weak! This is the last time they do such a thing to us. We will make a mobile howitzer,
we’re actually already making it, the mobile personnel carrier, we have made the rifle and will
make that good tactical one, the 12.7, multi-barreled rocket launchers of all possible calibres and
all possible ammunition for them, and drones. And we will be like that little man who is not big
but angry and well-armed, and let everyone think twice before they provoke him for no reason. It
will never happen again that they knock on our doors and we have nothing to respond with. ”
Bakir Izetbegovic, speech in Ahmici, [Bosnia and Herzegovina], faktor.ba, 16 April 2018.
7

18-06935

11/23

S/2018/416

and Herzegovina and a violation of the Republika Srpska commitments and
obligations arising under the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution, as set forth in
annex 4 and under annex 10 to the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The Republika Srpska is not entitled to decide on these matters
through referendum or otherwise.
Foreign fighters issue
During the reporting period, the relevant Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities
have not reported new departures of their citizens from the country to the Syrian Arab
Republic or Iraq. The authorities have announced that approximately 50 citizens h ave
returned to Bosnia and Herzegovina from the Syrian Arab Republic or Iraq. According
to the most recent information, the Bosnia and Herzegovina State Court has not issued
any new judgments beyond the previously reported 23 judgments against individuals,
of whom approximately 11 have already completed their sentences.
Radical extremism and potential terrorist threats
In April, acting on a warrant from the Bosnia and Herzegovina Prosecutor ’s
Office, the Bosnia and Herzegovina State Investigation and Protection Agency
arrested two people in the village of Gornja Maoca, near Tuzla in the Federation,
under suspicion of the criminal offence of terrorism. The Bosnia and Herzegovina
Prosecutor’s Office reported that the State Investigation and Protection Agency found
large quantities of weapons and flags of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.
Gornja Maoca is inhabited largely by Wahhabi Muslims and has been raided by the
State Investigation and Protection Agency on previous occasions.

III. State-level institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
A.

Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency
Member of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina Dragan Covic chaired the
Presidency throughout most of the reporting period. On 17 March, member Bakir
Izetbegovic assumed the rotating position for the next eight months.
The Presidency met monthly during the reporting period, holding six regular
and one urgent session, focused mainly on ensuring progress in the finalization of
answers from Bosnia and Herzegovina to the European Commission questionnaire
and fulfilling the conditions for activation of the NATO Membership Action Plan for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Presidency also agreed on the 2018 state -level budget
and adopted the country’s foreign policy strategy for the next five years. The
Presidency paid official collective visits to Serbia and the Vatican, while individual
members also visited Serbia, Croatia and Turkey.
Presidency members had divergent comments and interpretations concerning
the November 2017 convictions of wartime Serb military commander Ratko Mladic
and six former Croat political and military leaders by the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. The three members also continue to voice
differing positions on major issues concerning Bosnia and Herzegovina relations with
neighbouring States, such as the Peljesac Bridge project of Croatia and the
demarcation of Bosnia and Herzegovina borders with Serbia.
Nonetheless, in March the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency held an historic
trilateral meeting with Serbian President Aleksandar Vučić and Croatian President
Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović in Mostar. Participants announced another trilateral
meeting in Novi Sad, Serbia, in the future.

12/23

18-06935

S/2018/416

B.

Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers
The Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers met regularly throughout the
reporting period, holding 21 regular sessions and one telephone session. However, a
lack of parliamentary majority support persistently hindered its work, as exemplified
by the fact that more than a third of all laws adopted by the Council were subsequently
rejected in parliament.
The Council of Ministers’ main priorities remained European Union-related
issues, including the finalization of responses to the European Commission
questionnaire, which were handed over to Commission representatives on
28 February, 15 months after its delivery by the Commission to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities, on 9 December 2016.
During the reporting period, the Council of Ministers adopted 12 sets of
amendments to existing legislation, including a crucial set of excise tax laws and
amendments to the Law on the Intelligence-Security Agency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and two new laws, the 2018 state budget and the Law on Bank Deposit
Insurance, which was later withdrawn from parliamentary procedure. After
considerable delay, the Council of Ministers adopted the 2018–2021 Rural
Development Strategy, which was also adopted by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliamentary Assembly. The Council of Ministers adopted its 2018 workplan and
numerous strategies and action plans.
In December, the Council of Ministers adopted a decision on temporary
financing, due to the Parliamentary Assembly’s failure to adopt the 2018 state budget
on time. In February, the Council of Ministers adopted a decision on withdrawing the
second tranche of funds from the IMF Extended Fund Facility.

C.

Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly
The lingering political dysfunction in the country continued to have an impact
on the functionality and quality of the Parliamentary Assembly’s legislative output in
the reporting period. This is particularly true in the case of the House of
Representatives, which in two instances needed over a month and a half to complete
individual sessions.
Although a parliamentary majority coalition composed of the Party for
Democratic Action, the Party for a Better Future, the Croatian Democratic Union of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republika Srpska Alliance for Change parties — the
Serbian Democratic Party, the Party of Democratic Progress and National Democratic
Movement — formally exists, it functions only on a case-by-case basis, with
individual delegates increasingly acting independently, depending on the issue.
Moreover, the position of the Party for Democratic Action in the Bosnia and
Herzegovina House of Representatives has been weakened by delegates leaving the
party to join the Independent Bloc, a party formed by former Party for Democratic
Action members, while the Serbian Democratic Party is also losing members. In the
House of Peoples, a former Serbian Democratic Party delegate formed his own party.
In December 2017, the parliament finally adopted a set of excise tax legislation
required for the completion of the first review under the IMF Extended Fund Facility.
In late January, the parliament adopted the 2018 State budget.
During the reporting period, the House of Representatives held eight regular
sessions and the House of Peoples held five regular and two urgent sessions.
Cumulatively, the Parliamentary Assembly adopted 12 pieces of legislation, which,
except for the 2018 state budget and the Law on Parliamentary Oversight, were in the

18-06935

13/23

S/2018/416

form of amendments to existing legislation, and rejected 14 laws, 3 of which were
proposed by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers and the remaining 11
by parliamentary delegates.

IV. Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Federation coalition developments
The Federation Government worked consistently throughout the reporting
period, holding 15 regular and 25 extraordinary sessions. However, disagreements
over proposed legislation continued within the ruling majority coalition composed of
the Party for Democratic Action, the Party for a Better Future and the Croatian
Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina, with the Federation Parliament
adopting only three new laws and nine sets of amendments to existing legislation. In
November, the Party for a Better Future threatened to leave the ruling coalition by the
end of the year, but did not follow through on this threat.
The low legislative output in the Federation reflected stagnation in the
Federation Parliament, with the Federation House of Representatives holding just one
regular session, one thematic session and seven extraordinary sessions, and the
Federation House of Peoples holding five extraordinary sessio ns during the reporting
period. In December, delegates from the Croatian Democratic Union of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatian Democratic Union 1990 parties walked out of a session of
the Federation House of Representatives after delegates from other par ties adopted a
proposal to remove ethnic prefixes from the names of public companies in the
Federation.
In March, Federation President Marinko Cavara (of the Croatian Democratic
Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina) organized three consecutive meetings with
coalition representatives in the Government and the parliament aimed at overcoming
the gridlock, with little result. Notably, the Party for Democratic Action declined to
attend the third meeting.
No agreement on enabling local elections in Mostar, but positive developments
The responsible political parties had still not reached agreement to enact
amendments to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Election Law that would enable the
holding of local elections in the city of Mostar, where there have been no local
elections since 2008. Representatives of nine political parties have held a series of
meetings in Mostar since February, at which they appear to have made some initial
progress. However, by all accounts, significant areas of disagreement remain.
Nevertheless, the fact that a serious domestically led process is under way is
encouraging, and I urge the parties to reach a compromise that would enable the
citizens of Mostar to enjoy the same democratic right to elect their local leaders as
the citizens in the rest of the country.
The constitutional status of Serbs in the Federation cantons
Over the past year, I have repeatedly urged the leadership of the Herzegovina Neretva Cantonal Assembly to act to harmonize the canton’s constitution with the
Federation Constitution in order to ensure the constitutional equality of all three
constituent peoples, specifically the Serb people. The canton ’s constitution does not
explicitly reference Serbs as a constituent people or contain provisions providing for
the use of the Serb language as an official language or Cyrillic as an official script.
Herzegovina-Neretva Canton has been under an obligation to amend its constitution
in this regard since 2002, when the High Representative used his executive authorities

14/23

18-06935

S/2018/416

to amend the Federation Constitution in the same manner. Similar obligations remain
in Posavina Canton and West Herzegovina Canton.
With the Federation cantons having failed to act, in February the Bosnia and
Herzegovina House of Representatives took the unprecedented measure of adopting
an initiative calling upon the authorities in the cantons to adopt the requisite changes
to their constitutions within 30 days. Subsequently, House of Representatives Deputy
Speaker Mladen Bosic, of the Serbian Democratic Party, filed a motion with the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court for a review of constitutionality of the
provisions of five cantonal constitutions (four Croat -majority cantons plus the
Bosnian Podrinje Canton Gorazde) that he stated do not recognize the constituent
status of the Serb people, the Serb language and the Cyrillic script. He stressed that
provisions in some cantonal constitutions stipulate that only Bosniaks and Croats are
constituent peoples and that the official languages are Bosnian and Croa tian.
In April, the Bosnian Podrinje Cantonal Assembly’s constitutional-legal
committee held a session to discuss Bosic’s claims, deeming them unfounded, as the
canton had amended its constitution in 2003, adding references to Serbs as a
constituent people, the Serb language as an official language and Cyrillic as an official
script.
War veterans’ protests
In February, veterans of the former army of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Croatian Defence Council blocked several vital intersections near major town s in the
Federation, significantly disrupting traffic, making several demands of the
authorities, including allowances for unemployed veterans and the establishment of
single registry of veterans’ associations. In protests in front of the Federation
Parliament in April, veterans threatened violence against police. The Federation
authorities face significant financial challenges due to the demands of the veteran
population.

V. Republika Srpska
During the reporting period, the Republika Srpska ruling coalition, led by the
Alliance of Independent Social Democrats in partnership with the Democratic
People’s Alliance and the Socialist Party of Republika Srpska, remained functional,
with the Republika Srpska government meeting regularly. According to avail able
information, the Republika Srpska National Assembly held two regular and two
special sessions, adopting six new laws and 16 sets of amendments to existing laws.
In late March, the same parties signed a coalition agreement for the 2018 general
elections.
Following a series of chaotic sessions of the Republika Srpska National
Assembly in the previous period, which were disrupted due to harsh disagreements
between ruling coalition delegates and delegates from the opposition Alliance for
Change parties, in November the two sides agreed to form a joint commission aimed
at drafting an agreement on relations in the National Assembly. However, no
agreement was reached, and the opposition parties left the commission in December.
As the 2018 general elections approach, the power struggle between the two sides is
intensifying, with the ruling coalition accusing the opposition of betraying Republika
Srpska interests at the state level and the opposition accusing the ruling coalition of
corruption and nepotism.
As described in further detail above, in November the Republika Srpska
National Assembly repealed its 2015 decision to organize a referendum on “the

18-06935

15/23

S/2018/416

unauthorized and unconstitutional imposition of laws by the High Representative,
especially the laws on the Bosnia and Herzegovina Court and Prosecutor’s Office and
their application on Republika Srpska territory”, as well as the accompanying
decision regulating the appointment of a referendum commission.
Later in November, the Republika Srpska Ministry of the Interior signed a
contract with an arms manufacturer in Serbia to purchase 2,500 long -barrel automatic
rifles for the Republika Srpska police, along with 1.5 million rounds of ammunition.
This prompted concerned local and international media coverage. The purchase of
such military-grade weapons and exorbitant amounts of ammunition, along with an
earlier purchase, reported by the European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR),
of 1,400 similar weapons, is beyond accepted international standards for a police
force of approximately 5,000.
In January, the Republika Srpska continued its observance of 9 January as the
“Republika Srpska Day” holiday in contravention of a number of decisions by the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court. Further tainting the observation of the
holiday was the presence in the official “Republika Srpska Day” parade of members
of the so-called humanitarian organization from Serbia, “Serb Honour”, in full
military gear. Local and international media alleged that the group is actually a gang
of criminal mercenaries, and the Republika Srpska opposition parties condemned
their participation in “Republika Srpska Day” events.
Of similar concern was the March visit to the Republika Srpska of the
controversial Russian Night Wolves motorcycle club, apparently at the invitation of
the Republika Srpska government. Since December 2014, the Night Wolves club and
its leader (who was not part of the group that visited) have been under sancti on by the
United States Treasury Department for “engaging in … actions or policies that
threaten the peace, security, sovereignty, or territorial integrity of Ukraine ”. This
event, following the “Serb Honour” issue, prompted the Republika Srpska opposition
to express concerns that the Republika Srpska authorities were attracting such
organizations to use as intimidation during the 2018 electoral campaigns.
Law on Republika Srpska Day challenged before the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court
As previously reported, in September 2016 the Republika Srpska authorities
held a referendum on the observance of the “Republika Srpska Day” holiday on
9 January, against two decisions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court,
including an interim injunction from the Court against holding the referendum. The
Court later confirmed that the referendum had been unconstitutional and annulled its
results.
Nevertheless, in October 2016, the Republika Srpska National Assembly
adopted the Law on Republika Srpska Day, intended to implement the results of the
referendum conducted in violation of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional
Court’s decisions. In January 2018, Bosniak and Croat delegates in the Republika
Srpska Council of peoples challenged the constitutionality of the Law on Republika
Srpska Day.
On 9 January 2018, despite the decisions by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court clearly determining that the designation of 9 January as the
“Republika Srpska Day” public holiday is unconstitutional, Republika Srpska
authorities observed the holiday throughout the entity. The main event in Banja Luka
included a parade of police and civil protection services, sports associations and
others. Unlike the previous year, the 3rd Infantry Regiment of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina armed forces did not participate.

16/23

18-06935

S/2018/416

Non-cooperation with the High Representative
The Republika Srpska government continues to deny my Office access to
official information and documents as required under annex 10 of the Genera l
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Article IX of annex 10
obliges all authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to fully cooperate with the High
Representative. Repeated calls by the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board
reminding the Republika Srpska authorities of their obligations in this regard have
had no impact. The practice of the Republika Srpska government of not providing
information and documents as requested by the Office of the High Representative
dates to 2007 and contradicts frequent Republika Srpska claims that the entity
respects the letter of the General Framework Agreement.

VI. Entrenching the rule of law
Conclusions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council
On 26 October, the Bosnia and Herzegovina High Judicial and Prosecutorial
Council adopted conclusions based on information submitted by the Republika Srpska
Ministry of Justice’s centre for research on war, war crimes and search for missing
persons. One of the conclusions called for the extraordinary dismissal of judges and
prosecutors without appropriate disciplinary proceedings. These conclusions, coming
from the very institution responsible for developing, protecting and promoting
judicial independence, were assessed as not reflecting the meaning and purpose of an
independent judiciary and instead channelling external undue pressure and influence.
As such, they provoked public outcry and strong reactions from the international
community. After a prolonged debate, on 27 Nove mber the High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council issued a new set of conclusions that instead aim to implement
recommendations stemming from the European Union peer review process and to
obtain adequate information on best practices in vetting judges and p rosecutors.
Constitutional Court decision on the Bosnia and Herzegovina Criminal
Procedure Code
In early February, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court added to its
agenda the issue of the non-enforcement of a decision of the Court from July 2017
finding several provisions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Criminal Procedure Code
and Law on the Intelligence-Security Agency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
unconstitutional. As the six-month deadline set by the Court for the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly to correct these provisions had passed, the
Court was poised to put those provisions out of force.
Because the provisions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Criminal Procedure Code
in question regulate essential aspects of criminal procedure, their repeal without
appropriate new provisions adopted would essentially void up to 100 ongoing cases
of crime and corruption, and call into question the raising of any new cases by the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Prosecutor’s Office. For example, the provisions in question
regulate when special investigative measures such as communications interception or
controlled delivery are permitted and when immunity may be granted in exchange for
testimony, as well as certain aspects of the duration of investigations. They also
include a general provision that serves as the legal basis for raising an indictment in
all cases.
Despite these risks, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Justice, as the
competent ministry for the Criminal Procedure Code, did not finalize its proposed
amendments to address the Court’s decision until after the six-month deadline had
18-06935

17/23

S/2018/416

already passed. Moreover, what was finally proposed by the Ministry does not enable
the exercise of the full extent of state-level jurisdiction in criminal matters and is not
fully aligned with international standards.
In late April, the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives finally
adopted, in an urgent procedure, amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code
proposed by the Party for Democratic Action and supported by most Federation-based
parties, with the notable exception of the Croatian Democratic Union of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. These amendments were consistent with international standards and
sufficient to correct the issues identified in the Crimina l Procedure Code by the
Constitutional Court. As of this report, a further decision by the House of
Representatives to submit the amendments to the House of Peoples for adoption is
pending.
Concurrently, the House of Peoples is considering amendments to the Criminal
Procedure Code proposed by the Croat caucus of the House, which limit the special
investigative measures and would hinder the State’s ability to exercise its criminal
jurisdiction over offences prescribed by the criminal codes of the entities and the
Brcko District in instances when such offences endanger the State. I must express my
concern that this proposal clearly aims to limit the authority of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina judiciary in criminal matters, including corruption, and to weaken the
State.
These developments indicate a lack of interest at best by some political parties
to resolve the issue in line with international standards, and an interest in undermining
the ability of the state-level judiciary to fight organized crime and corruption.
Entity anti-corruption efforts
The specific legislation in the Federation on a special prosecutor and court
department for fighting corruption and organized crime, which was passed in 2014,
remains unimplemented.

VII. Public security and law enforcement, including
intelligence reform
The practice of improper political interference in operational policing has not
diminished in the reporting period. Authorities in Tuzla Canton, despite earlier
resistance to adhering to the basic standards of the rule of law, have begun the
technical process of ensuring the financial independence of the police. Una -Sana
Canton has completed the technical steps required to ensure the legal and financial
independence of the police for the 2018 budget year.
Posavina Canton, Canton 10 (after a three-year delay) and Tuzla Canton have
appointed new police commissioners. In January, the selection procedure began for
six of the seven state-level police directors and deputy directors, and the appointment
process is still under way. The appointment of the Federation independent board for
police remains outstanding since 2015, despite my warning to the Federation
Parliament to comply with the law and complete the app ointment. The mandate of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Independent Board ended in March 2018. The appointment
procedure for the Independent Board in Herzegovina-Neretva Canton remains stalled
since March 2017. Sarajevo Canton and Una-Sana Canton appointed new independent
boards in February and March of 2018, respectively.

18/23

18-06935

S/2018/416

Weapons purchases by police
During the reporting period, significant controversy arose over the purchase by
the Republika Srpska police of 2,500 new military-grade long-barrelled weapons
from a manufacturer in Serbia. Republika Srpska followed the legal procedure
required for importing the new weapons, but the incident drew attention to the
purchase and to reported purchases by other police agencies of similar weapons,
provoking concern that police forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina are “rearming”. In
March, EUFOR requested all 16 police agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
provide information on their respective holdings of long-barrelled weapons, and by
April had received information.

VIII. Economy
The 2017 economic performance of Bosnia and Herzegovina was generally
positive. Based on available indicators, real gross domestic product growth was
estimated at 2.7 per cent, the same as in 2016. Exports and imports registered an
increase of 17.4 and 12.2 per cent, respectively, while industrial production increased
by 3.1 per cent. Of note is a 60.8 per cent increase in foreign direct investments in the
first nine months of 2017 compared with the same period in 2016.
Employment data for December 2017 shows improvement, with a 2.8 per cent
increase in registered employment and a 6.85 per cent decrease in registered
unemployment. According to official statistics, there are 753,202 employed persons
and 475,084 unemployed persons in Bosnia and Herzegovina, while the
administrative unemployment rate is 38.7 per cent. The number of pensioners
increased by 0.9 per cent and totals 673,100 persons. The most recent Regular
Economic Report by the World Bank Group notes a significant drop in
unemployment, including youth unemployment, which dropped from 54.3 in 2016 to
45.8 per cent in 2017. However, the report explains that, unlike in neighbouring
countries, the decline in Bosnia and Herzegovina was driven by a combination of
higher employment and lower labour force participation, indicating the impact of
emigration on the country’s unemployment estimates. Income levels in December
2017 show no major change compared to those in December 2016: the average net
salary amounted to 862 KM, a 1 per cent increase, and the average pension amounted
to 364 KM, a 1.5 per cent increase.
Regardless of statistical progress, unemployment figures remain high, and
income levels fall well short of the monthly estimated consumer basket. Data showing
16.9 per cent of households living in poverty is of serious concern.
Economic ratings in the reporting period also point to areas in which significant
improvement is needed. The World Bank’s “Doing business” report for 2018 ranked
Bosnia and Herzegovina 86th of 190 economies in terms of ease of doing business,
the lowest rating of all Balkan countries. The Heritage Foundation ’s Index of
Economic Freedom for 2017 ranked Bosnia and Herzegovina 91st of 180 countries
globally and 38th of 44 countries in Europe, with the overall score below the regional
average and just above the world average. Transparency International ’s Corruption
Perceptions Index for 2017 ranked Bosnia and Herzegovina as 91st of 180 countries,
eight places down from the previous year. The country’s credit rating remains “B with
stable outlook”, as confirmed by Standard & Poor’s on 9 March.
The banking sector is assessed as generally stable and liquid and should be
further strengthened following the adoption of a new state -level Law on Deposit
Insurance as part of Bosnia and Herzegovina commitments under the IMF Extended
Fund Facility arrangement. According to the entity banking agencies, 14 banks in the
18-06935

19/23

S/2018/416

Federation and 7 banks in the Republika Srpska registered net profits in the first nine
months of 2017, while 2 banks — 1 in each entity — reported losses.
Fiscal issues
The overall fiscal situation is relatively stable, mainly due to the continued
growth of indirect tax revenues, domestic borrowing and international financial
assistance.
In 2017, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Indirect Taxation Authority registered
another annual record collection of indirect tax revenues, total ling 7.04 billion KM,
a 6.1 per cent increase over 2016. The positive trend continued in 2018, with a 13.2
per cent increase in the first two months over the same period in 2017.
On 9 February, IMF completed the first review of the country’s economic
performance under the Extended Fund Facility arrangement (total ling 553.3 million
Euro) and disbursed its second tranche in the amount of 145.8 million KM
(97.2 million KM to the Federation and 48.6 million KM to the Republika Srpska).
The completion of the first review was possible following the completion of all prio r
actions by Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities, including the 15 December adoption
of state-level legislation increasing excise taxes on fuel.
The adoption of 2018 budgets extended beyond 2017 for most levels of
government in the country. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly
adopted the 2018 state budget on 25 January. The adopted budget totals
1.954 billion KM, of which 950 million KM — the same amount as in the last six
years — is planned for the state institutions, and 1.004 billion KM — 7 million KM
less than in 2017 — is planned for foreign debt servicing. The state institutions ’
finances raise a few concerns. The budget has been fixed at the same level since 2012,
as has the State’s share in indirect tax revenues, which accounts for ove r 80 per cent
of the State’s revenue. Additionally, the State’s revenue from other sources shows a
continued decline. Consequently, the 2018 state budget shows a deficit of
60.2 million KM, to be covered by the 2017 surplus. It must be underlined that the
amount available to the state institutions allows them to cover basic current
expenditures, but it is insufficient to allow them to function at maximum capacity and
fulfil their obligations.
The Federation budget was adopted on 19 January at 2.882 billion KM, a 6 per
cent increase over the rebalanced 2017 budget. Domestic revenues are planned in the
amount of 2.269 billion KM (a 6.8 per cent increase), while the 613 million KM
deficit (a 35.4 per cent increase) is to be covered by domestic and foreign bor rowing.
Unlike in previous years, the Federation budget includes a significant allocation
(250 million KM) for capital investments in road construction. At the same time, the
amount needed for the Federation total debt payment (1.11 billion KM) and interest
on borrowing (124.9 million KM) is as high as 54 per cent of total domestic revenues
planned in this year’s Federation budget, and is cause for concern.
The stability of the Federation pension and disability insurance fund was the
key motive for the parliamentary adoption of a new Law on Pension and Disability
Insurance on 25 January. Key changes include: an increase of pensions by 10 per cent
and 5 per cent for those who retired before 31 July 1998 and 31 December 2007,
respectively; a pension calculation scoring system based on years of service;
minimum retirement limits; incentives for late retirement; and the harmonization of
pensions with costs of living. Minimum and guaranteed pensions will remain the
same. A significant change for pensioners is that payments will be guaranteed by the
Federation budget following the integration of the Fund into the treasury system
within two years. The fiscal implications of foreseen changes on the budget and the
pension fund have not been fully analysed.
20/23

18-06935

S/2018/416

The Federation faces continued challenges due to the demands of war veterans.
Allocations to veterans from the Federation, cantonal and municipal budgets are
substantial, totalling approximately 650 million KM in 2017 (of which 570 million KM
came from the Federation budget). The total budgetary funds allocated to veterans
since the end of the war is estimated at approximately 11 billion KM. New demands
include a registry of all participants in the war, monthly allowances for unemployed
demobilized veterans, and the streamlining of veteran associations.
The fiscal situation at the cantonal level shows improvement. All 10 Federation
cantons have adopted their 2018 budgets, 8 of them having done so before
31 December. The 2018 budget is also in place in the city of Mostar, after it was
proclaimed by the mayor in agreement with the head of the Finance Department, in
accordance with an exceptional amendment to the Federation Law on Budgets
adopted by the Federation Parliament. The proclaimed budget amounts to
59.9 million KM, a 9 per cent increase over the 2017 rebalanced budget. Brcko
District adopted its budget on 26 March, just ahead of the 31 March deadline, in the
amount of 243.98 million KM, a 1.3 per cent decrease from the rebalanced 2017
budget.
International obligations and other issues
On 14 December, the Energy Community Ministerial Council expressed its
regret over the continued lack of progress by Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
implementation of its obligations under the Energy Community Treaty. T his was due
to entity disputes over regulating certain aspects of the gas sector at the state level.
The Energy Community sanctions against Bosnia and Herzegovina, introduced in
October 2015, have thus far had no effect on resolving the disputes.
The Bosnia and Herzegovina Public Railways Corporation faces financial
constraints for the second consecutive year due to the unilateral decision of the
Republika Srpska to restrict its financing. Such a move could seriously threaten the
stability of the only corporation established thus far under annex 9 of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and which is crucial for
proper coordination and harmonization of the railway sector. This is in addition to the
threat posed by the current 16 March 2017 conclusion of the Republika Srpska
government requesting the Republika Srpska Ministry of Transport and
Communications to initiate a review of the agreement between the Federation and the
Republika Srpska on the establishment of a joint public railway corporation as part
of the transportation corporation, concluded in 1998 under annex 9 of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

IX. Return of refugees and displaced persons
The realization of the right of refugees and displaced persons to return to their
pre-war homes remains central to the fulfilment of the provisions of annex 7 of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as it requires
authorities at all levels “to create in their territories the political, economic, and social
conditions conducive to the voluntary return and harmonious reintegration of refugees
and displaced persons, without preference for any particular group ”.
Education remains a contentious issue in several returnee communities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Republika Srpska authorities continue to refuse to
acknowledge the right of Bosniak returnee schoolchildren to refer to their language
as “Bosnian” in accordance with a 2016 decision of the Bosnia and Herze govina
Constitutional Court, opting instead for the selective application of a provision of the
Republika Srpska constitution referring to “the language of the Bosniak people” while
18-06935

21/23

S/2018/416

referring to the language of the other two constituent peoples as “Serbian” and
“Croatian”. At the start of the spring semester, this issue triggered protests and student
boycotts in returnee communities around Zvornik.
At the same time, Serb returnee students in the Federation, particularly in the
Croat-majority Canton 10, continue to demand the introduction of the Serbian
language in their education, without success.

X. Media developments
Biased and politically influenced reporting continues to plague the three public
broadcasters, the independence of which is compromised by problems in financing,
reluctance to implement legal requirements for system integration and politicized
appointments to management. As a result of the rise in destabilizing and divisive
public rhetoric and reporting throughout the country, this problem is becoming more
acute.
With regard to financing, two of the three public broadcasting services within
the Bosnia and Herzegovina public broadcasting system ( Radio-televizija Bosne i
Hercegovine and Radio-televizija Federacije Bosne i Hercegovine) have partially
addressed financing problems through an agreement that the Sarajevo -based
electricity supplier will collect radio-television tax. However, the financing system
remains imbalanced, as the Republika Srpska broadcaster is not part of this
arrangement, nor are the other two electricity suppliers, while some politicians in
Croat-majority areas urge citizens not to pay the tax, contrary to relevant legislation.
Problems also exist in implementing relevant legislation concerning the
registration of a joint legal entity, the goal of which is to enable the transfer from
analogue to digital broadcasting for the Bosnia and Herzegovina public broadcasting
system and to serve as a joint digital network operator.
Thus, due to the inability of the public broadcasters to act outside political
influence and the lack of will among the political parties in power to allow the proper
implementation of relevant legislation, the public broadcasting system exists only on
paper. This is unfortunate, as the current legislation represents a solid legal base for
a proper public broadcasting system that would serve the interests of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina citizens in accordance with generally accepted programming principles.

XI. European Union military force
The European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, EUFOR, with
its continued executive mandate, plays a vital role in supporting the country ’s efforts
to maintain a safe and secure environment, which significantly contributes to the
ability of my Office and other international organizations to fulfil our respective
mandates.

XII. Future of the Office of the High Representative
The political directors of the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board met
in Sarajevo on 7 and 8 December 2017 to assess progress in implementing the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and underlined their
unequivocal commitment to territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and their full support to me as the High Representative in ensuring
respect for the Agreement and carrying out my mandate in accordance with annex 10

22/23

18-06935

S/2018/416

thereof, and relevant Security Council resolutions. The political directors reinforced
the need to complete the 5+2 agenda, which remains necessary for the closure of the
Office. The next meeting of the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board is
scheduled for 5 and 6 June 2018 in Sarajevo.
My Office continues its fiscally responsible approach to budget planning, and
the results are evident. Since the beginning of my mandate in March 2009, the
Office’s budget has been reduced by 53 per cent and my staff by over 58 per cent.
Given the deep and ongoing nature of the cuts, it is important to highlight that,
considering the realities of the situation on the ground and as entitled under annex 10
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, I must
remain equipped with the budget and the staff required to carry out my mandate
effectively.

XIII. Reporting schedule
In keeping with the practice of submitting regular reports for onward
transmission to the Security Council, as required by Security Council resolution 1031
(1995), I herewith present my nineteenth regular report. I would be pleased to provide
additional information should the Secretary-General or any Council member require
it at any time. The next regular report to the Secretary-General is scheduled for
October 2018.

18-06935

23/23
