307th

,PLENARY MEETING

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

Frit1v, 17 NO'Dember 1950, ot10.45 a,m.

FIFTH SESSION
Official Records

Flmhing Meadow,NetD Yorlt

CONTENTS
Page

Fonner Italian colonies; (4) reports of the United Nations Commissioner in .
Libya and. (b) reports of the administering Powers in Libya: reports of
the Ad Hoc Political Committee (A/1457) and the Fifth Committee •
(A/1S09 and Corr.l) (concluded)
~ •. ••. 413
P.,.esidenf: Mr. Nasrollah ENT~AM (Iran).

Former Italian eolonies; (0) reports of !he'United
Nations Commissioner In Libya and (b)' reports
of the administering Powers' intibya: reports
of the Ad Hoc Political Committee (A/1457)
. and dle Filth Committee (A/1509 and Corr.l)

(eor..duded)

(Agenda item 21]
1.. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The general debate on the report of the Ad Hoc Political Committee on the former Italian colonies is closed,
but it was understood that delegations would k~ve an
opportunity of expressing their opinions and obl'iervations on the statement made to the Assembly :fI~ter­
day [306thmeeti,sg] by Mr. Pelt. the United Nauc-cs
Commissioner in. Lib~. The first speaker on my list
is the representative of Syria.
2. Faris EL-KHOURI Bey (Syria): After listening
to the statement made yesterday [306th meeting] by
the United Nations Commissioner in Libya, Mr. Pelt.
on what has already been done and what is going to
be done during the. next year to. achieve the inde..,
pendence of Libya in· accordance with General Assembly resolution 289 A (IV) of 21 November 1949, the
Syrian delegation wishes to note with appreciation the
sincere efforts made last year by the.. Commissioner
and his co",workers and the efforts which are promised
for next year to accomplish the !aBk assigned to them
by the General Assembly re~olution,
3. But we cannot overlook certain very disappointing facts, which he reluctantly admitted. namely. t1lat
an assembly has been appointed, that it is composed
. of sixty members-twenty from each of the. three territories of Libya-and that it is to convene .on 25
November to draw up the cot:1Stitution of the Libyan
State. We also understand that these members consider themselves as constituting the national. ~ssembly
referred to in the General Assembly resolution of 21
November 1949. It must be noted here that the people
of Tripolitania, who represent more than is pet cent

of the whole population of Libya,- are thus to have only
one-third of the votes in this non-elected and arbl"
trarily appointed assembly.
4. In this connexion,.tny delegation wishes to ulake
certain remarks before the General Assembly proceeds
to V(i(e t>n the draft resolution submitted by the Ad Hoc
Po1i\.'ieal Committee.
5.Th'~ delegation of Syria considers that ~epeop!e
of Libya must not be prevented £.rOl11exerel~lng tllelr
funclamental right· of self-deten ma.tlOn•. ThIS .m~ns
that there must be due representation (Jf all the. In"
habitants of Libya as a whol~J through. general electi0l!s
conducted in accordance wlthestabbslted democratic
methods.
6. Paragraph 30£ section A of resol?tiqn 289 A (IV)
provides as follows: ~'rhat a .constltution for Libya,
including the fonn.of the government, .shall be deter...
mined by representatives of the inhabitants of eyrenaica, Tripolitaniaand. theFezzan .meeting and. consulting toge~her ina na~onal•• assembly". The words
nrepr~se..tltatives of the. Inha~ltants" can0!11y mean
deputies elected by the inhabitants on a. parliamentary
basis;· an appointed body cannot be .said to fuI~l that
condition. Fu\rthennore,the words "representatives. of
the inhabitants" are not synonymous WIth "repr~...senta­
tives of thp.: territories". Had it been intended that .
Libya should be divided into three territories for purposes of representation! the resolution. wou1d..hav.er~~
ferred to "representatives of. Cyrenal~, Tnpolitatna
and tJte Fezzan". It was not intended that the terri..
toraes should be represented ; it was inteqded that the
inhabitants should be represented.
7. The United Nations Commissioner in LibyaO:-I
quote from the .Press release1-said the following:
That the ~on.s.titution to be.... prepa.red sho1;1l~ be
a draft constitution. to be enacted ID prOVISional
fom and finally approved by an elected parliwnent.

413

.

1

(f.

See United Nations Press Release GAh04, Take No. 15.

A/PV.307

General Assembly-Fifth SessloQ.·-Plel1ury Meetlngs

"Th'at . . . that botly should consist of two elect~d

contrary, it has once more confirmed the fact that' the
national assembly which is to dra.w.up the Libyan
.chambers; one based on equal repres~lntation of ~he
constitution will be appointed rather than elected. It
provinces and the other based on ~pular represf,rtta..
tion of ~he whole of Libya. Th,;. popular chMlber .has also confirmed the· fact that Cyrenaica, Tripolit~nia
should have control of the budgt;t.
. and the Fezzan will each have twenty representatives
in the national assembly, so that they will have an
"That the provisional governni.~~nt should be reequal
number of votes in spite of the tremendous difsponsible ~o the popular chamber/'
ference in the size of their respective populations.
B. Furthermore, paragraph 3 (a) of the draft reso15. Practically all those who have spoken here, from
lution 1l0'W before the General Assembly provides "tbat
this
very rostrum, have strongly criticized such a coma national w:isembly duly representative of the inhabiposition
for an assembly which is supposed to be
tants of Libya shall be convened as early as possible".
national.
They have indicated clearly that an assembly
That paragraph confirms parag~ph 3 ~f section A .
appointed in such a way and with such a memberof r.esolution 289 A (IV), whIch provIdes for. the
ship
cannot be considered democratic or representative.
representation of the inhabitants of Libya as a whole
The
representatives
of Libya and Pakistan in the Council
and not for the representation of the territories sepaLibya:
have
already
objected strongly to this strange
for.
rately, .as is· the case with lhe body which has already
and scandalous way of establishing the Libyan national
been set up in Libya!
. .
assembly. And, what is more, we heurd yesterday from
9. The delegation of Syria wishes to recall, moreover,
the United Nations Commissioner, Mr. Pelt, himself,
that all the s~.aker.s who participated in the general
that he too had never agreed with such undemocratic
discussion on this matter expressed the view that the
methods. H~ stated [306th meeting] :
national assembly should be elected and should not be
"I believe that I have said enough to make it clear
appointed by anybody. If this body is appointed, it
that, personally, I have never liked either the idea
cannot be said to represent the inhabitants .of Libya.
of an appointed assembly or the idea of equal rep10. Taking· all these points into ~onsideration, the
resentation as a permanent prinCiple, .and I wish
delegation of Syria. reaffirms that the body of sixty
tonlake it particularly clear that I have neyerconpersons which has been established is not and cannot
sidered it desirable-as a matter of fact, I consider
be considered to be the national assembly referred to
it undesirable-that these two features should be
either in paragraph 3 of section A of· resolution 289
incorporated in the Libyan constitution which is now
A (IV) or in paragraph 3 (a) of the draft resolution
to be elaborated."
.
nQW under discussion. It can be regarded only as ,t
16. It is hard to understand how the idea of an
drafting body,. as ~he Commissi0!1er' stated :yesterday,
appointed
assembJ\y based on equal representation has
charged with tlv~ task of prepanng a workIng paper
wori the day. Mr. Pelt of course explained to us that
to be discussed ,md decided on by a duly elected parboth
Cyrenaica and the Fezzan had made equal repliament. or constituent assembly representing the whole
resentation
a sine qua non for their participation in
population of Libya in proportion to the number of
the
work
of
the national assembly. I do not believe,
inhabitants in the' Vo'uious constituencies.
however, that it would be going too far to say that
11. My delegation also takes note of the solemn
the attitude of Cyrenaica and the Fezzan would have
promise .of the Commissioner. that he will. make this
been quite different had they been free from all foreign
position clear to the sixty members of the b9dy which
influence.
is about to convene and will advise them to prepare
17. Be that as it may, the discussions in the Ad Hoc
only a draft con~titution providing for the establishPolitical
Committee during this session of the As..
ment of a· two-chamber national assembly.
sembly2 and the numerous statements we heard from
12. I believe that all the members of the General
this rqstrum yesterday prove quite clearly that it is the
Assembly take the same" view of the situation. I bealmost unanimous view of the. M~ubers of the' United
lieve that their purpose, in voting in favour of the
Nations that a Libyan national assembly duly repredraft resolution submitted by the Ad Hoc Political
sentative of the iilhabitants of Libya should be con..
Committee, is not that the General Assembly shall
vened; I emphasize the words "duly representative of
recognize the body composed .of sixty non-elected
the inhabitants of Libya". Those are the actual words
members which is to convene shortly as the. national
of the draft resolution· submitted by the Ad Hoc Potiti"
assembly referred to in resolution 289 A (IV) .. Their
cal Committee, which, as we all know, was approved
purpose, I believe, is tha~ that national ~ssembly .shall
by 53 votes to 1 with only 5 abstentions. Moreover,
in due course be elected In accordance WIth estabhshed
this text itself· refers to a preceding resolution on Libya,
democratic principles and methods. Only in tms way
resolution 289 A (IV)· dated 21 November 1949.
can the people of Liby-a be ~uly re~resente~J ~d only
18. The interpretation given. in tht; Ad Hoc Political
in this way ,can they d\~termme theIr constitutiOn.
Committee and in the Assembly to the words "a na13.. WAHEED RiV.FAT Bey (Egypt) (translated
tional assembly duly representative of the inhabitants
from French) : My delegation is in compl~te agreement
of Libya" leaves no room for any doubt whatsoev.er.
with toe statement just made by the represent~tive of
These words refer-and they can only refer-to an
Syria. In our turn, we shall make the following stateassembly elected in proportion to t~e size .0f.°the popument on behalf of the Egyptian. delegation.
lations of the. three component umts of Libya. They
14. The statement made yesterday before the. As. 2 See Official Records "1 the Gener si Assembly, Fijlh ~t$·
sembly by Mr. Pelt, the"United Nations Commissioner
.don, Ad Hoc Political Committee, 7th to 17th meetmgs
in Libya, has not in any way allayed our fears. On the
inclusive.

·'S07th Meetlug-17' Novembe~ 1950
cannot refe! to 'an appointed asse1,11bly based t>u equal
representatIon.
19. We confidently hope, in view of this almost unanimous 4esire on the part of the Me~bers of the' United
Nations, that the Council for Libya, the United Nations
Comnlissioner in Libya" and the' administering Powers ,
will do their utmost to follow the instructions .~ven
them by the .Organization and not to impede or dtstort
those instructions. In this connexion, we. cannot but
state our full agreement with the views expressed· by
Mr. Pelt in the statement he made yesterday when he
spoke of the scant authority an .appointed assembly
would have for the elaboration of a final constitution
for Libya. We solemnly take .note 'of the statement by
the United Nations Commissioner that a constitution
prepared by such an Assembly could. only be a provisional docutnent, a. preliminary draft, which would
require. final approval and, if necessary, could be
amended by aparliaritent to be el~c.ted by the Libyan
people as a whole.
20. But, if that is the case and if that is really our
purpose, why do we not begin where Mr. Pelt would
like us to end? Why not convene a truly national,
representative and constituent assembly without further delay, instead of convening this appointed assembly
of sixty members which, though apparently based on
the principle of equality, is in fact an expression of
the most flagrant inequality?
21. We believe that .there is still time to find a better
solution fol' this question. Today nlore than ever before, in view of the almost umi,ttintous .desire of the
Members of the United Nations, a desire that has
been. expressed both in the Ad Hoc Political Committee
and from this very rostrum, we strongly urge the competent bodies and the administering Powers' to 'respect
,this desire of the United Nations. We urge them to
remember that only a democratic and truly representa.,
tive Libyan national assembly will be capable of pre..
paring a democratic and lasting constitution for Libya.
22. . In conclusion. I ,should like.to point Qut that, in
his ~tatement, Mr. Pelt touched upon the, question of
the composition of the future parliament of Libya and
mentioned its functions and .itsresponsibilities.We
should not, however, attempt to anticipate events in
the constitutio.nal field, for- it was the view of the
Ad Hoc Political Committee that the composition of
, the future Libyan parliament, the question whether it
should be made up .of a single chamber or of two
chambers, etc., should be left entirely to the decision
of the representatives of the Libyan pe,ople meeting
in a national asaembly to discuss .the matter.
23.. Mr.JORDAAN (Union of S~uth Africa): I wish
to propose a small drafting change in 'paragraph 4·
of the operative. part of. the draft resolution on Libya,
a .change which I hope the General Assembly will
accept without discussion. Paragraph 4 now reads as
follows:
ltUrges the Economic and Social Council, the
specialized agencies and the Secretary-General of
the United :Nations to extend to Libya such teeh..
nical ·and firtancial assistance as it may request in
order to esu.iblish a sound basis for economic and
social pro,g-tess."

415

24. It seems to' my delegation that tbewords "as it
may request" are a little too bic:md and perhaps rather
unreasonable as they stand. What the paragraph says, .
in effect, is .this: let. Libya ask whatever it pleasesh
regardless of necessity or possibility, and it shaJ~ .~
granted. I am sure that the original spC:tsor$' of the
draft resolution and those who voted for· it in the' 'Committee never had. any'such intention ih mind.
25. For that reason, I venture to propOse the.Fttilowing drafting change: after the words "as it may request", add the words "and so fat as they may be in
a position ,to do so". The paragraph would then read:
"Urges 'the Economic and Social Council,. the
specialized agencies and the Secrctary..General of
the United Nations to extend to Libya such teeh-.
nical and financial assistance as it .may request, and '.
so far as they may be in a position to do so, in order
to establish a sound. basis for economic and social
progress."
In that way~ I feel,ourintentionswill be clarified.'
26. ' I have spoken to some. of the .original sponsors
of the draft resolution, and the words that I have suggested are acceptable to those·to whom I spoke.
27. Mr. ZEINEDDINE. (Syria) :,The Syrian delegation is of the opinion that the amendment presented
by the representative of the Union of South Africa
is sound, and it wiII therefore support it.
28. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Has the representative of Egypt any objection?
29. WAHEED RAAFAT Bey (Egypt) (translated
from Fi'ench) :'We JJ,aveanother attien~ent to submit.
30. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Does it relate to the amendment. submitted by' the '
delegation of the Union of South Africa ?
31. WAHEED RAAFAT,Bey (Egypt) (translated
from French) : No, Mr. President. .
.
32. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):·
In that. ~tSe ~ shall invite the Assembly to .vote on the
amendment of the Union of South Africa. I shat1 then
call upon the representative of :Egypt to submit his
amendment which does . not, apply to the same part of
the text.
33. . The' amendment.' proposed by the delegation of
the Union of South Africa and supported by the . representative of Syria is, .I think, simple and straightforward. I shall now put it to the vote.
.
The amendment was adopted by 52 votes to nOn(h
with 2 abstentions.
.
.'
34. WAHEED RA..c\FAT Bey (Egypt) , (translated
from French): Ia1tlOlogize for SUbmitting a last"'riiinute
amendment on behalf of my delegation~ but the President himself has allowed us more or less to open the
door to the submiss~Qn of 3,).'l1endments.,1
35. Our amendment is very short and expresses the
general feeling oithe Assembly.and of the Committee.
It sil11ply calls for the ad:ditlon of the words ,celected
and" in pa~graph 3 (a). or the operative part .of. the
&aft resolutlOn, so that 'I;he tex:t would read: "That a
national assembly duly elededand representative of theinhabitants .of Libya,. . •.", the remainder being .un'l'
I

\~hanged.

30. '1 anr,' sure that noonewiU objeet to an amend·
ment. whjl$ is in ·line with all the ~hes 'we have

heard.
.
. 3~~. \\1:lje PRESIDENT (translated jrQtP- Frencb):
I q1l11 \tI~,nthe United Nations Commissioner in Libya.
38.~ft/' PELT (United Nations Commissioner in
Libytf~) t~ .1 shall limit my remarks ·to the amendtnent
justp.t'oposed by the representative of Egypt. If I
understood him correctly, paragraph 3 (a) of the d~!t
resoltttion would read:
f'That a national assembly duly elected and rep"
cresentative of the inhabitants shall be convened as
", eat1¥ as possible, and in any case before 1 January

19S1".

39. Today i$, 17 November. which means that there
. are exactly forty-four days left between. now and the
end of'the year. It is absolutely out of the question to
have a national assembly el~cted within that short time.
40. When elections w-ereheld in Cyrenaica, which is
a much, smaller te~'rif.tory-at least with a .smaller population-it tOQk three months of hard wOrk tQprepare
an electoralla.w, to draw up the list of voters, to' allow
time for the presentation of candidates and ~e raising of objections, to establish the organization which
is required to;conduct.an election. suth as polling places,
. and to tttke the necessary measures to guarantee proper
oolloting.
.
,
.

.

41~ When I ~onsidered this matter in Tripolitania

together 'with the British Administration and with the.
political leaders, we cattle to· the .conc1usiotl that the
same work in Tripolitania .would last. at least four
months. On top Clf that, of course, we should have to
allow. time for· an electoral ~paign. ·At the shortest,
that would be anothermontb.
".
42. If .the General Assembly,therefote, were now. to
suggest that the national assembly, which is going to
convene on 25 November, must be electedf there w~uld
be no national ass~rlb1y until. far into next"year, and
in .that case I mU$t point out that the possibility of
achieving independefi~. by the end of. next year would
become a dreatn~ The date of, 31 December 1951. for
inde~ndence would in that case be out of the question.
43. , Amorigother reasons, it was in order to avoid
that da.~gerof.lo~~g the .main·, object- of the origina!
resolution of. the tieneral Assembly that I suggestea
yesterday that when the' national assembly met on 25
November, I should advise its members to consider
the constitution they prepared as a draft to be provisionally enacted so that a provisional.goV'ernmentas another paragraph9fthis drift resolution demands
-coutdbe auly· elected . by the national. assembly. and
then ata later date the constitution would be submitted
tt) an' elected parliament. That procedure bas the· advantageof giving satisfaction, to democratic feelings,
which 1 share, and to the desire to ensure the establishment of a'.democratic Lipyan. State. Furthermore,.
no time would be lost in establishing the State.
44~ .I most strongl,. urge' the Geneml Assembly not
to diverge from thIS plan and this schedule. I must
predic:2 and warn that .if this.amen~ent.is .adopted,
tliere. is a risk l:hatLibya may not become mdependent
by the end of next year.
.'

45. The PRESIDENT (tra.nslated from French): I
ha-yea. number of speakers on my list and I shall
recognize them in t~rn. I regret that. a new debate
seems to be about to start. The Egyptian ,amendment
has wide. implications and should' ~rhaps. have been
submitted to the Ad H ()t Political Committee. How~
ever~ as it ·has been presented to the Assembly, I have
no dtoice but -t~put it up for discussion.
416: I must ask. repres~ntatives who .speak' to be as
brief as, possible and not to embark.on a new disf..11ssion•.
47. Sir Frank SOSKICE(United.Kingdom): I
simply want· to say one or two words with regard to
th~ amendment which has just been proposed. I shall
most certainly respect the President'S wish that lny
address should be short.
'
'
48. In opposing the amendment I should like to say,
as.a representative of one· o£ the administering. Powers,
that it would beco1Upletely impracticable. to try to. hold
elections if there is not to bean almost interminable
delay in achieving the ultimate purpose which everyone
has in mind.
. "
,
49. I sho~ldsimply like to .summarize my argument
in one sentence. Mr. Pelt has' already given t'easons
for opposing the amendment. Those reasons cOl'nmend
themselves to the United Kingdom delegati~tl as, being •
completely unanswerable. I sincer~ly. hope. that ,,!G
shall not at this late hour adopt an amendment wh1(~h
is ofa controversial character and which is bound to
entail· considerable delay and would impose upon all
those concerned a burden, which they could not pqssibly discharge within~e ,time at. their disposal. J
cordially. hope that the A"sembly 'wdl not accept thIS
amendment which is bound to lead' to far-reaching complications and to unfortunate consequences.
50. Mr. CASTRO (ElSatvador)': I feel very reluctant about speaking at this time, but 1 do so because
I feel·. that there is a clear duty -before me to' express
the opinion of .the deleWltion of .EI Salvador, concern-ing the amendment which has been proposed by the
representative of .Egyp~ .. I ~s. ready to rai~e. a point
of order concern111g this ql~estlOnp because It IS, absolutely. necessary that the General Assembly. sho~td
knoW' what is the substance of the matter upon whIch
it is voting.
'
51.', There are two divergent opinions in the General
Assembly concerning paragraph 3 (a) of the draft
resolution, whi~h provides :'that. a national. assembly
duly representative ofl the inhabitants of LIbya shall
be convened as early as possible""On. the one hand.
that'paragraph is interpreted in a liter~t. sense to mean
that a duly representatIve assembly IS to be elected. ~
On the other bandt it is interpreted. in the, light of the I

,.1.'

~:b:;~~c':'~~t=~t~~~
a=~te<f::d· 1
in that ca$eit is tbis body wbieh is to draft the future ..,

constitution 1torLibya.
52. We do not feet-and I think that is the view of
a number of delegations-that this appointed· national
assembly is representative of the inhabitants of Libya.
It is not at all representati'Ve. It may bereptesentative of· the interests of. those' who have appointed it,
but it is not representative of the will of thepeopte
of Libya. We understand that the Ad H DC PolitIcal

•

._. +_ _""_ _
;;_&C_...-

411

3~.'il\ MeetWg-17 Nnvember, 19$0 '
.....,,~<;

l.

in the A.d H (lC Political Commi~ to withdraw them;
Committe~~. in apPfoving the draft resolutiont had in
and they did so. If wearenpw to start submitting
mind that \the national assembly should be' elected by
the peopk-. Tot say Uduly representative of the inhabi..
amendments again, I very much fear that this whole
tants of Libya , implies, undoubtedJy, that the inhabi,.compromise' sOlution will be upset. All of us appreciate
tants of Libya are to have a voice in designating the
the spirit in which the representatives of Egypt and
metabers of the nation:« assembly.
El Salvador have submitted their amendrrtents. But I
53. For that reascm, if this draft resolution is put to very respectfully request them to limit themselves to
having their remarks entered in the ~Iecord.
a vote without c::larifying thesituatiQni/some ()fthe
members of the, General Assembly will be acting on
60. Faris EL-KHOURI Bey (Syria): I had wanted
the a$swnptio~ that they are voting; for a national as.. ~ simply to say that the point raised by the Commissembly dUly elected~and the otherlS will be acting on
sioner for Libya with reg;trdto the time ,limit was
the assumption that it is the natiorial assembly already
a sound one, since it WQuld not be possible in $e~onth
appointed which is going to draf'; the Libyanconsti..
or so between now and 1 January 1951 to tiStabi~ha
tution.
duly elected~: representative national assembly. For \~his
54. The delegation of El Sclvadorsupports the reason' I, had inte.ttded to suggest that the time l~t
should be~'tended ~E~'~,4Iy ,so that the t~skcould, b~
amendment .of the representative of Egypt, because it
a~comp1ished within thepe-t'i9dprovided. Thereprel
is ,absolutely necessary, toe,stablish the fact that the
sentative of El Salvador, howeY~~, has made itunnece~!"/
national assembly should bf~elected by the people of
sary for me, to biy;bmit a.proposal to that. eff~t~~,~m~
Libya.
he, has 1l1oved that "1 March" shoWI.! ,be "substituted
55. Some objections have, been raised by the United foruI January"--anextensi~of two months;. and
Nations Commissioner in Libya with respect to the
that "1 I1-me't should be Substltu~ied' for "1 ~:prtl". ~
question of time only., The question .oftime is not so
think it would be very convenient if the tnfLtter were
important when we CLre trying to establish the future
dealt with in that wa:l~ .
- .
structure ofa new State; the question of time is
61. TQ leave the time .'Umit at I, January and 'to fol...
entirely secondary. Therefore, in order to make the
low the suggestion of the representative of Greece
proposal of tlle represC)~tative of Egypt fully practicwould certainly, be neither correctnorpra~tica.ble. Ac~ble, I am g(,:Jng t? sugg~$t two am~ndmentsconcern­
to the present wording, "a.national assembly
cording
mg only the questIon of d~tes and tIme.
duly representative of the inhabitants of Libya shall
56. I propose t!mt ~ub-paragraph «(1,)0£ paragraph
be convened as ~rly as possible, and in any case
" shot.ud be artlended by sUbstituting, the date " 1
before 1 January 1951", but we understand "dUly ~ep­
March 1951'~ 'for "1 January 1951",' and that subresentative" to imply also,' that the national assembly
paragraph ( b) of the same paragraph should be
should be elected, and it would be impossible for an
amended ,by, substituting the date "1 June 1951" for
election· to ,be completed by 1 January 1951. For this
"1 April 1951". Thus twomo!'~ months are 'allowed
reason my, delegation supports the three amendments
for the convening of the national assembly and for the
proposed by the representatives of Egypt and 'El
establishment of the provisional government of L~bya.
Salvador.
57. It is a very important prob~ern and a, point of 62. The ,'PRESIDENT (translated fr()m~french).:
substance. But we are "not reopenIng the debate held
The r.:~presenb'~tiveof Egypt informs me that hIe wishes
in the Ad Hoc Political Committee. A number of' repto speak, There is another speaker 011 th~.J,.Wt before
resentatives'did not know that there yrcl$ any intention
him. !f th~ repr~senta.tiveof Egypt. 'Wi~h.~§· ~to say, ~t
to call upon this appointed national assembly
draft , he, WIthdraws h1S amendment, I can· can UPOl1 him
the Libya.n constitution-we only learned of that at
immediately.
our meeting yesterday--and they will naturally oppose
63. Since that' is, not theca.se, I shall call upon him
the proposal that this appointed body should draft the
after the next speaker..
future constitution of Libya which will determine the
64. ' Mr. GROSS (United Statesi'of America): The
political structure of the new State.
of the representative of ,Egypt and, the fur-'
58. Mr. KYROU (Greece): I shall be very brief. proposal,
thera1l1endmentssubmitted by tij.e representative of
The original sporisors of the draft resolution which is
El Salvador precipitate a 'very. difficult issue indeed. '
now before the' Assembly charged me with the task
From . the standpoint of principle it wiU be obvious
of submitting that draft to the Ad Hoc Political Comthat few, if any, would wish to ,record themselves as
mittee, where it received almost unanimous 'approval. . oPPo$ing the .idea of elections. We, hold it dear in our
It constituted, a compromise solution arrived at in a
own traditions" and this gives rise, to, J\ very difficult
spirit of conciliation. The main objective in considerdilettUr1a indeed. 'However. there, is "another matteri!1g ~his qt~estion must be to. secure co-operation among
involved here. Those of us who [ollowed the develop..
all th\) int~rested parties. If I am not wrong, a.nother' ment of. thi$ draft resolution through the AclH(lC Politiprincipal organ of the United Nations has extolled the
cal Committee will realize, I am sure that, as has
SUccess. achieved on this question of Libya and, 111.ore
been expressed so well bythereprepentative of Greecet
generally, on the whole question of the former Italian
the Vice-Chairman of the .Comnuttee, whQ spoke a
colonies, a question which the four great Powers COnfew minutes ago, very difficult problems, were posed .
cerned had failed to settle.
when the C011U,l.1ittee. was faced with two draft ,resolut
59. On the. basis of this compromise, and on behalf tions,one sponsored by eight. States "and L;e other
by four, and that through ,~ettighest degree of . ,s~tes ..
t., d
O!iff;thne,. sponsors. of the .draf,t, reS91ut.ion" I ,asked ,the manshIp
on the part of
twelve of those de1~tions,
..:::...:rent delegaliOll$wlticb had submttted amendments

to

an

418

Gc;neral A~~e111bly-Fifth Seation-PlenaryMeetlnga

stimulated by the Va\!e..Chairman, who presided at the
meeting of the spunsors, an agreement was thrashed
out which result;idin unanimous approval by the A.d
Hoc Political Committee of the draft resolution now
submitted to the General Assembly.
65. It seems to my dele~tion ~t to reopen this
eunre <'Luestion here i::1 the General Assembly involves
a danger and that we should be failing in our duty if
wc did n\lt draw attention to that danger and ~int
out that oue of the essential principles which was, dis...
cussed in the Ad'Hoc Political Committee was whether
ct' not there should in fact be any reference at all to
dates and. wheth~r or not any time limits or target
dates should be .set. That matter was discussed, an
amicable agreement, was reached, all the sponsorsincluding the delegations of Egypt and Syria-partici...
Dated in the agreement, and a date was set. The ques...
non which is .now raised by the representative of
Egypt in his amendment was also discussed. Various
viewpoints were' held; the draft resolution which was
approved. reflected f;he desire for harmony and unanim...
ity in the Committee.
66. I think in a sense perhaps it wa~ somewhat .re...
grettable that the Union of South Afnca should have
proposed an amendment which happened to be in sub...
stance the st\ttle as an amendment which the United
States delegaHon submitted to the Committee, and then
withdrew in .the interest of harmony and unanimity. I
think it unfortunate that the entire issue, which ca~sed
so much debate and so much difficUlty and which was
finally resolved 'With such complete lla..t"tllony in the
Committee" should now have been raised in' the
Assembly.
67. It is very difficult indeed for me to understand
how it would be possible, evcm in a fairly lengthy debate
in the Assembly, to go through all those fundamental
issues which were thra.shed out in days and days of
rr..eetings' of the 'Jub...committee and working groups of
the Ad Hoc Pot,itical Committee.. I think it could only
result in doing Jess than justice to the problem.
68. I therefore most earnestly add the support.of my
delegation to the comments made by the Commissioner
in Libya and to those other spea'kers before me who,
I am su::e, would agr~e with me in' principle that a
vote against these amendments is not a vote against
· the principle of elections. On the c:ontr&.ry, it would be
a vote for the orderly and effective execution of the
work of the United Nations itself and would vindicate
the perseverhg work that was done by the representa..
· tives of the twelve sponsors who happily reached agreement in t~~ Ad Hoc Political Committee. I' therefore
~1rge the Assembly to vote ag3.inst, the amendments
.
which have been proposed.

representative, in his statement a few minutes ago, did'
not really o,P"pose such a..democr,a.tic, soluti~l1. I am. t,er..
tain that, Mr. Gross, hlmself a. democrat, would not
object to an elected constituent assembly in Libya instead of an appointed one.
70. Furthermore, there is no discrelP-ucy between the
solutions proposed by Mr. Pelt and "ourselves. On the
contrary, we want to gain time. Mr. Pelt, however,
told us yesterday that the proposed constitution would
not be a final one. The constitution to be prep;1red
by the so-called Libyan national assembly would be
only a preliminary draft constitution. A truly democratic parliament would later be conv~ned to reconsider
the constitution.
71. Our aim is to simplify thi.s unusualiy complicated
procedure and to save both time and labour. What we
ask is what Mr. Pelt's method itself would be bound
to achieve in the end. We r~i£rely ask for a duly elected
and representative national assembly. Why such a
commotion about the two words "elected" and· "representative'" ?
72. Is the majority here rea\lly opposed to the idea that
the Libyan assembly, a m.ol)nal constituent assembly,
should really be an elected assembly? If so, we ate
ready to withdtaw our amendment. If, however, the
authors of the draft resolution wish the assembly to
be truly elected and not appointed". why should they
.
object to this proposal?
73. I should like to reminc the Assembly that it was
my delegation, with the other Arab delegations, which
urged speed in convening the assembly and proposed
that it should not be convened later than 1 January
1951. What are the objections now? Some say that
the question is controversial and that what the Egyptian
amendment calls for cannot be carried out, but, our
reply \~o that is that the majority in the Assembly is
in favot-tr of this amendment-or at least, that is what
we hope. As for the practical scope of the amendment,
our course is quite clear. The representative of El
Salvador has asked us to postpone the date for con"
vening the assembly from 1 January 1951 to 1 March
, 1951. He' has also proposed that the provisional govern'"
ment which, under paragraph 3 (b) of the opera:~ll v"
part of the draft resolution, is to .be convened before
1 April 1951, should not be convened untill June 1951.
The questio~ solves itself.
74. We objected, originally; to the convening of the
assembly later than 1 January 1951; but we agree to
the amendment submitted by El Salvador. 'Consequently
there can be no serious objection to our amendment
on the ground either of its substance or of its implementation. I appeal to such a democratic Assembly as
ours to vote for my amendment. "
.

69. WAHEED RAAFAT Bey (Egypt) (transwted
fr:mt French): My delegation cannot understand th\;s
opposition to· such a mild and restrained amendment.
· Actually,. it is t10t even an amendment. It must have
been evident that all my delegation was trying to do
was to bring some daritY into an extremely ambiguous
text. As I said in my previous statetr1ent~ 1 believe it
is tlie view of the Ad Hoc. Political Committee and ~

75. Sir Frank SOSK:ICE (United Kingdom): Since

the General Assembly' that the Libyan national con...
stit.uent .assembly should be an elected body and not
an appointed one. I feel sure ,that the United States

I requested petmission, to speak, what I desired to say
has been very much better said by Mr. Gr~ss, the
representative of the United States. I most cordially
end6rse 'what he said.
76. If we 0I'pose the group of amendments now before us, it does not mean that we are against elections
or against due democratic process. On the contrary, it
means that we are. asking th.e Assembly not nOw to
reopen the debate and to canvass again the labours of

307'" Meedng-17November 1950 '
(

'. the 1" Hoc Political Conunittee, which Mr. Gross

descr1bed.
.
77. The draft resolution before us was carefully
worked out to reconcile coidlicting views in the course
of a number of debates in the Ad Hoc Political Committee. The United Kingdolu delegation feels that it
would be extraordinarily unfortunate if now, at the
last moment, because these amendments are raisedmay. I say without' any preliminary intimation to a
number of us who would have liked to have had such
an intimation-we were t(.) go into the whole of these '
controversial questions again. But that is not all; these
amendments raise far wider issues stilI.
78. My delegation listened yesterday with attention
and pleasure to the statement of the United Nations
Commissioner in Libya. He told ·.US .that he proposed
to ask the views and guidance of the United Nations
Advisory Council for Libya upon certain advice which
he was considering tendering to the Libyans regarding the formul~Ltion of, their constitution. If these
amendments are adopted, 'or indeed discussed in their
entirety, we shall really be questioning and going into
that advice whic.l't the Commissioner indicated that he
proposed to tender.
79. May I say at once that the. United Kingdom
dele~tion questions very much whether it. is right
and proper for· us to comment now upon. this advice
at all. We think it wO'Jld not be proper to do so. First,
as the Assembl:1' knows, my government is one of the
administering P~wer3; s~i:cndly, it is represented on
the Council for LibyCi.. la a sense, therefore, the matter
is sub judice. But'l would go further than that and
submit to the Assembly that it is not wise for us now
to comment upon the advice which the United Nations
Commissioner may at some future ,date tender to the
Libyans.
80. j,.£tet' all, the Assembly has set up the Council
for L~bya for. this very purpose. It is for the· Council
io di~ct1ss. and conunent upon proposals of the United
Nations Commissioner, when they are put to it. Any
discussion of the matter in 'this Assembly can omy
prejudice future discussionr; which will, no doubt,. take
place in the Council for Libya, in which-and I would
emphasize this particularly-not only certain countries
represented in this. Assembly· have representatives but
in which the people of Libya themselves are represented. I really should like to suggest to the Assembly
that it would be far wiser to leave discussion of this
matter to the very body which, after all, the Assembly
has created for just this purpose and which ,has a
far closer and more detailed knowledge of the actual
conditions in Libya than we can have here.
81. As regards any suggestion that the Assembly
should go further and express an opinion in any form
on the substance of the advice which the Commissioner
may suggest ,he should give to the Libyans, I (all .only
so. woul~ seem to me to be entirely'; insay ~hat to
~ons1stent W1th the attitude taken by the.Assembly-in
ItS. resolution 289 A (IV), of 21 November 1949 and
reaffirmed in the draft resolution which we are now
discussing. I am most anxious not to enlarge the scope
of this debate, but it ,seems difficult, in view of the
amendments that have been proposed, not to remind
the Assembly of the circUmstances to which I have
been referrinv:

40

...

,419

_ 1

!

82. After all, last y~&l' the Assembly expressly stated,
in paragraph 3 of$ection A of its resolution, u. • •
that a constitution for Libya • • . shall be determined
by representatives of the inhabitants of Cyrenai~,
Tripolitania and .the Fezzan meeting and consultirig
together in a' nr.ttionalassembly". The Libyans, that
is to say, are to, detentline their constitution and their
form of goverJ:l~ment. "fh(~ United Nations Commis..
sioner is,' of course,p~r£ectly free-indeed, it is his
duty-to assist the pec;l,p~e of Libya in this task, and
he will' no dClubt do ~r~ by. tendering such advice as
he thinks fit. ;But we are sitting here some 4,11000 miles
away from Libya., If we try to tell the Lihyans how
to manage their affairs, there must be a danger that
we may stir up antagonisms and call into play- forces
of which we have no first-hand knowledge.
83. My delegation sympathizes very much with what
has been said about the, desirability of having elected
bodies in Libya, created in accordance with due demo"
cratic processes. ,But it is not always so easy to hold
elections. The representatives of. Tripolitania them'"
selves have gone on record assaying that they do not
wish elections to be held there. Let us notiorget that
the principle of nomination fo~ a Committee of Twenty~
One was adopted upon the advice of the Council for
Libya itself. Let us not forget that it was the. Com..
mittee of Twenty-One which decided to set .up the
national assembly upon the basis of. equal' representation for each of the three ,territories and appointed, by
means of selection. The Committee of Tw~nty-One
decided this unanimously. I would repeat that: it deCided it unanimously. However much we may sympathizewith the idea of electiong-..;and, incident31~y, I
should mention in passing that the British Administration in Tripolitania prepared an electoral law some six
months ago, but dropped it in deference to the views
of the TripoIitanians themselves-we should surely not
be wise to ignore this unanimous decision of the
Libyans themselves in the Committee of Twenty-One,
which was set up :by the Commissioner upon .the
advice of his Council.
.'
84. I have sought to submit-once more I am afraid,
because they were thoroughly discussed in the Ad H cc
Political Committee-certain general considerations, but
it is impossible to. state. a case against the amendments
which have been proposed without reminding the General Assembly of the general scope of the task which
confronted the Conunitte~ and of the result of the
Comnlittee's deliberations•. 1 had profoundly, hoped, as
I said before and I am sorry to reiterate it, that we
should not now disturb what has already· beeri done
and w~at has resulted in.a compromise which represents, In what' my delegation regards as·. a,. nicely balanced form, 'conflicting points of view which were
reconciled before the Ad Hoc Political Committee.
85. If we are ((eally to consider these amendments,
my delegation cannot help thinking that it isa little
unfortunate that after the Ad H (le Political Committee
has completed its deliberations the)Se amendments
should, right at the very e1eventhhout',be proposed
to the General Assembly without any sort of prior
warning. I do hope that, in view of the considerations
which land previous speakers have advanced before
the General Assembly. we shall 'not a~cept these
amendments•
,

86. Mr. ARUTIUNIAN (Union of Soviet Socialist

Republics). (tramlated jrom Russian):' The delegation .of the. Soviet Union supports the Egyptian delegatiotfs amendment to the eitect that the draft resolution .should provide Uthat a national assembly duly
elected and representative of the inhabitants- of Libya
shall be convened as early as possible". .
87. The principle that a national assembly must be
'elected is one of the generally recognized principles
of democracy. Even those representatives who have
spoken ~inst the establishment of a national assembly
in Libya by means of elections have had to say that
they cannot take exception to the principle of elections
· in general.
88. Mr. GrOLS, the United States representative, be· gan by saying that it was hardly pos~ible to object
, to the principle of establishing an assembly of. a representative character. but he ended with al~ appeal to
the General Assembly to vote against the principle of
· the election of the Libyan national assembly. As we
say in my country, that is ta.utamount to toasting someone's health .and then drinking to the repose of hilS soul.
· 89. liow does Mr. Gross explain his very strange
application of the elective principle which, according
· to him,. is' good for America and bad for Libya? He
~plains it by the need to ensure harmony and collaboration in the General Assembly and by the fact
that the Committee's draft resolution represents a
compromise.
.
90. The delegation of the USSR has always objected
to such compromises which mean sacrificing the interests of the people; in this case it is sought to base
the COll1promis~ on the rejection of oneaf the fundamental principles of democracy by which alone the
creation of a truly independent and sovereign Libya
can be ensured.
91. To reject the elective principle in. the case of the
establishment of the Libyan national assembly would
be tantamount to trying to set up a body in Libya
which would be labelled "national assembly" but would
in fact bea puppet body manipulated by the admit';,;tering Powers.
92. Sir Frank Soskice, the representative of the
United Kingdom, has given us one of the best illustrations of this. In support of his objection to the
dective principle he referred to a decision 'of the Corn'"
mittee of Twenty-One, appointed by the United Nations
Commissioner in Libya to draft a numbf'" of bills. He .
said that that Committee had unanimously rejected
the elective principle. That is quite true. But the question arises why the Committee of Twenty-One, called
upon to reJlresent the people of Libya~ objected to the
elective prInciple. The explanation is very simple. The
Committee of Twenty-One was appointed by the Commissioner; it is not composed of representatives who
express the true interests of the Libyan people but
of representatives who were specially picked tQ COver
up the actions of the administering Powers in Libya,
whose purpose is to dismember the country and to keep
Libya uncer the control of the colonial Powers.
93. That .'s the C0111nlittee to whose decisions Sir
Frank Sos~cice referred. His idea undOUbtedly is that
a new hod} r.a11ed a "national assembly" should be

set up, selected in the same way as the Committee of
Twenty-One, from among those who are obedient. Of
course, the representative of the United Kingdom is
prepared to vote for a national assembly of this sort
because, like the Committee of Twenty-One, it will be
a puppet in the hands of the administering Powers.
94~ It cannot be denied that the elective principle is
generally recognized as the principle governing the
establishment ot any national assembly. It is regrettably
true that, as Mr. Castro, the representative of . El
Salvador has said, when the. question of a national
assembly was being discussed itl the Ad Hoc Political
Committee, many people were unaware that the national assembly would be appointed by the Commissioner. That makes it even more essential to make it
quite clear that the national assembly must be elected
and not appointed.
95. Since it is the United Nations General Assembly
which recommends that a national assembly should be
convened in Libya, it is obvious that the General Assembly must itself issue a basic directive stating whether
the natlOnal assemoly is to be an appomted or an
elected body. We are told to leave the decision to the
Commissioner. That is what the representative of the
United Kmgdom said. It is common knowledge, howevert that so far the Commissioner's activiues have
served simply to camouflage the policy of the administering Powers, which is to dismember Libya. fhe
Connr~ssioner's selection of the Commlttee of TwentyOne is the ·best proof of this. Can we really entrust
this basic directive to the Commissioner? No, the General Assembly' itsc ~f must defiue the nature of the
Libyan national assembly when it recommends that
such all assemMy should be convened within a given
time.
96. One of the most serious objections raised particularly by the United Nations Commissioner in
Libya was that the date of 1 January 1951 proposed
in the draft resolution would not allow sufficient time
to convene the assembly.
97. The representative of El Salvador therefore introduced an amendment designed precisely to meet the
objections of the CommiSSIoner. The Commissioner
said that it would take approximately four months to
prepare the elections. This of course is arguable but,
even if it is truer the amendment proposed by the representative of El Salvador and supported by the Egyptian representatives meets the Commissioner's wishes.
Thus, on this point, there can be no objections. All objections on grounds of practicability are thus disposed
of; the Commissioner will have the time he requires
to organize elections for a Libyan national assembly.
98. Apart from all this~ the Commissioner's statement at this mt~eting had a very strange ring. He ended
his speech with the assertion that if the national assembly were to be lan elected body, he could" positively
say that Libya'$ independence would'not beachieyed
by 1 January 1952. Such a statement by the Umted
Nations COlnmissioner in Libya is quite ul1~ceptable
since it is his duty to hring about· the creation of an
independent and sovereign Libya by 1 January 1952.
99. It is clear frem what I have said that there is
absolutely 110 reason for voting against the Egyptian
proposal, the purpose of which is to ensure that the

1

4a1l
----------_._-----'._-..:::::.-_-------------_ _----S07th Meetibg-17 November 1950

elections to th~ r.~ibyan national assembly af'\! conducted .
on a democratic basis and that the national assembly
is convened in accordance with the electiv~~ principle.
The delegation of the Soviet Union will therefore
support this amendment and vote in favour of it. We
hope that a. majority of the Assembly will follow this
example and support the amendment of the E'gyptian
delegation.'
•
100. Mr: PLAISANT (France)' (translated from
French): In view of this discussion on a series of
amendments and the dimensions our debate seems to
be assuming, I should like to make a general observa...
tionon the character of the discussion we are trying
to initiate today on t~e future status of Libya.
101. The French delegation certainly listened with
keen interest to the different views of the repJ;'esenta...
tives who spoke yesterday withouf, however, always
obtaining a completely clear picture of their intentions.
102. The statement made bvMr. Pelt also seemed
to us to deserve attention. While rig-htly leavitlg him
full personal responsibility for his statements, we must
pay tribute to the good will he has displayed in a
very delicate situation.
103. That is why the French delegation would now
like to elucidate a few points. First of all, we believe
that in accordance wjth the spirit of the draftresolu...
tion on Libya which. is now before us, we should leave
the Libyan people free to determine the form of their
future R'ovemment and of the institutions that will
provide its constitutional framework.
104. As re~rds the question of eJections-whIch
mig-ht have been submitted with a little more detachment-I should like to point out that the French
reoresentative on the United Nations Council for
Libya has never obiected to the principle· of the elec..
tion of representatives. Since, however, we always
praise here the aspirations to freedom of the 'People
concerned, we should also remember that it is the
heads of the political parties in Tripotitania who have
proposed the method that would seem to be criticized.
105. My dele~tion is extremely surprised. at the
various criticisms levelled in the. General Assembly
alminst the equal representation of the three parts of
Libya in the natiortal assembly. This eQuality of representation is no innovation in constitutional law; it is
always adopted in the case of the establishment of a
State. whose componen! parts enl0Y eq~al rights at
the time when they bmd themselves by agreement.
Th.e .Republic of the United States provides the most
strlkm~ example) regardless of the very great differ..
ences In populatIon between tpe States of New York
and Montana, for instance, each State has two representatives in the Senate of the United States. I could
give many more examples, but I must not be pedantic
or take up too much time, to show th&~ the Constitutiolls of m~ny S!atest\~cognize the prin~iple of ~qual
represerttatJon WIth all the advantages It may entail.
106. Lastly, the French delegation wishes to empha...
siz~ t:hat at yesterday's meeting there was a great deal
of mI~representation of the role of the administering
Powers. We shall not embark on a discussion on that
point, E!s we liave always been anxious to a'\7oid any
controve!sYl but. merely.state that France has always
deemed It Its duty to respect the wdl of all peoples.

.........

.

~

j

107. Ata moment when it would seem we are aboutj
to improvise some constitutional legislation,. I should j
like to state that the, opinions expressed by 'Various i
delegations naturally commit no one but themselves j ;
confirming the reservations it has already made, the
French delegation wishes to stress its belief that in
the last resort it is for the ~pulations concerned to
decide .themselves on the kind .of .regime they want.
That regime cannot be imposed on them from outsid~;
it can be based only on fr~dom.
108. Mr. SARPER (Turk~v): I beg leave to requesi
the ;Commissionerin Libya, Mr. Pelt, to give the General Assembly the benefit of his .opinion as to whether
it. would be· possible to hold normal elections within
the time limit proposed in the amendment of the dele...
gation of RI Salvador. Sueh information mightclarif~,
some of our doubts and would, inanv event, be helpful
to my delegation in reaching a decision.
(
109. The. PRESIDENT (translated fr,m French):
This sut!~estionis a most . reasonable one; indeed, the
,information furnished bv the United Nations Commis~
sioner mavhelp dele~tions.in decidin~ how to vote.
If Mr. Pelt is prepared to ~ve·the Assernbly·exnlananons on· that point~ I shall call upon him to do so.
.'
110. Mr. PELT (United Nations Commissioner in
Libya).: I hope tbis debate will not de~ne!ate .into
a ouarrel over a democratic or non...democrahc Llbya..
I do not believe for a moment '. that that is the issue.
r have not· hp~rd ~nvone in the General Assembly
opoose the desirahiJitv and the nece~sityof Libva becominlt a democratic State and, as I hooed I had made
it clear yesterday, I have always taken that view myself.
111. What is realty under dic:;cussion is how to attain
our ~o~l. takinO' ,into account the local conditions exist...
in{!' in Libva. What bas happen~rt ut> to now in Lihva,
whether one does or does not like it-and, as I indicated v~sterday, there are certain ~spectsin the s.ituation whkb I, llersonaUy, do not like-is the rp~111t of
a c:lrefutlv workE'd out compromise amon'! the Libvans
of the three territories. To unset this compromise wOt1ld
not only mean consicierable loss of time-and .in the
matter of the time limit to be ohserved I shall reDly
in a flOW' moments to the Question of thereoresentafive of Turkev-in connexion with the prof)Osedmeet...
in~ of the national assembly on 25 No'Vemh~l\ but also
it would als~ have the most serious political consequences, conseouences $0 ~ve that one must even
take into account the possibility ofa bre~k...down .0£
the Libyan unity which ha!jl. So far been achieved.
112. I should like to impress upon the reoresentative
of Egypt, who knows so well what ~onditions are in
Libva, that if he presses his amendment he risks ren"
dering the greatest possible disservice to Libya.
113. The representative of. Turkey has asked whether
elections could be held within the time limit now pro...
posed by the representative of El Salvador. My reply
must definitely be in thenegati'\7e; this is impossible.
The date of 1 March rot the convenin~ of the national
assembly would leave just under .three and a half
months. When I mentioned in my pre'Vious interven..
tion that it took three months .to organize eJections
in Cyrenaica, I Was. talking 'about a territory with a
population of 300,000 inhabitants. When 1 mentioned
four months for elections in Tripolitania, I based my...

General Assembly-Filth Seuioll.~Plenatr Meetinp
;

.

.

."

. ., . ,

.,

"',,

" . ""~', " ,',

, self conservatively on the fact that Tripotitania has
two 'and a half times more inhabitants than Cyrenaica,
and 1 added only one more month for the preparation'
of elections in Tripolitania.
114. The organization of elections in the Fezzan, although ~he popula!ion i~ much smaller, is going t~ be
a compbcated affatr .OWIng to the size of the territory
and the extremely difficult communications. Let us not
; forget that the territory of the Fezzan alone is larger
; than the territory of France.
11~. What. we CU"e discuss~ng here are not Tripolitanl~ electIons, Qr Cyrenalcan elections or .Fezzan
, elections, but general Libyan elections, elections for
, which no machinery has ever existed in the history of
Libya, a machinery which has to be created from top
to bottom.
11~. I ~o not thi.M I am justified in making a guess
w~ch mIght or mIght not have a chance of being cor.rect. If, however, the Assembly wants me to make an
, approximate estimate, 1 should say that at least four
, months are required for the preparation of genel'al
elections in Libya, not counting the time to be allotted
for an electoral campaign.
117.. If you change the date of 1 January 1~'51, you
must change the date of 1 April 1951, as the representative of El Salvador has already observed. But
then you tnus~ also change the d~te of 1 January 1952,
because the time schedule for Libyan independence is
, so tight that if you prolong the essential phases by
one month, two months, three months or four months,
you must postpone ,the date set for the independence
6f Libya by an equal number of months.
118~ The representative of Egypt has presented his
amendment as an innocent one as to its repercussions.
I regret to say that I cannot agree with him. What
I .suggested.yesterday would.achieve exactly the goal
we. are all seeking here-including the representative
of Egypt. It would achieve this. that a provisional constitution would. be worked out and could be so far
advanced by 1 April 1951-and perhaps even before
then-as to enable the national assembly to establish
a provisional government, as the draft resolution asks.
The provisioJ:lal government would then have the time
and ~he' duty to organize the. State. In the meantime
tp.e draftprovi~ional copstitution ha~ng been estab~
bsbed, we shouli:l have t~me to organize elections and
elect a parliament. That elected parliament would have
!he•duty to approy~ and ratif:¥ a~d even to amend, if
It liked, the proVislOnal constttutmn. The final result
would be exactly the same. but we should not lose a
, great deal of time in Organizing the State and we should
not endanger the establishment of Libyan independence
by the end of next year.
119. Finally, there is the point of the General Assembly·s general. h~haviour towards Libya.. The General
Assembly ,has granted the Libyan people the right to
determine their own fate" We want them to behave
democratically, but charity begins at home. If we want
them to behave democratically, Jet. the General Assembly behave demoeratically towards the Libyans.
120. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
•
call upon the representative of Egypt for the last time.
. After that we proceed to the vote.

i

I"

__ ' , " , '

','"

"

.J "

,

"

121. MOhamed SALAH..EL·DIN Bey (Egypt): I
wish to Qp()logi:r;e to the President and to the General
Assembly for starting this discussion, but we had to
do it. I call attention to the fact that it was not the
Egyptian delegation which really. opened the door for
an am~ndment. An amendment was put forward and
we felt that we· were then entitled to submit another
amendment which we considered to be a small one and
one on which all could agree.
122.1 am very much astonished at the discus$ion
which has taken place' concerning an amendment' on
which we thought all could agree. No one who has
spoken today has said that he opposes an election. We
all agree on an election. 1£ wean agree, then why should
we not have an election? Why- should we hear all these
speeches opposing an election? If there is any practical
difficulty, then let us consider it.
123. As you all know, the representative of El Salvador resolved this difficulty by changing the dates with
respect to the convening of the national assembly and
the establishment of a provisional government in Libya.
124. Mr. Pett said that the Egyptian delegation knows
very well about the conditions in Libya. That is right,
but it is because we know the conditions in Libya very
well that we have put forward our amendment for free
elections as the basis upon which the national assembly
of Libya must be constituted. It is my turn to ask Mr.
Pelt and the delegations of the United Kingdom and the
United States to give up their opposition. which 1 really
cannot undt;rstand, and to vote for our amendment. I
am confident that our democratic General Assembly will
not reject such a simpl~ and democratic amendment.
125. Mr. AMMOUN (Lebanon) (translated from
French) : .At the close of this discussion, I should like
to express my wholehearted support for the amendment
submitted by the Egyptian delegation and I hope the
representative of Egypt will allow' me to tell him that
there is no'need for him to apologize for his amendment.
It should not be considered simply as an Egyptian
amendment, but rather as the expression of the views
of all those wh? are anxi?us that democratic principles
should be put mto practice. We are all supporters of
these principles and we all want them to be applied in
their entirety in Libya, particularly at a time when that
country is at a 1:urning-point in its history.
126. What are, after all, the objections made to this
amendment? There is, first of all, the question of the
time limit. The United Nations Commissioner told us
a few moments ago that it would be impossible for Libya
to reach independence during the coming year. This
9ues~ion of the time limit is not really as important as
It mIght appear to be; what matters is the principle
itself. Mr. Pelt took the floor ai~ain to speak of an extension of, the time limits. I gathered that the time
limits proposed in the second amendment submitted by
the delegation of El Salvador were not long enough. If
that is so, instead of an extension of two months, we
coul~ agree to a four months' postponement of the
elecbons or of the convening of the national assembly.
127. .W~t seems to have attracted most attention,
however, IS the. compromise achieved in the Ad Hoe
Political Committee. This comp-romise ba!\ as its sote
aim. the application of the principles we are defending.
It should not be cOflfined to the Ad Hoc Political Corn"

307. Meeliug-17 NoveJpbeJ.o .1950

mlttee but should be ac:cepted ill the ASseIl1bly .itself.

I appeal to those who were parties to it to abide by it
now and supplement it with the alterationa that have
just beenpropQsed, for these alterations are fully in
accord with the, spirit which originally inspired the
~
compromise.
128. The obJection which I fear ,may be raised· is that
something has already been done in Libya, that an organ
already exists there and has been convened, that we are
thus faced with a' fait accompli and that it would be
difficult to go back on what has already been done. In
my opinion, and in the opinion of my delegation, such
a consideration cannot be allowed to weigh with us.
That is an issue which is'rather of a personal nature
and it cannot be taken into account.
129. That is why I strongly urge that what has been
done should be undone; that the cQnvening of this organ
-which has~been called a national assembly-should be
revoked. Basically, I think I am in agreement with Mr.
Pelt himself. He admitted at yesferday's meeting and
this morning that the constitution. of Libya could be
prepared in its final form and adopted only by an assem·
bly which would be truly representative of' the inhabi..
tants of the country, having been convened as a result
of free elections based on proportional representation.
Not only did he admit that, but he even added that he
had expressed the same view iTa the Council for Libya
when the question had been discussed and a decision
taken, and that he had not agreed 'with that decision.
130. In these circumstances, what would be the result
of the adoption of the Egyptian amendment? Simply
this, that instead of entrusting the preparatory work of
drafting the Libyan constitution to an organ convened
prior to the constituent assembly, that assembly woulcl
be convened straightaway after the holding of free elec..
tions based on proportional representation, and it would
be that assembly which carried out the whole task of
preparing the draft constitution. That would be the
result of the Egyptian proposal. My delegation, there..
fore, cannot but support it and hopes that it will receive
general approval. Our hope is all the more firm since
the. proposal does not actually entail the difficulties
which some have been pleased to raise"
131. Mr. AL..JAMALI (Iraq): My delegation feels
very grateful to the delegations of Egypt and El Salva..
dor for the amendments which they have introduced.
I am very happy that the General Assembly is to face
the issues and the facts as they really are. We in the
United Nations cannot afford to compromise on certain
fundamental principles. We have to abide by the Char..
ter. We cannot compromise on principles such as that
of self-determinc1tion; we cannot compro~ise on prin..
ciples of democracy or an the principle of elections. No
United Nations action or undertaking should ever be
permitted, to run counter to the fundamental principles
of the Charter which establish certain laws and certain
human rights which should guide us in all our actions.

132. In the Ad Hoc Political Committee my delegation was very frank in pointing out to the United
Nations Commissioner that it did not consider the estab..
lishtt ent of the Committee of Twenty-One to have been
a wis ~ measure. We saw no reason for the appointment
of a <..ommittee merely for reasons of expedience and,
.probably, as the result of the influence exerted by cer...

~1

s~l'Vlised
~t'~
1
United Natio,ns Commissioner and hi,s Cou,nell took
j

ta!n illtefested quartet"s. We I,\l'e

'a,

course which led to theestablishme~d: of a. na,tionall
assembly which is in fact not, a natiof1lal assembly and
which is not duly representative as it is supposed to
be.
133. The only course open to us now is to depend
upon the wisdom and good judgment of the Commis..
sioner himself to find a way out, to undo the mistakes
which have been made so far, and to see to ittbat
henceforth the foundation is sound and that democracy
is the guiding spirit of all actions of the United Nations,
its agencies and representatives.
134. The PRESIDENT (tl"anslatid fr.om' Fr~nch):
We shall now proceed to the vote. We. shall vote first
on the Egyptian amendment, and then, if it is adopted,
on the amendment submitted by the delegation of El
Salvador.
135. 'The Egyptian amendment proposes the insertion
of the' words "elected and" in sub-paragraph. (a) of
paragraph 3, so that the text would read: ··T~'l.at a national assenlbly duly elected and representative of the
inhabitants of Libya shall be convened, as early as possible, and in any case before 1 Januaty 1951u •

136. I now put this Egyption amendtnent to the vote.
A roll·call has been requested.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Greece, having been drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.
In favour: India, Indonesia, Iraq, Lebanon, Mexico,
Pakistan, Panama, Philippines, Poland, Saudi Arabia,
Syria, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Repub,lic, Unio,nof
Soviet Socialist Republics, Uruguay, Yetnen, Yugo-slavia, Afghanistan, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet SociaIist Republic, China, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Egypt, El
Salvadot'.
'
'
Against: Greece, Iceland, Luxembourg, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Sweden, Un..
ion of South Africa, 'UnitedKingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Venezuela, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Colombia,
Denmark, Ecuador.
Abstaini11,g: Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iran,
Israel, Liberia, Nicaragua, Thailand, Turke)', Argen...
tina, Boliviat Chile, Costa Rica, Ethiopia, France.
The result of the 'Vote was 24 in favour, 20 against,
and 15 abstentions.
The amendment was not adopted, having failed to
obtan the required two-thirds majority.
137. The PRESIDENT (translated from Fr~nch):
I do not think it is necessary now to put the amendment of El Salvador to the vote.

I1
~

II

138. I put to the vote the draft resolution as a whole,
with the amendment submitted by the Union of South
Africa which has already been adopted.
The draft resolution as a whole, as amended, was
adopted by 50 'Votes to none, with 6 abstentions.
139. Mr. SARPER (Turkey): My delegation ab.
stained in the . vote on the amendment submitted by the
delegation of Egypt. We did this not because' we are

I

ail

,.

H.

'QP~ to elections in principle, but because the ex'"

planations of the Commissioner could not disPel our
doubts regarding the pra.cticability of holding such
elections ;moveover-and this is more important sti11we felt that the complexity of the problem might
; further delay. the independence of Libya. We wanted to
avoid any compUcation which might 1nvolve a delay in
, the establishment of an independent and unified Libyan

State.

.

'140. The PRESIDENT (tr(1.nslated from French):
I now put to the vote the draft resolution subm~ed by
. the USSR delegation (Ajl';!l].
141. The delegation of Iraq has requested that we
should vote on this draft resolution in parts. I therefore
put to the vote paragraph 1, which reads: .
((The General Assembly recommends
u 1. That the parts of Libya-·Cyrenaica, Tripoli..
tania and the :Fezzan......be united in a single State and
that legislative and, ~ecutive organs for Libya be
established."
'Theresult of the vote was 23 in favour, 21 against,
and 10 abstentions.
ParaUfaph 1 was not adopted, having failed to obtain
t'he required two-thirds m.ajority.
142. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall now vote on paragraph 2 of the USSR draft
resolution.

143•. Mr. AL..JAMALI (Iraq): I request that the

second paragraph should be divided and voted on
in two parts.
144. The first part to be voted on would read: ffThat
all foreign troops and military personnel be withdrawn
from the territory of Libya within three months".
145. The second part to be voted on would read: nand
military bases dismantled".
.
146. Those are two different concepts, the one of
evacuation and th(l other of dismantling military bases.
Some of us might like to support the first concept, but
might feel that the\ dismantling of the bases should be
left to the Libyan lpeople. They might not wish to dismantle the bases.
147. The PRES1DENT (translated, from French) = .
I put to the vote tine first. part of paragraph 2, which
reads: "That all f01~eign troops and military personnel
be withdra:\'\-"n from the territory of Libya. witmn three
months".
The first part of paragrap~ 2 ~as rejected. by 36 'Votes
to 1'1) with 5 abstentions.
.
148. The PRESIDENT (translated, from French):
I now put to. the vote the second part of paragraph 2,
which reads: "and military bases dismantled".
The second. part of paragraph 2 was· rejected by 36
votes to 7, with 11 abstentions. .
' .
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

,

Printed in. V.S.A.

t., ,~

.

1

j

d

t

\

d .........

A-40464-December 1950-3,400
