A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/86
11 January 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 153
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/49/711)]
49/86.

Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions relating to the complete and
effective prohibition of bacteriological (biological) and toxin weapons and to
their destruction,
Recalling also, in particular, its resolution 46/35 A, adopted without a
vote on 6 December 1991, in which it welcomed, inter alia, the establishment,
proceeding from the recommendations of the Third Review Conference of the
Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production
and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their
Destruction, 1/ of an ad hoc group of governmental experts open to all
States parties to identify and examine potential verification measures from a
scientific and technical standpoint,
Recalling further its resolution 48/65, adopted without a vote on 16
December 1993, in which it commended the final report of the Ad Hoc Group of
Governmental Experts to Identify and Examine Potential Verification Measures

1/

See BWC/CONF.III/23.

95-76105
/...

A/RES/49/86
Page 2

from a Scientific and Technical Standpoint, 2/ agreed to by consensus at its
last meeting at Geneva on 24 September 1993,
Noting with satisfaction that there are more than one hundred and thirty
States parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons
and on Their Destruction, 3/ including all the permanent members of the
Security Council,
Bearing in mind its call upon all States parties to the Convention to
participate in the implementation of the recommendations of the Third Review
Conference, including the exchange of information and data agreed to in the
Final Declaration of the Third Review Conference, 4/ and to provide such
information and data in conformity with standardized procedure to the
Secretary-General on an annual basis and no later than 15 April,
Recalling the provisions of the Convention related to scientific and
technological cooperation 5/ and the related provisions of the Final
Document of the Third Review Conference, the final report of the Ad Hoc Group
of Governmental Experts and the final report of the Special Conference of the
States Parties to the Convention, held from 19 to 30 September 1994, 6/
1.
Notes that a majority of States parties to the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction requested the
depositary Powers to convene a special conference in order to consider the
final report of the Ad Hoc Group of Governmental Experts to Identify and
Examine Potential Verification Measures from a Scientific and Technical
Standpoint; 2/
2.
Welcomes the final report of the Special Conference, adopted by
consensus on 30 September 1994, in which the States parties agreed to
establish an ad hoc group, open to all States parties, whose objective shall
be to consider appropriate measures, including possible verification measures,
and draft proposals to strengthen the Convention, to be included, as
appropriate, in a legally binding instrument to be submitted for the
consideration of the States parties;
3.
Welcomes the information and data provided to date and reiterates
its call upon all States parties to the Convention to participate in the
exchange of information and data agreed to in the Final Declaration of the
Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological)
and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction;

2/

BWC/CONF.III/VEREX/9 and Corr.1.

3/

Resolution 2826 (XXVI), annex.

4/

BWC/CONF.III/23, part II.

5/

See resolution 2826 (XXVI), annex, article X.

6/

BWC/SPCONF/1.
/...

A/RES/49/86
Page 3

4.
Requests the Secretary-General to render the necessary assistance
to the depositary Powers of the Convention and to provide such services as may
be required for the implementation of the decisions and recommendations of the
Third Review Conference, as well as the decisions contained in the Final
Report of the Special Conference, including all necessary assistance to the Ad
Hoc Group of Governmental Experts;
5.
Calls upon all signatory States that have not yet ratified the
Convention to do so without delay, and also calls upon those States that have
not signed the Convention to become parties thereto at an early date, thus
contributing to the achievement of universal adherence to the Convention;
6.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fiftieth
session the item entitled "Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons
and on Their Destruction".
90th plenary meeting
15 December 1994
