doing or causing to be done or permitting any acts
which might aggravate the situation ;
2. Further requests each of those Governments to
inform the Council immediately of any material change
in the situation which occurs or appears to either of
them to be about to occur while the matter is under
consideration by the Council, and consult with the
Council thereon.

quer ou de permettre aucun acte susceptible d'aggraver
la situation ;
2. Demande, en outre, a chacun desdits Gouvernements que, tant que l'affaire est pendante devant le
Conseil, il informe celui-ci de tout changement materiel que la situation subirait ou serait, a son avis, sur
le point de subir, et qu'il consulte le Conseil a ce
sujet.

Adopted at the 229th meeting by 9 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Adoptee a la 229' si>ance
par 9 voix contre zero, avec
2 abstentions (Republique
socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques).

Decision

Decision

At its 229th meeting, on 17 January 1948, the
Council decided that the President should invite the
representatives of India and Pakistan to take part in
direct talks under his guidance in an effort to find
some common ground on which the structure of a
settlement might be built.

A sa 229• seance, le 17 janvier 1948, le Conseil
a decide que le President devait inviter Jes representants de l'Inde et du Pakistan a se rencontrer sous ses
auspices pour essayer de trouver un terrain d'entente
a partir duquel puisse etre elabore un reglement.

39 (1948). Resolution of 20 January 1948

39 (1948). Resolution du 20 janvier 1948

[S/654]
The Security Council,
Considering that it may investigate any dispute or
any situation which might, by its continuance, endanger
the maintenance of international peace and security
and that, in the existing state of affairs between India
and Pakistan, such an investigation is a matter of
urgency,
Adopts the following resolution :
A. A Commission of the Security Council is hereby
established, composed of representatives of three Members of the United Nations, one to be selected by
India, one to be selected by Pakistan, and the third
to be designated by the two so selected. 3 Each
representative on the Commission shall be entitled to
select his alternates and assistants.
B. The Commission shall proceed to the spot as
quickly as possible. It shall act under the authority
of the Security Council and in accordance with the
directions it may receive from it. It shall keep the
Security Council currently informed of its activities
and of the development of the situation. It shall report
to the Security Council regularly, submitting its conclusions and proposals.
C. The Commission is invested with a dual function: (1) to investigate the facts pursuant to Article 34

[S/654]
Le Conseil de securite,
Considerant qu'il peut enqueter sur tout differend
ou toute situation qui pourrait, par sa prolongation,
menacer le maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales, et que, dans l'etat actuel des choses entre
l'Inde et le Pakistan, une telle enquete s'impose
d'urgence,
Adopte la resolution suivante:
A. 11 est constitue une Commission du Conseil de
securite, composee de representants de trois Membres
de !'Organisation des Nations Unies, dont l'un sera
choisi par l'Inde, l'autre par le Pakistan et le troisieme
par les deux premiers3 • Chaque membre de la
Commission sera habilite a choisir ses suppleants et
assistants.
B. La Commission se rendra sur les lieux le plus
tot possible. Elle agira sous l'autorite du Conseil de
securite et conformement aux instructions qu'elle en
recevra. Elle tiendra le Conseil au courant de son
activite et de !'evolution de la situation. Elle lui fera
regulierement rapport, lui soumettant ses conclusions
et propositions.
C. La Commission est investie d'une double
fonction : 1) proceder a une enquete sur les faits en

8 By its resolution 47 (1948), the Council decided to
increase the membership of the Commission to five. The
composition of the Commission is given below, following
that resolution.

3

Par sa resolution 47 (1948), le Conseil a decide de porter

a cinq le nombre des membres de la Commission. La composition de celle-ci figure ci-apres, a la suite de ladite
resolution.

2

of the Charter of the United Nations ; (2) to exercise,
without interrupting the work of the Security Council,
any mediatory influence likely to smooth away difficulties ; to carry out the directions given to it by the
Security Council ; and to report how far the advice
and directions, if any, of the Security Council have
been carried out.

vue de !'application de !'Article 34 de la Charte des
Nations Unies ; 2) exercer, sans que !'action du
Conseil de securite en soit interrompue, toute influence
mediatrice susceptible d'aplanir les difficultes, executer
les instructions qui lui sont donnees par le Conseil de
securite, faire rapport sur la mesure dans laquellc les
avis et instructions qu'aurait donnes le Conseil de
securite ont ete executes.
D. La Commission remplira les fonctions decrites
au paragraphe C : 1) en ce qui concerne la situation
dans l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire, exposee dans la
lcttre du l ., janvier 1948, adressee au President du
Conseil de securite par le representant de l'Inde 4 , et
dans la lettre du 15 janvier 1948, adressee au Secretaire general par le Ministre des affaires etrangeres du
Pakistan 5 ; et 2) en ce qui concerne les autres situations
exposees dans la lettre du 15 janvier 1948, adressee au
Secretaire general par le Ministre des affaires etrangeres
du Pakistan, quand le Conseil de securite lui donnera
pour instructions de le faire.
E. La Commission se prononcera a la majorite des
voix. Elle fixera sa procedure. Elle pourra diviser
parmi ses membres, titulaires ou suppleants, leurs
assistants ou son personnel, les taches auxquelles elle
aura a pourvoir pour realiser sa mission et parvenir a
ses conclusions.
F. La Commission, ses membres, titulaires ou suppleants, leurs assistants et son personnel pourront se
rendre, soit ensemble, soit separement, la OU les
besoins de leur mission les conduiront, notamment
dans Jes territoires, qui sont le theatre des evenements
dont le Conseil de securite se trouve saisi.
G. Le Secretaire general foumira a la Commission
le personnel et !'assistance qu'elle estimera necessaires.

D. The Commission shall perform the functions
described in clause C : ( 1) in regard to the situation
in the J ammu and Kashmir State set out in the letter
'of the representative of India addressed to the President of the Security Council, dated 1 January 1948, 4
and in the letter from the Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Pakistan addressed to the Secretary-General, dated
15 January 1948 ; 5 and (2) in regard to other situations set out in the letter from the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Pakistan addressed to the Secretary-General,
dated 15 January 1948, when the Security Council so
directs.
E. The Commission shall take its decision by
majority vote. It shall determine its own procedure.
It may allocate among its members, alternate members,
their assistants, and its personnel such duties as may
have to be fulfilled for the realization of its mission
and the reaching of its conclusions.
F. The Commission, its members, alternate members, their assistants, and its personnel shall be entitled
to journey, separately or together, wherever the
necessities of their tasks may require, and, in particular, within those territories which are the theatre
of the events of which the Security Council is seized.
G. The Secretary-General shall furnish the Commission with such personnel and assistance as it may
consider necessary.

Adoptee a la 230- seance
par 9 voix contre zero, avec
2 abstentions (Republique
socialiste sovietique d' Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques).

Adopted at the 230th meeting by 9 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

47 (1948). Resolution of 21 April 1948

47 (1948). Resolution du 21 avril 1948

[S/726]
The Security Council,
Having considered the complaint of the Government
of India concerning the dispute over the State of
J ammu and Kashmir,
Having heard the representative of India in support
of that complaint and the reply and counter-complaints
of the representative of Pakistan,

[S/726]
Le Conseil de securite,
Ayant examine la plainte du Gouvernement de
l'Inde relative au differend concernant l'Etat de
Jammu et Cachemire,
Ayant entendu Jes declarations faites par le representant de l'Inde a l'appui de cette plainte ainsi que
la reponse et les plaintes reconventionnelles du representant du Pakistan,

• Official Records of the Security Council, Third Year,
Supplement for November 1948, document S/1100, annex 28.

4 Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, troisii!me
annee, Supplement de novembre 1948, document S/1100,
annexe 28.
~ Ibid-, annexe 6.

0

Ibid., annex 6.

3
