S/2018/408

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 May 2018
Original: English

Letter dated 1 May 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the fifty-fifth monthly report of the
Director-General of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), submitted pursuant to paragraph 12 of Security Council resolution 2118
(2013) (see annex). The present letter covers the period from 24 March to 23 April 2018.
Arrangements are continuing for assisting the Syrian Arab Republic in the
destruction of the remaining two chemical weapons production facilities, of the
27 declared in total. I take note that these arrangements are expected to be finalized
in the coming weeks, with destruction operations taking a further two to three months,
assuming security conditions permit.
With regard to the declaration of the Syrian Arab Republic, I note that while
some information received by OPCW from the Syrian Arab Republic has partially
addressed the questions raised, other questions regrettably remain unanswered. The
ongoing inability to resolve these outstanding issues remains a source of very deep
concern. I continue to urge the Syrian Arab Republic to extend its full cooperation to
OPCW in this regard.
Following the profoundly alarming allegations of the use of chemical weapons
in Douma (Eastern Ghouta), an OPCW fact-finding mission team deployed to the
Syrian Arab Republic to visit the relevant sites. As the Director-General states in his
note (see annex), the team entered Douma on 21 April 2018 and visited one of the
sites. During this visit, it collected samples and then returned to Damascus. I note that
the mission is continuing to study all available information relating to this and other
allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic. In this regard,
I express my confidence in the integrity and expertise of the OPCW fact -finding
mission and reaffirm my support for the OPCW.
The seriousness of these most recent allegations has further underlined the need
for a dedicated, impartial, objective and independent mechanism for attributing
responsibility with regard to the use of chemical weapons. I call upon the Security
Council to continue to work towards this end.
Impunity and the absence of international consensus on accountability are
escalating the conflict. As I have stated previously, any confirmed use of chemical
weapons by any party to the conflict is abhorrent, reprehensible and a clear violation
of international law. The identification of those responsible is a necessary step
towards holding them to account. In failing to discharge our collective responsibility
in this regard, we fail the victims of chemical weapons attacks. Impunity cannot
prevail.
(Signed) António Guterres

18-06949 (E)

020518

*1806949*

S/2018/408

Annex to the letter dated 1 May 2018 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish]
I have the honour to transmit to you my report entitled “Progress in the
Elimination of the Syrian Chemical Weapons Programme”, prepared in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the OPCW Executive Council Decision EC-M-33/DEC.1, and
the United Nations Security Council resolution 2118 (2013), both dated 27 September
2013, for transmission to the Security Council. My report covers the period from
24 March 2018 to 23 April 2018 and also covers the reporting requirements of the
Executive Council decision EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November 2013.
(Signed) Ahmet Üzümcü

2/5

18-06949

S/2018/408

Enclosure
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish]

Note by the Director-General
Progress in the elimination of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme
Background
1.
In accordance with subparagraph 2(f) of the decision by the Executive Council
(hereinafter “the Council”) at its Thirty-Third Meeting (EC-M-33/DEC.1, dated
27 September 2013), the Technical Secretariat (hereinafter “the Secretariat”) is to
report to the Council on a monthly basis regarding the implementation of that
decision. In accordance with paragraph 12 of United Nations Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013), the report by the Secretariat is also to be submitted to the
Security Council through the Secretary-General.
2.
The Council, at its Thirty-Fourth Meeting, adopted a decision entitled “Detailed
Requirements for the Destruction of Syrian Chemical Weapons and Syrian Chemical
Weapons Production Facilities” (EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November 2013). In
paragraph 22 of that decision, the Council decided that the Secretariat should report
on its implementation “in conjunction with its reporting required by subparagraph 2(f)
of Council decision EC-M-33/DEC.1”.
3.
The Council, at its Forty-Eighth Meeting, adopted a decision entitled “Reports
of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria” (EC-M-48/DEC.1, dated 4 February
2015) noting the Director-General’s intent to include reports of the OPCW Fact
Finding Mission (FFM) in Syria, along with information on the Council ’s discussion
thereof, as part of the monthly reporting pursuant to United Nations Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013). Similarly, the Council, at its Eighty-First Session, adopted a
decision entitled “Report by the Director-General Regarding the Declaration and
Related Submissions by the Syrian Arab Republic” (EC-81/DEC.4, dated 23 March
2016), noting the Director General’s intent to provide information on the
implementation of that decision.
4.
The Council, at its Eighty-Third Session, adopted a decision entitled “OPCWUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism Reports on Chemical Weapons U se in
the Syrian Arab Republic” (EC-83/DEC.5, dated 11 November 2016). In
subparagraph 12(a) of that decision, the Council decided that the Director-General
shall “regularly inform the Council on the implementation of this decision and
incorporate information regarding the implementation of this decision into his
monthly reporting to the United Nations Security Council, through the United Nations
Secretary-General, regarding EC-M-33/DEC.1”.
5.
This, the fifty-fifth monthly report, is therefore submitted in accordance with
the aforementioned Council decisions and includes information relevant to the period
from 24 March 2018 to 23 April 2018.
Progress achieved by the Syrian Arab Republic in meeting the requirements
of Executive Council decisions EC-M-33/DEC.1 and EC-M-34/DEC.1
6.

Progress by the Syrian Arab Republic is as follows:

(a) The Secretariat has verified the destruction of 25 of the 27 chemical
weapons production facilities (CWPFs) declared by the Syrian Arab Republic. As
previously reported, in November 2017 the Secretariat conducted an initial inspection
18-06949

3/5

S/2018/408

of the last two stationary above-ground facilities in accordance with paragraph 44 of
Part V of the Verification Annex to the Chemical Weapons Convention (hereinafter
“the Convention”). Thanks to the voluntary contributions provided by States Parties
to the Syria Trust Fund for the Destruction of Chemical Weapons, including
contributions provided in response to the Secretariat’s Note S/1541/2017 (dated
9 October 2017), the Secretariat, together with the United Nations Office for Project
Services (UNOPS), has been making all the required arrangements to assist the Syrian
Arab Republic in the destruction of the facilities located at these two sites. The
remaining required arrangements are expected to be finalised in the coming weeks.
Once the arrangements are in place, destruction operations are expected to take two
to three months, subject to security conditions.
(b) On 17 April 2018, the Syrian Arab Republic submitted to the Council its
fifty third monthly report (EC-88/P/NAT.2, dated 18 April 2018) regarding activities
on its territory related to the destruction of its CWPFs, as required by paragraph 19
of EC M 34/DEC.1.
Progress in the elimination of Syrian chemical weapons by States Parties
hosting destruction activities
7.
As stated in previous reports, all of the che micals declared by the Syrian Arab
Republic that were removed from its territory in 2014 have now been destroyed.
Activities carried out by the Secretariat with respect to Executive Council
decisions EC-81/DEC.4 and EC-83/DEC.5
8.
During the reporting period, the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) continued
its efforts to clarify all outstanding issues regarding the initial declaration of the
Syrian Arab Republic in accordance with paragraph 3 of Council decision
EC-81/DEC.4 and paragraph 6 of Council decision EC-83/DEC.5. On 29 January
2018, the Director General addressed a letter to the Deputy Foreign Minister of the
Syrian Arab Republic, Dr Faisal Mekdad, in which he asked for further clarifications
regarding activities conducted at the Scientific Studies and Research Centre (SSRC),
and attached to his letter a non-exhaustive list of questions.
9.
Through a note verbale dated 19 February 2018, the Syrian Arab Republic
provided answers to the SSRC-related questions raised in the Director-General’s
letter of 29 January 2018. The DAT assessed these answers and determined that while
they partially addressed some of the questions, other questions remained unanswered.
The DAT’s assessment of the responses provided by the Syrian Arab Republic was
reported in a Note by the Director General entitled, “Report on the Work of the
Declaration Assessment Team” (EC 87/HP/DG.1, dated 2 March 2018).
10. In a letter to Deputy Minister Mekdad dated 10 April 2018, the Director-General
referred to this report and reiterated that unanswered questions remain and require a
response. An updated non-exhaustive list of questions, including follow-up questions
arising from the answers provided in the 19 February 2018 note verbale, was attached
to the Director-General’s letter.
11. The Director-General also repeated his request to the Syrian authorities to
provide all necessary information that would assist in clarifying the remaining issues
associated with the declarations and further submissions of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Additionally, the Director-General restated that the Secretariat will continue to assist
the Syrian Arab Republic in resolving these issues in a manner consistent with the
Convention and relevant Council decisions.

4/5

18-06949

S/2018/408

Other activities carried out by the Secretariat with respect to the Syrian
Arab Republic
12. UNOPS continues to provide support to the OPCW mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic in accordance with the Tripartite Agreement.
13. As at the cut-off date of this report, one OPCW staff member was deployed as
part of the OPCW mission in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Supplementary resources
14. As previously reported, the Trust Fund for Syria Missions was established in
November 2015 to support the OPCW FFM and other remaining activities, such as
those of the DAT. As at the cut-off date of this report, total contributions to this fund
stood at EUR 17.1 million. Contribution agreements had been concluded with
Canada, Chile, Finland, France, Germany, Monaco, New Zealand, the Republic of
Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, the United States of America, and the European Union.
Activities carried out with respect to the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria
15. Guided by Council decisions EC-M-48/DEC.1 and EC-M-50/DEC.1 (dated
23 November 2015), as well as by United Nations Security Council resolution 2209
(2015), the FFM continued to study all available information relating to the
allegations of use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic.
16. Regarding allegations of the use of chemical weapons in Douma on 7 April, the
FFM team deployed to the Syrian Arab Republic in mid -April to visit the relevant
sites. Security for these sites is under the control of the Military Police of the Russian
Federation. To facilitate the FFM’s deployment to Douma, the United Nations
Department of Safety and Security (UNDSS) made arrangements for the Sy rian Arab
Republic to escort the FFM team to a rendezvous point, after which the security would
be provided by the Military Police of the Russian Federation.
17. To further assure the safety of the FFM team in Douma, on 17 April UNDSS
conducted a reconnaissance mission to two sites to assess their safety for the FFM
deployment. On arrival at Site 1, a large crowd gathered and the reconnaissance team
withdrew on the advice of UNDSS. At Site 2, the UNDSS team came under small
arms fire and an explosive was detonated, after which the reconnaissance team left
Douma to return to Damascus. FFM team members did not participate in this mission,
and their deployment to Douma was subsequently postponed pending improvement
of the security situation.
18. On 20 April, the UNDSS team conducted another reconnaissance mission to
Douma. No incidents occurred and UNDSS determined that conditions were
sufficiently secure for the FFM team to deploy. The FFM team entered Douma on
21 April, visited one of the sites, collected samples, and returned safely to Damascus
the same day.
Conclusion
19. The main focus of the future activities of the OPCW mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic will be on the activities of the FFM and on the implementation of Council
decisions EC-83/DEC.5 and EC-81/DEC.4, including declaration-related issues, as
well as on the verification of the destruction of the two stationary above-ground
facilities, and annual inspections of the underground structures already verified as
destroyed.

18-06949

5/5
