TWENTY-SIXTN

SECILW’Y6?!juri/, ,puq

YEAR

/y+y-+l@~.

th
MEETING: 19 OCTOBER I97 1

NEW

RETURN

WITHOUT

oEL.AY

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda(S/Agenda/l 597) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,

Page
I

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . , . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia:
id Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the President of the Security
Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of),
Dahomey, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea,
Kenya, Liberia, the Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo,
Tunisia. Uganda. the United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper
Volta and
-Zambia (S/i 0328);
(b) Report of the AdHoc Sub-Committee on Namibia (S/10330 and Corr.l) . , .

1

S/PV.1597

FIFTEENHUNDREDANDNINETY-SEVENTHMEETING
Heldin New York on Tuesday, 19 October 1971,at 3.30p.m.
President: Mr. Guillermo SEVILLA SACASA (Nicaragua).

and if there is no objection, I shall invite those representatives participating in our debate on this item to take the
places reserved for them in the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

2. 1 invite the representatives of Sudan, Ethiopia, South
Africa, Liberia, Guyana, Chad, Nigeria, Mauritius, Saudi
Arabia, Uganda and India to take the places reserved for
them in the Council chamber, it being understood that they
will be invited to take a seat at the Council table when they
wish to speak. I also invite the President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia to take a place at the Council
table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 597)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi,
Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, the
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, Kenya, Liberia, the Libyan Arab Republic,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and
Zambia (S/10326);
161Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia
(S/10330 and Corr, I).

At the invitation of the president, Mr. E. 0. Ogbu,
president of the United Nations Gwncil for Namibia, took
a place at the Secun’ty Council table, and Mr. M. Fakhreddine (Sudan), Mr, Y. Tseghe (Ethiopiaj, Mr. C. F. G.
von Hirschberg (South Africa), Mr. J, R. Grimes (Liberia),
Mr. P. Moussa (Chad), Mr, R. Ramphul (Mauritius), Mr. J.
Baroody, (Saudi Arabia), Mr. G. S. K. ibingira (Uganda)
and Mr. S. Sen (India), took the places reserved for them in
the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spantsn): I wish
to draw the attention of the members of the Council to the
text of the revised draft resolution submitted by the
delegations of Burundi, Sierra Leone, Somalia and the
Syrian Arab Republic, contained in document S/10372/
Rev.1.

Adoption of the agenda

4. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): At the meeting of thiscouncil
held on Friday, 15 October 1395th meetin&‘, my delegation had the privilege of presenting the text of a draft
resolution, which was reproduced as a Security Council
document under the symbol S/10372. The draft resolution
waspresented on behalf not only of my delegation but also
of the delegations of Burundi, Sierra Leone and Syria.

The agenda U.USadopted.

The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 September 197 1 addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, the
Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic ‘of), Dahomey, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya,
Liberia, the Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, l’vlorocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the
People’s Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo,
Tunisia, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, the
Upper Volta and Zambia (S/10326);
(b) Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia
(S/10330 and Corr.1)

5. Following the presentation of that draft resolution, we
heard a number of constructive suggestions made by the
representative of Argentina, and at the end of the meeting
my delegation, along with the delegations. of Sierra Leone,
Syria and Burundi, indicated that those suggestions would
be given very careful consideration and that it was hoped
the majority of them would be incorporated in the draft
resolution. I am glad to inform the Council that, as a result
of consultations, the majority of those suggestions have
now found expression in the first, sixth and tenth preambular paragraphs and in operative paragraphs 5 and 14 of
the revised version of the draft resolution contained in
document S/10372/Rev.l.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with previous decisions taken by the Council,
1

6. One suggestion made by the representative of Argentina
was not taken up by the sponsors-not
because we
disagreed in principle with the substance of the proposal
but because we found that its incorporation in this draft
resolution would be out of tenor with it. It may be recalled
that during the period that led up to the submission of the
report by the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia to the
Council /S/i0330 and Corr.lJ .a proposal had been made
by the Afro-Asian members of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee
to the effect that South Africa should be invited to enter
into discussions with the Secretary-General so as to enable
the United Nations to take over responsibility for the
Territory as soon as possible. Following that proposal, there
were counter-proposals to the effect that perhaps the best
approach would be to ask the South African Government
to co-operate and to make contact with the United Nations
so that the people of the Territory could be given their
right to self-determination and independence, Ofcourse, we
members of the Afro-Asian group have our own concept of
what self-determination should mean and also of the kind
of arrangements necessary to ensure that self.determination
is properly and adequately exercised, The proposal made by
the Afro-Asian members was maintained by the delegations
of Italy and the United States, and found expression in
paragraph 20 of the Ad IYCJCSub-Committee’s report. The
Afro-Asian members in fact did make certain amendments
to that proposal, but they were unacceptable. During the
current debate (1593rd meeting-j, the reprcsentativc of
France took up this question perhaps more vigorously and
came out with a number of interesting proposals which
merited careful consideration. Naturally, my delegation was
waiting to see how those proposals would eventually find
form, particularly in view of the statements which were
made in the Council by the representative of South Africa.
7. The Afro-Asian members therefore believe that the
provisions of the draft resolution which they have sub.
mitted to the Council should be maintained in their present
form. The draft resolution is based strictly on the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice’ and upon
other resolutions which hle had been adopted by the
Security Council and by the General Assembly.

vidual delegations have adopted on it we singled out
paragraph 133, since it has particular and important
relevance and quite neatly sumsup the opinion which the
Council invited when it referred the question to the
International Court of Justicein July of last year.
IO. With these few introductory remarks,it is the hope of
the sponsors that members will have no difficulty in
accepting the text of the reviseddraft resolutionand that it
will be possiblefor the Council to proceed to a vote assoon
;1spossible.
11. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish]: I
thank the representative of Somalia for his statement.We
have taken careful note of what he said, particularly when
he mentioned the work done, in a spirit of utmost goodwill,
in order to reconcile viewson a draft resolutionlikely to be
adopted by the Security Council. He referred specifically to
the suggestionsmade by the representativeof Argentina
and he termed them constructive, particularly with regard
to the revised text presented by Burundi, Sierra Leone,
Somaliaand the Syrian Arab Republic.
12. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (iriterprcfatiorl
fionz Spanish): With his usual clarity and eloquence,my
distinguished friend, Ambassador Farah of Somalia, has
now formally submitted the revised draft resolution contained in document S/l0372/Rev.l. May I thank him and
the other sponsors,the representativesof Burundi, Sierra
Leoneand the Syrian Arab Republic, for having beengood
enoughto take into account the suggestions
that I madeat
the 1595th meetingwhen we referred to the original text of
the draft resolution. My intention and my desireswere,
wheneverpossibIe, to improve the formal contents of the
document before us. In noting that those suggestions
have
been included, my delegation wishesagain to expressits
gratitude for having its views considered.In fact, most of’
the suggestionsthat I made have been included in this
newly revised text. I should like to state that we are
extremely satisfied and can find no objectionsto the text
being proposed to us. Therefore, I wish to state that I am
ready to vote in favour of the draft resolution.
13. The representativeof Somalia,in his presentation,also
said, and this is the fact of the matter, that with regardto
what would havz been paragraph7-to which I alsomade
reference in my last statement-a separate section or
separatedraft resolution could have beendrafted.

8. We, the sponsors, believe that we have a strong,
indisputable juridical position and one which should command the widest support amongst the international community. We trust that, with the revised text, it will now be
possible to gain unanimous support.

14. Let me clarify matters somewhaton this question. In
my last statement, the Council may recall that I said that
when the Security Council adopts a resolution on the item
on its agenda,regardlessof the decisionarrived at, we could
always leave the door open so that at the sametime, and
without prejudice to the draft resolution to be adopted,
some type pf negotiation could be undertaken that might
lead to the ultimate goal that we all desirefor Namibia,
namely, independence.This willingnessto negotiate, I felt,
would place South Africa squarelybefore the responsibility
of either accepting or rejecting negotiations. In either case
the Council would know precisely where it stood and how
to act accordingly.

9. There has been a last-minute change, as will be seen
from operative paragraphs S and 6, to reflect the importance which the sponsors attach to the advisory opinion.
Operative paragraph S “Takes note with appreciation of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21
June 1971”. Operative paragraph 6 goes a step further. It
‘Endorses the Court’s opinion expressed in paragraph 133
of the advisory opinion”. Naturally, the sponsors would
have wished to see the Council endorse the whole of the
advisory opinion but knowing the positions which indi1 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of
South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding
Security Council resohrtiotl 276 (19701, Advisory Opinion, I. C.J.
Reportsi971, p. 16.

IS. I also said, and I want this to be very clearly
understood,that that invitation, which might be embodied
2

in a draft rCsOlutiOn, would in no way conflict or be
inconsistent with the draft resolution submitted to us by
the four I’wcrs. This point is very important because my
de]c&JtiOn

feels that

thC one step does not

entirely

preclude

the other. The draft resolution submitted by Burundi,
Siem h)nc, SOmdia
and the Syrian Arab Republic js a
Perfectly structured resolution based upon the report that
the & HOC Sub-Committee on Namibia presented before
this Council. This draft resolution j.s a mature document
whkh msiders
every aspect of the question as it was
discussed in the Sub-Committee, but by the same token it
does take into account the advisory opinion of the
lr~terrlational COUrt of Justice. If 1 may so put it, this draft
resolution sets in motion a course of action to be taken by
the Security Council, and as such my delegation supports
this revised text. llowcver, I feel that we might-and this is
what we are doing-prepare an additional draft resolution
wlricll will in 110 Way impinge upon the objectives of the
present one, in order to leave the door open to the
possibility to ~llich 1 referred a few moments ago. If 1 may
sum up, should the invitation to negotiate be ignored or
pass unheeded, the Security Council would not have wasted
its time and would certainly not have abdicated any of its
responsibilities, because the draft resolution submitted by
the four sponsors would still be in force. Thus, on the one
hand, WC should be acting on the strength of the report of
the Rd HOC Sub-Committee on Namibia, while at the same
time WC should be acting on the basis of the views
expressed and exchanged during the course of this debate.
16. Since the laudable spirit of compromise shown by the
four sponsors 011 draft resolution S/l0372/Rev.l has
enabled us to conddcr other possibilities, such as the ones 1
mentioned earlier, I would ask you, Mr. President, and the
sponsors of this draft resolution to be good enough to
postpone the vote on it, so that, together with the four
sponsors and with other members of the Council, particularly those of the Afro-Asian group; who obviously have
interests and responsibiIities in the question, consultations
may take place on the possibility of preparing the other
draft resolution. Then, perhaps at an early date, perhaps
even in a few hours, we might agree on a text that would be
duly submitted to the Security Council, at which time we
might vote on both draft resolutions.

this afternoon’s meeting to set forth views and ideas on the
revised text, as circulated. We could also meet in the very
near future, after the necessary consultations have taken
place, to consider the terms of that new and forthcoming
draft resolution, which might be considered as complementing the work of the Council on this subject.
20. The draft resolution before us at this time is based
upon a reality, namely, the work done by the Ad Hoc
SubXommittee on Namibia; it is also based upon another
reality, and that is the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice.
21. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (irlrerprcration
Frencll): I listened to the statementsof Ambassador
Farah and AmbassadorOrtiz de Rozaswith the attention
thejl deserved.I would like first of all to congratulatethe
membersof the Council on the spirit of understanding
and
co-operationthey have shown in a matter which is indied
most difficult, a problem to which we all very muchwant
to find a solution. For although we may be in disagreement
on points of law or on certain methods,we arenevertheless
all agreed on the final objective, which is to enablethe
people of Namibia to exercise their right to self-determination.

from

22. The representativeof Somaliahaspresenteda revised
draft resolution /S/ZO372/Rcv.I], in which the sponsors
have taken up various suggestions
madeby the representative of Argentina. On that point, there was nothing
unexpected or new for us. On the other hand. there are
other changesin the text, changesthat in our opinion are
not minor ones.For example, in operativeparagraph6 we
find the word “Ezdurses“. May I say,parenthetically, that I
believe the French translation to be inexact-the original
text wasin English.The word ‘Endorses”is translatedby
the words “Fait sierrlze”. As far as I know, “endorse”
indicateswhat one does in signingone’snameon the back
of a cheque, for which the French translationis “dormer
son aval d . . ‘: You might say that there is no great
difference between them, but there is neverthelessa
difference between “doarrer SOHaval” and ‘pire sit-me“,
and I shouldtherefore like to have the French text reflect
the meaningaccurately.
23. This beingsaid,there obviously is aproblem; andsince
we are, 1 believe, a serious delegation that attaches
importanceto our votes, whether they be in favour, against
or abstentions,we feel obliged very seriouslyto study the
various changes,and I must communjcatethem to mY
Governmentandreceive instructions.

17. But in the meantimc, to gain time perhaps, members
of the Council might wish to speak on the present draft
resolution already submitted to them for consideration.
18. The PRESIDENT (illtetpretation from Spank: The
representative of Argentina was extremely clear and we
understood perfectly what he said. Logically, the revised
draft resolution denotes a great effort on the Fart of its
sponsors and seems to be generally acceptable to the
tnembers of the Council. The representative of Argentina
argued that it m&M be wise to prepare a new draft
resolution that would draw its meaning from operative
Daragraph 7 but would in no way contradict or compete
,+rith this draft reso]ution once it becomes an adopted
jocument.

24. This is why, as far asmy own delegationis concerned,
we would not be in a position to vote today on the revised
text. Furthermore, the representative of Argentina has
pointed out a new possibility which appealsto us, in view
of the position we have taken in the debate. There also,
however, we would need to have a text. Words are
important, they must be weighed,andfor that purposetoo
we needsometime.

g. Obviously we are willing to entertain such a possibility
nd tllink it appropriate, and, as the representative of
lrgentina has correctly stated, we could take advantage of

25. That is why-and contrary to our practice, sincethe
French delegation is not in the habit of delaying or
postponing meetings of the Council-we rather tend to
3

speed things up--in this particular case and for the serious
reasorts I have just indicated, l should prefer not to VOLC
until tomorrow.

recognizes that the Court’s opinion should be accepted.
Where the text says ‘Endorses the Court’s opinion”, I think
we should use the term “Acce~~ts the Opinion of the Court
expressedin paragraph 133.”
-

26. The PRESIDENT (interpretabbn from S’paniFI~):We
have listenedcarefully to the-representativeof Francewho
3 1. For thesereasons,this is not a newmatter but rather a
wasvery clear. He quite justifiably feelsthat he will have to
correction. This point shouldhave appearedin the previous
carry out someconsultationson someof the termsof the
draft: it is an essentialone.
revised draft resolution, the general terms of which seem
acceptable to him. He referred specifically to operative
32. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from $aanish): The
president intends to call a meeting of the Council for
paragraph6, which beginswith the word “endorses”. He
hascorrectly referred to both thejuridical and grammatical tomorrow. In the meantime, a joint effort might be made
difference between“to accept” and “to endorse”. He also to find some form of words to express the idea of
“Endorses” in operative paragraph6, as mentionedby the
referred to the latest suggestionof the representativeof
representativesof France and 3urundi, and alsotoprepare
Argentina and saidthat he would like to seethoseideasin a
specific document in order to engagein the consultations a new draft text, as suggestedby the representativeof
Argentina.
which are necessarybetweenall representativesand their
superiors. We understand full well the views of the
33. Mr. ORTlZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (intq~retatio?~
representativesand their superiors.We understandfull well
porn Spanish): Having listened very carefully to the
the views of the representativeof France, and unlessthe
statementsjust made by the representativesof France and
majority opinion disagrees,we are ready to vote ‘on any
Burundi, I feel that among the consultations that might
documentthis afternoon.
take place between now and our next meeting we might
also consider the section of paragraph6 which reads
27. On the other hand we might take advantageof the
“Endorsesthe Court’s opinjon”. May I say that I have no
time between this meeting and the next to consider this
objection to the words “Endorses the Court’s opinion as
revised text carefully, which 1 think will be an easytask,
expressedin paragraph 133 of the Advisory Opinion”.
and to take cognizanceof the second draft resolution to
However we think that becauseof various interpretationsof
which the represcntativcof Argentina referred.
“‘nclorses.the Court’s opinion” there may be someother
wording that would allow all delegationsto support it. WC
28. Mr. TERENCE (Burundi) (intcqvetation from
might alsosay “Also takes note of the court’s opinion”, or
French): ,I shouldlike to speakon a specific point, or to bc
use someother formula that would meet arly scruplesor
precise, I want to state that WCshould not overlook the
difficulties that might confront other delegations.In the
merits of the revisedtext sincea very important fact had
caseof the Argentine delegationthere isno such difficulty.
beenomitted in the first text. The membersof the Council
But since what we are seekingis unanimousapproval of a
will recall that since under resolution 284 (1970) the
resolution, we might include this question in the COMJ~Council referred the question of Namibia to the internatations betweenthe sponsorsand other delegations.
tional Court of Justice,and alsosince the United Nations,
and therefore the Security Council as well, were representedat the Court in the personof the Secretary-General 34. Mr. ISSRAELYAN (Union of Soviet SocialistRepub.
lies) (translatedfrom Russian): The Soviet delegationhas
and furthermore sincethe Membersof the United Nations
studied the text of the resolution submitted today and
were able to addressthe Court at The Hague during its
hearingson this?natter, the normal and logical conclusion would be preparedto proceedto a vote, However, a request
has been made by several members of the Council, in
to be drawn from thesefacts is that the Council, which
particular the representativesof Argentina andFrance, that
askedfor the advisory opinion from the Court, is in law a
the vote should be deferred until the next meetingand the
party to the caseon which the Court has handed down its
Soviet delegation has no objection to that. At the same
advisory opinion.
time, we shouldlike to request the sponsorsto inform the
29. This is a very important aspectof the questionwhich
Soviet deIegation of the progress of the consultations
may perhapshave escapedthe attention of somemembers before the meeting of the Security Council at which we
of the Council. As I said earlier, the Security Council is a
shall proceed to vote. That is the request of the Soviet
party to the casesubmitted to the International Court of
delegation.
Justice and therefore it goeswithout saying that normally
35. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): We
all membersof the Council shouldfeel bound to acceptthe
have taken note of the request of the representativeof the
advisory opinion which the Council itself had askedof the
Soviet Union and I presumethat the sponsorsof the draft
court.
resolutionhave done likewise.
30. Any contrary view would seem somewhat strange,
sincethe requestfor the advisory opinion did emanatefrom
36. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): First, I should like tomake it
this Council. That is why the sponsors of the draft
clear that the revised draft resolution submitted by the
resolutionunder discussionfelt that it was more just and
Afro-Asian membersmust be consideredon its own merits
more in keeping with law to correct the error which had
and shouldnot be linked to any other draft resolution. In
slippedinto the text and which, fortunately, hasnow been other words, if the draft resolution submitted by the
corrected. That is why all the sponsorsare relying on the
representativeof Argentina doesnot materialize, it doesnot
Council to understandwhy we had to add the text now
mean that our draft resolution will not go forward. Our
appearingin paragraph6 of the draft resolution, which
draft resolutionis formally before the Council.
4

37. Secondly, the sponsors would like to have a unani.
mous vote on the revised draft resolution. However we were
given the impression, following the debate in the Council
and also as a result of our consultations, that, no matter
what word we use, whether we use “accepts” or “endorses”, some delegations-very few-would not vote for
the noised
draft resolution, but that at best they might
abstain. Naturally, what we do not wish them to do is to
vote against it. I should like to have this fact borne in mind.
38. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Qxmish): The
idea of deferring a decision or a vote on this text stems
from a desire to attain unanimity, Wecould utilbe the next
few hours in consultations on which word is to be used for
“Endorse”. It could be “Accept”, or some similar expression. AI1 these views can easily be taken into account in our
search for unanimity which I think is what we all want.
39. Mr. DRTIZ

DE ROZA (Argentina) (interpretation

from Spanish): Let me say briefly that I entirely share the
views of my friend the representative of Somalia as
expressed in the opening words of his last statement. I, too,
believe that this draft resolution stands alone, I do not
believe it has to be merged with or confused with another
draft resolution. It has to be considered separately on its
merits. ‘Whatever draft resolution may emerge from the
consultations that may take place with other members of
the Council will be a completely separate draft which must
in no way impede this very important and substantive draft
resolution and, as I said earlier, one which my delegation
supports. The other is a separate procedure that will
complement this draft resolution, but is in no way intended
to impinge upon this draft resolution.
40. The PRESIDENT (interpretation front Spanish): 1
think that your explanation has satisfied the representative
of Somalia, namely, that the revised text will have no link,
should I say, will not depend upon the approval of the
proposal referred to by the Argentine representative. This
draft resolution, as you said, stands alone and therefore is
not linked to the other draft resolution, to which the
representative of Argentina referred twice in his statement.
41. Obviously, postponement of a vote will allow condtations on the terms contained in operative paragraph 6 of

the revised text. 1 feel that this might help us succeed in our
efforts to achieve unanimity.
42. Mr. FAR411 (Somalia): I should like to make clear
that as a result of our consultations the sponsors are assured
of an overwhelming majority vote on the present text of
the draft resolution. Therefore the question of our adopting
a language which would not show “approval” or “acceptance” or “endorsement” of the advisory opinion does not
arise.
43. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spa&h): May
1 ask whether the Council wishes to vote this afternoon
upon the revised text, or as a considerable number of
members of the Council seem to feel, should we defer the
vote until tomorrow? If we postpone the vote until the
next meeting there would be the advantage that unanimity
would bc easier to achieve and we would thus also comply
with the request of the representative of France who very
clearly said that he would appreciate a few hours to carry
out specific consultations on operative paragraph 6 of the
draft resolution, The representative of Argentina also
referred to that specific paragraph.
44. May I with all respect venture to ask our cotteague
from Somalia whether he would object to agreeing to the
suggestion that the vote on this draft resolution be deferred
until tomorrow afternoon at our next meeting when it will
be considered on Its merits and independent of any other
draft, with the assurance that by tomorrow the wording
referred to by the representative of France will have been
cleared up.
45. Mr. FARAIJ (Somalia): I am sure 1 am speaking for all
the sponsors when I say that we wish to give every
delegation here the time necessary to obtain instructions on
this revised draft resolution.
46. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from SpdSh): 1
take it then that we would all agree that we meet again
tomorrow afternoon at 3.30 for the following purposes:
immediately to vote upon the revised draft resolution, and
to take up any other draft resolution that may be
submitted on the question of Namibia.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m
