S/2018/780

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 August 2018
Original: English

United Nations Support Mission in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2376
(2017), covers political and security developments in Libya, provides an overview of
the human rights and humanitarian situation in the country and outlines the activities
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) since the issuance of my
previous report on 7 May 2018 (S/2018/429).

II. Political and security-related developments
2.
On 2 July, I announced the appointment of Stephanie T. Williams of the United
States of America as the new Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary -General
for Political Affairs in Libya. She took up her functions immediately.
3.
During the reporting period, my Special Representative continued to engage
with Libyan, regional and international stakeholders to support the implementation
of the United Nations action plan. He also endeavoured to facilitate discussions on
viable options to hold national elections in 2018, as foreseen by the plan and requested
by the Security Council (see S/PRST/2018/11). Overall, stakeholders remained
supportive of the United Nations action plan as the means to resolve the Libyan crisis.
4.
Meanwhile, the security situation remained volatile. The mid -June attempt to
capture key oil facilities in the oil crescent region resulted in loss of life and
destruction of infrastructure. Following a military offensive that generated numerous
reports of human rights violations, the Libyan National Army announced that it had
assumed full control over the eastern city of Darnah at the end of June. In Tripoli,
tension increased as a result of fighting to control the capital. Intercommunal conflict
continued in southern Libya, where armed clashes at Sabha ’s Elena Castle resulted in
several deaths.
Implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement
5.
During the reporting period, members of the House of Representatives and the
High Council of State continued to discuss limited amendments to the Libyan
Political Agreement, which aimed to create a reformed and more inclusive executive
authority. However, no consensus was reached on the proposals.

18-13987 (E)

290818

*1813987*

S/2018/780

6.
Meanwhile, the United Nations continued its efforts to stimulate broad
participation in the political process. In that regard, the national conference process
brought together 7,000 Libyan men and women in more than 40 towns and cities
across the country. The consultations provided an opportunity for people to voice their
aspirations and concerns. The Libyans consulted requested an end to the transition
period. They highlighted the need to unify State institutions through elections. They
emphasized the need to protect Libya’s national wealth and improve the distribution
of resources. Special events were also organized for women, youth and internally
displaced persons.
International and regional engagement
7.
From 11 to 13 May, as part of the meeting of the African Union High -level
Committee on Libya, the Government of Senegal hosted an inter-Libyan
reconciliation meeting in Dakar. The meeting included the Presidents of Senegal and
the Congo, as well as Libyan representatives of former regime loyalists and their
opponents. Participants called for a referendum on the constitutional proposal. They
also advocated a greater African Union role in efforts to address the Libyan crisis.
8.
On 21 May, Algeria hosted a tripartite meeting between the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Algeria, Egypt and Tunisia. The ministers reiterated their support
for the United Nations action plan and finding a political solution to the crisis in
Libya. On 9 June, the leaders of the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America) reiterated their support for the implementation of the United
Nations action plan to foster a stable and democratic Libya.
9.
On 29 May, four major Libyan actors met in Paris under the auspices of the
United Nations. The event was hosted by Emmanuel Macron, President of France.
The Libyan actors — Prime Minister Faiez Serraj, Speaker of the House of
Representatives Agila Saleh Essa Gwaider, President of the High Council of State
Khaled al-Meshri and General Khalifa Haftar of the Libyan National Army —
committed themselves to working constructively with the United Nations to bring
about parliamentary and presidential elections in a secure environment by
10 December 2018 and to respect the results of the elections. They recognized the
importance of developing a constitutional basis for elections. They expressed support
for my Special Representative’s consultations with Libyan authorities on a proposal
and timeline for adopting the constitution. The Security Council welcomed the
commitment expressed by these Libyan actors, as well as the positive momentum
generated by the Paris conference (see S/PRST/2018/11). I also welcomed the
meeting.
Situation in the western region
10. During the reporting period, the security situation in the western region
remained precarious. There were heightened tensions over security control of the
capital and hostilities in the oil crescent. Following the release of the report of the
State Audit Bureau for 2017 (see para. 21 below), clashes erupted on 24 May between
rival forces in Tripoli. On 25 and 26 May, elements of the Tripoli Revolutionary
Brigade and the Abu Salim armed group forced units of the President ial Guard from
their posts and briefly detained the head of the Guard, General Najmi al -Nakoua.
Tensions increased in Tripoli over rumours that armed groups from neighbouring
cities planned to displace armed groups in Tripoli affiliated with the Government of
National Accord. UNSMIL continued to engage with those groups, specifically those
in Misratah, particularly during a meeting on 13 May to promote dialogue and
de-escalation.

2/16

18-13987

S/2018/780

11. There were also continued reports of theft, attacks, clashes and kidnappings. On
26 June, following a statement supportive of the decision of the Libyan National
Army to hand over oil facilities to the “interim Government”, an unknown armed
group attacked the Vice-President of the Presidency Council, Fathi al-Majbari. The
Vice-President escaped unharmed, but he resigned on 20 July. In Zintan, continuous
competition over resources between rival armed groups, mostly related to fuel
smuggling and human trafficking, escalated into armed skirmishes on 21 May. In that
regard, an armed group briefly held civilians in order to exchange them for fuel trucks
confiscated by a rival armed group. On 19 May, in Ujaylat city, fierce fighting took
place between armed groups over revenue from illegal activities. As a result, one
civilian was hit by a stray bullet and accidentally killed. On 23 May, 23 illegal
migrants attempting to escape were injured when traffickers shot them at a warehouse
in Bani Walid. Peaceful demonstrations over the delivery of basic services were also
reported in Tripoli.
Situation in the eastern region
12. On 7 May, following the two-year-long military encirclement of the city of
Darnah by the Libyan National Army, a military operation was launch ed against the
Darnah Mujahidin Shura Council. Ahead of the attack, the Shura Council dissolved
and allied itself with other armed elements to form the Darnah Protection Force.
Ground forces were used in combination with intensive aerial bombardment and
artillery shelling with sophisticated air support. The military operation left at least 27
civilians dead and 30 others injured. While 140 Libyan National Army members were
reportedly killed, the number of Darnah Protection Force members killed is unknown.
Most civilian casualties were caused by the use of indiscriminate fire and unguided
weapons, such as artillery and mortars, by the Libyan National Army in densely
populated residential areas, as well as crossfire and exploded remnants of war. When
restrictions on civilian movement were eased on 29 May, thousands of families fled
to safety. Other civilians remained trapped in areas of active conflict without
sufficient food, water or access to medical treatment. On 28 June, General Haftar
announced that Darnah had been “liberated”. As of 5 August, intermittent Libyan
National Army operations against elements of the Darnah Protection Force continued
in the old city.
13. On 14 June, members of the former Petroleum Facilities Guard and the Benghazi
Defence Brigades, as well as foreign elements, launched an offensive against the
Libyan National Army to capture the Ra’s Lanuf and Sidrah facilities in the oil
crescent. After days of armed clashes, resulting in an unconfirmed number of deaths
and injuries, the Libyan National Army succeeded in recapturing the oil facilities on
21 June. In an unprecedented move, on 25 June, the Libyan National Army announced
the handing over of the oil facilities in the oil crescent and in other areas under its
control to the National Oil Corporation associated with the “interim Government”
based in eastern Libya. However, on 11 July, following Prime Minister Serraj ’s
request to the Security Council to establish an international technical committee to
audit Libyan finances, the Libyan National Army agreed to hand over control of the
oil crescent facilities to the Tripoli-based National Oil Corporation. In a press
statement dated 19 July (www.un.org/press/en/2018/sc13429.doc.htm), the Security
Council welcomed the announcement that the National Oil Corporation was resuming
its work on behalf of all Libyans and encouraged Libyan leaders to work towards the
unification of the country’s institutions within the framework of the Libyan Political
Agreement.

18-13987

3/16

S/2018/780

Situation in the southern region
14. The situation in the south continued to be dominated by the conflict between
Tebu and Awlad Suleiman communities. After an increase in small -scale
confrontations and sniper attacks, on 12 May, Tebu forces took the strategic Elena
Castle and the adjoining headquarters of the Sixth Brigade affiliated with Awlad
Sulayman. Approximately 10 people were reported killed and 45 injured in the attack.
The Tebu forces then retreated after destroying the fortifications, making the site
indefensible. Efforts to resolve the dispute between the two sides, including those by
the Presidency Council, have so far failed. In the meantime, restrictions on access to
basic services based on tribal affiliation remain in place in various locations.
15. On 31 May, forces linked to the Petroleum Facilities Guard attacked the
Tamanhint airbase controlled by the Libyan National Army, killing four of its
members. The Libyan National Army continued to conduct periodic operations
against Chadian opposition groups, including attacks on Umm al-Aranib, 90
kilometres south of Sabha, on 28 May and on 2 and 3 June. Kidnappings and
insecurity continued to be reported in the south. On 23 June, three Turkish engineers
kidnapped in Awbari were released after spending 233 days in captivity.
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Libya
16. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) continued activities around its former
stronghold of Sirte, as well as in other areas of Libya. On 23 May, ISIL claimed
responsibility for a suicide vehicle-borne improvised device that had detonated the
day before near a Libyan National Army checkpoint, south-east of Ajdabiya. ISIL also
claimed responsibility for the simultaneous attack against another Libyan National
Army checkpoint north of Awjilah. On 2 June, ISIL targeted a police station in Qanan,
south-east of Ajdabiya, killing one civilian and injuring another five. ISIL published
a claim that its fighters had killed two Libyan National Army members during clashes
at a checkpoint in the Jufrah district on 6 June.
17. As part of a military operation launched by the Presidency Council in early
April, four suspected ISIL fighters were arrested on 9 June in the Saddadah area, near
Bani Walid, following local reports of ISIL movements. On 5 and 13 June, the Uni ted
States Africa Command (AFRICOM), in cooperation with Government of National
Accord, announced its conduct of air strikes against alleged ISIL members south -east
of Bani Walid, resulting in the death of five suspected ISIL fighters, including Abd
al-A’ati Ashtaiwy, a key ISIL cadre in Sirte. On 24 July, ISIL claimed responsibility
for killing two Libyan National Army personnel during an attack on an army
checkpoint in Ageila town, west of Ajdabiya. In the ensuing pursuit operation, 11 ISIL
elements were killed.
Economic situation
18. On 12 May, the Presidency Council and the Central Bank of Libya reached an
agreement on the 2018 budget. The new budget included public expenditures of
42.5 billion Libyan dinars ($31 billion), as compared with 37.5 bill ion Libyan dinars
(USD 27.4 billion) for 2017. The increased expenditure reflected the integration of
salary expenditures for officials in eastern Libya previously paid by the unrecognized
“interim Government” and increased salary payments for security actors. Salaries
make up the main portion of the budget, with an estimated 1.78 million Libyans on
the public payroll. The budget deficit is nearly 10 billion Libyan dinars ($7.3 billion).
19. The agreed budget was based on projections for public revenues stemming from
oil exports. According to the Ministry of Finance, revenues from the export of oil and
gas surpassed expectations from the beginning of the year through 31 May,

4/16

18-13987

S/2018/780

accounting for 13.34 billion Libyan dinars ($9.7 billion). While oil production
averaged 1 million barrels per day during that period, the recent attack on oil facilities
in the oil crescent and subsequent events have significantly disrupted oil production,
which was reduced to 315,000 barrels per day.
20. The eighth Libyan economic dialogue was convened in Tunis on 5 June. The
meeting, which brought together representatives of the Government of National
Accord, the Central Bank, the National Oil Corporation, the House of
Representatives, the High Council of State and the State Audit Bureau, concluded
with an agreement on economic measures, including subsidy reform, direct cash
transfers, increased liquidity and devaluation. On 10 June, the Central Bank
announced the launch of a tax scheme for foreign currency transactions to reduce th e
gap between the official and black-market exchange rates. As of 27 June, the parallel
market exchange rate stood at 6.85 Libyan dinars to one United States dollar,
compared with the official rate of 1.38 Libyan dinars to one United States dollar.
21. The State Audit Bureau issued a report on 23 May estimating that public
expenditures totalled 277 billion Libyan dinars ($202 billion) between 2012 and 2017
and that public debt reached 58 billion Libyan dinars ($42 billion) during that period.
The report contained a range of allegations of corruption and financial
mismanagement that caused outcry among Libyans. The report also suggested that
the increase in public revenues in 2017 had not translated into an improved economic
situation. In a letter to the Security Council dated 10 July, Prime Minister Serraj
proposed that an international technical committee be established to review the
financial arrangements of the internationally recognized Central Bank and the parallel
bank in the east.

III. Constitution-making process
22. A commitment to the establishment of a constitutional framework to end the
country’s transitional period was reiterated during the Paris conference (see para. 9
above). Efforts in this regard continued, including through UNSMIL consul tations
with Libyan legal experts and national and international partners on a constitutional
framework ahead of parliamentary and presidential elections. The House of
Representatives resumed its discussions on the necessary legislation for a referendum
and the Constitution Drafting Assembly continued its outreach efforts on the
constitutional proposal, including through briefings to the international community.
On 29 July, the Chair of the Constitution Drafting Assembly, Nuh Abdel Sayed,
announced his resignation. The session of the House of Representatives held on 30
and 31 July to discuss the draft constitutional referendum law concluded without a
vote. Following a further session held on 13 August, the vote was deferred again.

IV. Other activities of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya
A.

Electoral support
23. Following the 2 May terrorist attack on the headquarters of the High National
Electoral Commission in Tripoli, which killed at least 13 people and destroyed parts
of the premises, the Government of National Accord provided 2 million Libyan dinars
($1.5 million) of emergency funding for the Commission’s immediate rehabilitation.
In addition, international partners agreed to fund rehabilitation work for the
Commission through the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) project
entitled “Promoting elections for the people of Libya”, currently funded by the

18-13987

5/16

S/2018/780

European Union, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Switzerland and the United
Kingdom.
24. On 12 June, the Government granted the High National Electoral Commission
a compound in Tripoli to establish its new headquarters. Following an assessment
conducted by the Department of Safety and Security of the Secretariat, efforts were
made to rehabilitate the compound in line with the Department’s recommendations.
UNSMIL and UNDP, in cooperation with an implementing partner funded by the
United States Agency for International Development, supported the Commission in
the planning and coordination of the rehabilitation and engineering works on the new
site. The re-establishment of a functional headquarters for the Commission is essential
for the conduct of any balloting events in 2018.
25. Despite the challenges following the attack on the High National Electoral
Commission, the UNSMIL-led integrated electoral assistance team, which includes
capacities from UNDP, continued its efforts to support preparations for the 2018
balloting events, as foreseen by the United Nations action plan and agreed to at the
Paris conference (see para. 9 above). Advice was provided on electoral operations and
timelines pending adoption of the electoral legislation, information technology and
data management, procurement of electoral materials, logistics, out -of-country voting
and field operations. In addition, limited technical advice and information technology
equipment was provided to the Central Committee for Municipal Council Elections
in preparation for local elections in 2018. UNSMIL also engaged in consultations
with the High National Electoral Commission and the State Elections Commission,
the new electoral affairs office within the Ministry of the Interior, on the need for
creating effective mechanisms with a clear division of labour among defence and
internal security forces for electoral security.

B.

Human rights, transitional justice and the rule of law
26. During the reporting period, armed groups across Libya continued to commit
violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law in a
climate of continued impunity.
27. Civilians, including children, continued to bear the brunt of the escalation of
fighting and violence. During the reporting period, UNSMIL documented 99 civilian
casualties (44 deaths and 55 injuries), which is an increase from previous periods.
Leading causes of casualties among civilians included shelling, explosive re mnants
of war, gunfire, vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices and air strikes.
28. The escalation of conflict in Darnah generated numerous reports of human rights
violations and failure to protect civilians on the part of the Libyan National Army.
Indiscriminate weapons were reportedly used in populated areas, and civilians were
unable to move in and out of Darnah freely and safely. Libyan National Army fighters
pillaged, damaged, destroyed and appropriated private homes in several
neighbourhoods that had fallen under their control, including Shiha, Mbakh, and
Sahel al-Sharki. In some instances, the properties of suspected Darnah Protection
Force fighters and their families appeared to have been targeted. On 5 June, the city ’s
main functioning public hospital was closed owing to shelling, shortages of medical
supplies and ongoing fighting in the vicinity. While medical services gradually
resumed in Darnah neighbourhoods under the control of the Libyan National Army,
concerns remained regarding the lack of access to medical treatment for those trapped
in areas of active fighting. During the reporting period, medical professionals reported
at least four preventable civilian deaths due to the absence of medical supplies or lack
of safe access to medical treatment.

6/16

18-13987

S/2018/780

Unlawful deprivation of liberty, detention and torture
29. Armed groups continued to take hostage or otherwise unlawfully deprive
civilians of their liberty. Civilians were targeted for financial or political gain, on the
basis of their tribal origin or family identity or for their perceived political affiliations
and opinions.
30. Libyan National Army fighters reportedly detained civilian men from Darnah at
checkpoints and at their homes. Those taken included civil society activists, religiou s
figures, medical professionals and local leaders, some of whom seemed to have been
targeted solely for exercising their right to freedom of expression. Despite repeated
requests, UNSMIL was unable to visit prisons and other detention facilities in easter n
Libya under the control of the military police or the Libyan National Army since
2014.
31. Across the country, arbitrary detention and torture continued to be widespread.
Some 6,400 individuals were held in 26 official prisons under the Ministry of Justi ce,
an estimated 75 to 80 per cent of them in pretrial detention. Thousands of others were
held in facilities nominally under the control of the Ministry of the Interior or the
Ministry of Defence, as well as facilities directly run by armed groups. Those held
had little opportunity to challenge the legality of their detention or seek redress for
violations suffered.
32. In relation to detention facilities, UNSMIL continued to receive credible reports
of prolonged and arbitrary detention, torture and other ill-treatment, enforced
disappearances, poor detention conditions, medical neglect and the denial of visits
from families and lawyers. During the reporting period, UNSMIL gathered credible
information on torture and other ill-treatment at the Mitiga detention facility
controlled by the Special Deterrence Force and facilities operated by the Central
Security/Abu Salim armed group, the counter-terrorism unit in Abu Salim, the general
investigations apparatus in Tripoli, the joint operations room in Misratah a nd the
general investigations body in eastern Libya. Despite repeated requests, UNSMIL
continued to be denied access to the Mitiga detention facility, where an estimated
2,600 men, women and children are believed to be held, most without charge or trial.
33. On 7 May, the Presidency Council adopted decree No. 555 of 2018. Under the
terms of the decree, the Special Deterrence Force was renamed “Deterrence Body for
Combating Organized Crime and Terrorism” and granted a nation-wide remit,
independent budget and extensive powers, including of arrest, detention and
surveillance. After concerns were raised by national and international stakeholders,
Prime Minister Serraj sent the decree to the Ministry of the Interior for review.
Summary executions
34. On 12 June, a video emerged on social media depicting the beating and summary
execution of a captured man, allegedly by fighters affiliated with the Libyan National
Army in the area of Sahel al-Sharki in Darnah. The following day, the Libyan National
Army announced investigations into the video, but no information was shared on the
progress or findings. Previous promises of investigations into alleged summary
executions and other possible war crimes committed by fighters affiliated with the
Libyan National Army have not led to prosecutions.
35. The exact legal status and whereabouts of a field commander with the special
forces under the Libyan National Army, Mahmoud al-Werfalli, who is the subject of
arrest warrants issued on 15 August 2017 and 4 July 2018 by th e International
Criminal Court for the crime of murder for his alleged involvement in summary
executions, remain unclear. On 11 July, General Haftar ordered the arrest of Mahmoud
al-Werfalli.
18-13987

7/16

S/2018/780

Groups in vulnerable situations
Migrants
36. Migrants and refugees continued to be vulnerable to deprivation of liberty and
arbitrary detention in official and unofficial places of detention; torture, including
sexual violence; abduction for ransom; extortion; forced labour; and unlawful
killings. The number of detainees increased owing to more interceptions at sea and
closure of sea routes to migrants, preventing their departure. Perpetrators included
State officials, armed groups, smugglers, traffickers and criminal gangs.
37. During the reporting period, UNSMIL gathered information regarding detention
conditions, torture and other abuses committed at the Zuwarah detention centre
overseen by the Department for Combating Illegal Migration. On 16 May, UNSMIL
was denied access to the facility by the mayor of Zuwarah. UNSMIL was unable to
conduct human rights monitoring visits to any detention facilities under the control
of the Department for Combating Illegal Migration owing to bureaucratic hurdles
imposed by the protocol office of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the public
relations department of the Ministry of the Interior.
38. On 7 June, the Security Council placed global asset freezes and travel bans on
six leaders of human trafficking networks, four Libyan nationals and two Eritrean
nationals. They include Abdel Rahman Milad (known as Bija), former head of the
Libyan Coast Guard in al-Zawiya, who was suspended from his post on 22 June.
Women and girls
39. Women and girls were arbitrarily detained, at times on the basis of their family
affiliation or for “moral crimes” such as engaging in consensual sexual relations
outside of marriage. Many were held in the Mitiga detention centre, the Jawwiyah
prison and facilities of the Central Security/Abu Salim and the Department for
Combating Illegal Migration without female guards, heightening the risk of sexual
abuse. Women were strip-searched by or in front of male guards, and some were
subjected to intrusive cavity searches. Migrant women and girls were particularly
vulnerable to rape, forced prostitution and other forms of sexual violence.
40. The situation in the Judaydah Women’s Prison remained of particular concern.
Special Deterrence Force members beat women, including with water pipes and the
backs of rifles, placed them in prolonged solitary confinement and interfered with
visitation rights. Cameras were also installed in the prison’s corridors, thereby raising
concerns about privacy. Three detainees were transferred in April from the Judaydah
Women’s Prison to the Mitiga detention facility by order of the Attorney General,
reportedly under pressure from the Special Deterrence Force, and remained held at
Mitiga with limited access to family visits.
Journalists and activists
41. Activists, journalists and other media professionals were victims of targeted
attacks, intimidation and detention. During the reporting period, a journalist covering
migration and abuses by armed groups fled the country after having received death
threats through her social media accounts and directly by telephone.
42. Two prominent media figures and organizers of an annual media award, Suliman
Gashout and Mohammed Yaghubi, remain detained arbitrarily at the Mitiga detention
centre since their arrests without warrant on 29 April 2018. They have yet to appear
in front of judicial authorities.
43. A human rights activist continued to be held without charge or trial since his
arrest on 15 May. In mid-June, he was reportedly transferred from the General
8/16

18-13987

S/2018/780

Security Apparatus detention facility in Bab Tajoura to the Ayn Zarah (B) Pr ison. The
exact reasons behind his detention remain unclear. Following his arrest, unidentified
armed men confiscated his documents and laptops.
Transitional justice and national reconciliation
44. Over the past 18 months, an UNSMIL-led project funded by the Peacebuilding
Fund and supported by UNDP has promoted local dialogue and contributed to the
signing of reconciliation agreements throughout Libya. UNSMIL endeavoured to
raise new funding to sustain and expand ongoing local dialogue processes in sup port
of the political process and transitional justice in Libya. The Governments of Italy
and the United States committed financial support that will ensure the continuation
of a comprehensive reconciliation programme.
45. Building on their initial meeting in February 2018 and their agreed road map for
reconciliation, delegations from Ghadamis and the Tuareg communities displaced in
Awal attended a three-day training session in Tunis in May. The objective was to
enhance their capacity to document the gross human rights violations committed by
both sides and to identify damage and appropriate reparations mechanisms. Around
220 families remain displaced because of the conflict.
46. In May, the Presidency Council established by decree an independent
commission for the search for missing persons, on the basis of previous legislation
and the Libyan Political Agreement. While the decision was positive in principle,
concerns were raised that the decree did not adequately protect the future commission
from political interference and reflect international best practices regarding the
protection of all persons from enforced disappearances. On 11 May a group of Libyan
and international legal, constitutional and forensics experts convened in Tunis to
propose amendments to the decree, in partnership with the International Commission
for Missing Persons.
47. On 3 June, local officials from Misratah and Tawurgha’ signed a reconciliation
charter, which fell far short of international human rights standards. The charter fai led
to ensure the unconditional and safe return of some 40,000 Tawurghans forcibly
displaced since the 2011 armed conflict. The charter ’s preamble reproduced a onesided narrative of the conflict, referencing alleged crimes committed by the
Tawurgha’ community. The charter further undermined the Tawurghans’ rights to
freedom of expression and association, placed returns and security under the control
of armed groups from Misratah and excluded a range of Tawurghans from the
possibility of returning to their home town. The Tawurgha’ Shura Council and other
members of civil society opposed conditions set by the charter. In an apparent effort
to compel those critical of the charter to vacate the temporary shelter at Qararat
al-Qataf camp in Bani Walid, the Tawurgha local council removed its mobile medical
clinic, generator and water tanks, transferring them to a school inside Tawurgha ’ used
to shelter returnees to the city. Between 15 and 20 June, Misratah armed groups
established a checkpoint near the entrance to Tawurgha’, checking the identification
of displaced Tawurghan returning to celebrate Eid al-Fitr in their home town. Some
identity cards of internally displaced persons were reportedly confiscated and only
returned to them once they left the city.
Support and capacity-building for national non-governmental organizations
48. Between 7 and 10 May, UNSMIL organized a series of training workshops in
Tripoli for human rights defenders and lawyers. The purpose of the meetings was to
enhance knowledge of and expertise in human rights monitoring and reporting
techniques; the use of international human rights mechanisms, including special

18-13987

9/16

S/2018/780

procedures under the Human Rights Council; and international human rights and
humanitarian law.
49. On 12 May, UNSMIL facilitated a consultative workshop aimed at improving
coordination among national civil society organizations working on the human rights
of migrants and extending their work to cover remote locations within Libya. The
meeting led to the establishment of a coalition of organizations aimed at improving
the human rights monitoring of detention facilities, raising community awareness and
enhancing the institutional capacity of civil society.
Human rights due diligence policy
50. The United Nations system in Libya continued its efforts towards the
implementation of the United Nations human rights due diligence policy ( A/67/775S/2013/110, annex). UNSMIL and the United Nations country team are currently
reviewing their support for Libyan security forces, with a view to mitigating identified
risks of grave violations of international humanitarian law, human rights law or
refugee law being committed by non-United Nations security forces that are recipients
of United Nations support.
51. A risk assessment and mitigating measures with respect to United Nations
support for the Department of Combating Illegal Migration are currently under
consideration. The measures include increased monitoring of human rights law
compliance by recipients of support, human rights screening and enhancing
accountability.

C.

Security sector
Support for Libyan planning for interim security arrangements and the
unification of the security forces
52. UNSMIL continued to develop, in consultation with the Libyan authorities and
its international partners, a security framework to support national authorities in
establishing a unified State security service that is effective, accountable,
representative, responsive to the needs of all Libyans and placed under civilian
control. The approach builds on three mutually reinforcing tiers: strategic level
unification of the army and police, institutional capacity-building, and community
security planning and implementation.
53. In addition, UNSMIL continued to monitor efforts to build consensus between
Libyan and international actors involved in the army unification process. My Special
Representative continued to monitor developments in the Cairo unification talks and
their complementarity with the United Nations action plan. Libyan military officers
participated in six meetings to consider options for the unification of the armed forces
and enhancement of their capacity (see S/2018/429, para. 62). The Mission continued
to encourage the use of legitimate State security institutions rather than non - or
quasi-State armed groups.
54. Within this framework approach, UNSMIL is developing a strategy to assist
national authorities in dealing with the Libyan armed groups. As part of the process,
UNSMIL conducted a perception survey of more than 40 armed groups and their
leaders from across Libya. The survey was conducted through bilateral interviews,
focus group sessions and workshops, in conjunction with local and international
non-governmental organizations and in coordination with the Presidency Council.
Such engagement with the armed groups served to enhance their support for the
United Nations action plan. The results of this bottom-up process fed into a draft
UNSMIL armed groups strategy, which sets out a long-term framework for supporting

10/16

18-13987

S/2018/780

Libyan stabilization and integration measures. Meanwhile, consultations continue
with the Libyan authorities, the armed groups and the international community.
55. UNSMIL continued to convene regular international security sector working
group meetings, now held simultaneously in Tripoli and Tunis, attracting up to 35
Member States and international organizations, thereby facilitating international
consensus in this sector and more broadly in others. Plans to reinvigorate national
ownership of this mechanism are well advanced. UNSMIL began work towards
consolidating the security arrangements in other regions of the country. The Mission
is encouraging dialogue among all the key security actors in Benghazi and Misratah.
It is working closely with UNDP, through the Policing and Security Joint Programme,
with the aim of providing technical advice and support to the Ministry of the Interior;
sensitizing Tripoli security actors to the requirements of the human rights due
diligence policy; and building community policing through the establishment of a
model police station in the Andalus area of Tripoli.
56. Progress has been made since the establishment of the Army Joint Operations
Centre on 7 September 2017 and the appointment of the Army Chief of Staff on
30 August 2017. The Chief of Staff sponsored a review of military structures in Tripoli
which resulted in over 30 “ghost” battalions being identified for removal from the
national security apparatus through Presidency Council decree No. 555, adopted on
7 May 2018. Despite this progress, the security sector in general continued to suffer
from a lack of political will and government financial support, the creation of par allel
forces and coordination mechanisms and continued dependency of the Government on
selected armed groups as illustrated by the adoption of decree No. 555.
Arms and ammunition management
57. The United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) continued to assist Libyan
authorities in their efforts to address uncontrolled proliferation of arms and
ammunition. In June, technical support was provided to Libyan security authorities
on weapons and ammunition management. A safety assessment of a missile storage
site in Gharyan was conducted in preparation for the disposal of liquid fuel propellant
for missiles. Contingent on funding, UNMAS will secure the site and prepare for
disposal. UNMAS continues to face difficulties with the systematic exchange of
information among national actors, which complicates a coordinated approach to
addressing the challenges posed by explosive hazards.

D.

Women’s empowerment
58. Since the launch of the United Nations action plan, Libyan women have been
engaged through civic movements and various forums in promoting women’s
political participation. On 23 June, the Women’s Empowerment Network, supported
by UNSMIL, convened to discuss actions to be taken by women to contribute to the
establishment of a constitutional basis for elections. The participants agreed to
continue discussions on the constitutional basis for elections, as well future
opportunities and challenges for women, with a broad inclusive group of women from
Libya at the next meeting in mid-July.
59. In May, 24 women from Libyan political parties and newly established political
movements were convened by UNSMIL to discuss opportunities that political parties
can provide to advance women’s leadership in the planned elections. Subsequently,
the participants formed a network to promote the nomination of women in the
elections. The National Front Party and Nation Forces Alliance have since assigned
women to executive positions, including Deputy President and General Secretary.

18-13987

11/16

S/2018/780

60. The overall participation of women in the national conference process was
estimated at 30 per cent. Designated sessions for women were organized to encourage
increased participation of women across Libya in the process. UNSMIL provided
advice and training to the facilitators of those sessions, including on methodology for
reporting at community level.

E.

Young people, peace and security
61. The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization conducted interviews with Libya n
youth in partnership with the Libyan Youth Voice Organization to identify core values
for peacebuilding in 12 schools in Sirte and Misratah. This will inform future United
Nations activities related to youth, peace and security.

F.

Coordination and international assistance
62. Significant progress was made towards the finalization of the United Nations
strategic framework for the period 2019–2020. On 7 June, UNDP, UNFPA and
UNICEF presented the final draft of their country programme documents for 2019–
2020, which will be considered by their respective executive boards in September
2018. On 15 May, the human rights working group, co-chaired by the Ministry of
Justice and UNSMIL, was launched under the coordination framework for
international assistance. At the request of the Ministry of Planning and with financial
assistance from the United Kingdom, a new database was developed to inform
evidence-based decision making and support the coordination of international
assistance.

G.

Humanitarian, stabilization and development assistance
63. The humanitarian situation remained fragile owing to the protracted political
conflict and economic hardship. Periodic, but increasingly frequent, escalation of
armed conflict resulted in displacement, while humanitarian actors often faced
challenges or restrictions imposed on access.
64. The Libya Humanitarian Response Plan for 2018 remained poorly funded, with
only 19 per cent of the required $313 million having been contributed. Protection and
health were severely underfunded. Increasing respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights law remained a key priority, which requires the implementation
of a wide range of protection interventions for all vulnerable groups. Support for the
dignified and safe return of internally displaced persons is also key and depends on
urgent, systematic and increased access being granted to areas of active conflict, such
as Darnah and southern Libya.
65. Humanitarian access to Darnah was severely limited. The Libyan Red Crescent,
with support from international entities, including the World Health Organization
(WHO) and the International Organization for Migration (IOM), covered the majority
of the initial emergency needs of internally displaced persons around and inside the
city. Later on, UNICEF addressed the needs of 1,000 displaced boys and girls while
the multisectoral response to the population was scaled up to meet the needs of an
additional 1,000 families and 36,000 schoolchildren previously assisted early in 2018.
66. During the reporting period, there were over 690,351 migrants in Libya,
including women (9 per cent of identified migrants) and children (9 per cent), of
whom 42 per cent were unaccompanied and 58 per cent accompanied. Between 8 May

12/16

18-13987

S/2018/780

and 28 June, 6,827 migrants arrived in Italy from Libya, while 276 deaths were
recorded. At the same time, 3,557 migrants were returned to the shores of Libya by
the Libyan Coast Guard. At disembarkation points, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and IOM provided individuals with
medical and humanitarian assistance. From 1 January to 26 June, IOM assisted 8,710
migrants, of whom 2,235 were helped to return to 23 countries of origin through the
voluntary repatriation programme.
67. Of the 53,713 refugees and asylum seekers registered with UNHCR in Libya,
1,469 were registered during the reporting period. In addition, some 4,000 refugees
and asylum seekers are currently detained in Libya, according to U NHCR. During its
183 monitoring visits to detention centres during the reporting period, UNHCR
provided 3,972 medical consultations and material support to detained migrants and
refugees. Since November 2017, UNHCR has evacuated 1,858 refugees from Libya
(1,536 to Niger, 312 to Italy and 10 to Romania), of whom 516 were evacuated during
the reporting period.
68. More than 7,000 migrants were detained in official facilities. This figure does
not include detention centres maintained by armed groups. To date, the Libyan
authorities have reported the closure of 25 detention centres. To ensure that legal cases
involving unaccompanied migrant children take into account the best interest of the
child, UNICEF, IOM and UNHCR established an emergency best interest
determination panel. To inform future programming, UNICEF is finalizing an
assessment regarding unaccompanied and separated migrant children on the basis of
primary data collected in Libya and Italy.
69. WHO deployed mobile medical teams to five health-care facilities in Sirte
providing 4,000 persons with primary and specialized health care. Over 500 medical
consultations were provided to internally displaced persons from Tawurgha ’ at a
WHO-supported clinic in Qararat al-Qataf. The World Food Programme gradually
increased its assistance during the reporting period, feeding up to 79,000 vulnerable
people, of whom 52 per cent were female and 48 per cent male.
70. To enhance the capacity of local entities dealing with explosive remnants of war,
including those supporting Government-led efforts to stabilize areas liberated from
ISIL, UNMAS provided the Free Fields Foundation, a Libyan non-governmental
organization, with medical and explosive ordnance disposal equipment and
coordinated the delivery of disposal-related equipment and training for the Libyan
military engineers and specialized police units. In Misratah, UNMAS continued
efforts to destroy 200 tons of explosive remnants of war and to secure the ground for
wider humanitarian action, early recovery and sustainable development. However,
mine action actors were unable to carry out intensive clearance activities in Tawurgha ’
in preparation for a safe, dignified and durable return of internally displaced persons,
as access was denied.
71. UNFPA, in partnership with the Ministry of Health, the Libyan Association for
Midwives and the National Centre for Disease Control, organized a series of events
for the International Day of the Midwife, including a workshop involving more than
100 midwives from all parts of Libya to review the midwifery regulations and set
recommendations for advancing midwifery in Libya. It also deployed psychologists
and social workers to primary health-care centres in Sirte, Jufrah, Benghazi, Tripoli
and Sabha to provide integrated psychosocial support to victims of gender-based
violence and women suffering from mental health issues.
72. On 25 June, UNFPA and the United Nations Human Settlements Programme
(UN-Habitat), in partnership with the Sirte municipal council and the Bureau of
Statistics and Census and under the overall coordination of the Ministry of Planning,
presented a profile report on Sirte city and its population to the international
18-13987

13/16

S/2018/780

community. The report includes the preliminary results of a multisectoral household
survey and an urban functionality assessment, with a comprehensive review and
analysis of primary and secondary data sources. Following protracted conflict in and
around the city, the report informs future programming.
73. Programme delivery continued across Libya under th e UNDP Stabilization
Facility. On 7 and 8 May, in Tunis, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) and the National Economic and Social Board of Libya, in coordination
with UNSMIL, co-organized a round table with experts on Libyan national prior ities
regarding combating corruption and money-laundering. Experts developed
recommendations to help Libyans meet their obligations under the United Nations
Convention against Corruption.

V. Deployment of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and security arrangements
Operational concept and return to Libya
74. During the reporting period, UNSMIL continuously and gradually increased its
presence in Tripoli and elsewhere in Libya. The Mission’s expanding footprint
enabled staff to intensify outreach and interaction with Libyan interlocutors
throughout the country and to increase support to national counterparts, particularly
leading up to the electoral processes. In addition, the Mission arranged short -term
temporary presences of staff in Benghazi and conducted visits to other locations
throughout the country.
75. In 2019, UNSMIL will continue to increase and intensify even further its
engagement and support to national interlocutors and counterparts, political and
security conditions permitting. To that end, it is foreseen that the Mission would
consolidate its permanent presence in Libya. This transition would be carried out in
phases, based on mandated operational priorities and taking into consideration
political and security conditions. As a priority, the Mission plans to consolidate its
presence in Tripoli, re-establish a stable presence in the east, namely Benghazi, and
continue its regular outreach to other parts of the country, including the south. The
Mission’s staffing needs in all components will continue to be adjusted to ensure
effective and efficient mandate delivery across the country.
Security and safety of staff members and operations
76. United Nations personnel in Libya continued to work in a high -risk security
environment. Restrictions continued to be imposed on the movement of personnel in
the country and on international staff travelling by air to Tripoli and other destinations
within Libya.

VI. Observations
77. Important steps forward were taken in the implementation of the United Nations
action plan to end Libya’s transition. While elections must be held to renew the
mandates of institutions in the country and establish a new executive authority, it is
equally important that the proper conditions be in place. I urge the Libyan parties,
and in particular the members of the House of Representatives and the High Council
of State, who were among the four Libyan actors represented at the Paris conference
(see para. 9 above), to implement their commitments.

14/16

18-13987

S/2018/780

78. Escalation of conflict in the oil crescent and subsequent action by the Libyan
National Army threatened to unravel progress achieved in the political process. I
reiterate the importance of placing all natural resources, their production and their
revenues, under the control of the recognized Libyan authorities. In that regard, I
recall the request of the Security Council, in its resolution 2259 (2015)that the
integrity and unity of internationally recognized national institutions, including the
Central Bank, the National Oil Corporation and the Libyan Investment Authority, be
protected. Dissolving parallel institutions is of paramount importance.
79. The people of Libya have expressed an overwhelming demand for a unified
army and police and a sustainable solution to the issue of armed groups. There is a
clear need to build professional, accountable and unified security institutions
throughout the country. I encourage Member States to support Libyan efforts to
transition to a State monopoly on legitimate and capable State security institutions,
complemented by outreach to armed groups to foster their support for both the
transition and the political process outlined in the United Nations action plan.
80. The security situation on the ground needs to improve in order to create an
atmosphere conducive to elections. I commend the High National Electoral
Commission for its efforts since the 2 May terrorist attack on its headquarters to
ensure readiness to conduct elections and to facilitate Libya’s democratic process. I
remind all Libyan parties of their expressed commitment to improve the atmosphere
for national elections.
81. Various Libyan authorities now accept that they need to take action to protect
the country’s wealth. In this regard, I call for greater transparency and accountability
of Libyan economic and financial institutions. I welcome the request of Prime
Minister Serraj to the Security Council to review the internationally recognized
Central Bank of Libya in Tripoli and the central bank in the east. I have requested my
Special Representative to provide early proposals to the Security Council, in the
context of the United Nations action plan, taking into account his dialogue with all
Libyan parties, as requested in the Council’s press statement of 19 July
(www.un.org/press/en/2018/sc13429.doc.htm).
82. I am concerned by the economic situation in Libya, which threatens the stability
and unity of the country. Economic stability, development and stronger growth, as
well as government institutions to deliver public services to Libyan citizens, are of
critical importance. In this regard, I urge all Libyan authorities to commit to the
agreement to undertake economic reform that is fair and will deliver long -term gains
for the benefit of the Libyan population, as agreed by key Libyan actors at the
economic dialogue in June. UNSMIL will continue to support the Government of
National Accord in the consolidation of economic arrangements, including reform
and policy.
83. I welcome the continued strong engagement of Libyan women in political,
peacebuilding, recovery and reconciliation processes. I commend the dedicated
efforts made to ensure their participation in the national conference process and to
underline the imperative of women’s inclusion in the political process. The
advancement of gender equality and women’s full and effective participation in
Libya’s political and economic life is in Libya’s interest and I urge all actors to
implement Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) in particular.
84. I am concerned by the deteriorating humanitarian situation across parts of Libya.
I commend Member States for their contributions to the Libya Stabilization Fund and
encourage further funding for the Libya Humanitarian Response Plan, which is aimed
at supporting 1.1 million people in need, particularly protection and health
interventions for vulnerable Libyan communities.

18-13987

15/16

S/2018/780

85. I am concerned by the surge of civilian casualties amid the escalation of conflict
and violence in the eastern city of Darnah and the oil crescent region. I call upon all
parties to the conflict to fully respect international humanitarian law, including by
taking all feasible precautions to protect civilians and to ensure that the wounded and
sick, both civilians and those who have participated in hostilities, are cared for,
including through medical evacuations. Parties to the conflict should also facilita te
safe passage for civilians wishing to leave areas of active conflict.
86. I remain concerned about human rights violations and abuses committed in the
context of detention, and the prolonged arbitrary detention of thousands of men,
women and children without due process. I continue to call for the closure of
detention centres and respect for the human rights of those who are detained.
Authorities must prioritize the release of all those detained arbitrarily, provide
humane treatment and conditions for those detained lawfully and ensure that all are
afforded due process rights. To build a country on the foundations of the rule of law,
authorities must signal a zero-tolerance policy for torture, summary executions and
unlawful killings in custody, and the pursuit of accountability for past alleged abuses.
They must also suspend all decisions integrating armed groups into State institutions
without any vetting process to remove those reasonably suspected of committing
human rights violations. Given the important role of truth-seeking in advancing
reconciliation, an appropriate legal framework for an independent human remains
identification process is crucial.
87. I welcome the Security Council’s decision to impose sanctions on six leaders of
human trafficking networks. I encourage the Libyan authorities to do more to identify
and prosecute all those responsible for such heinous crimes and other violations and
abuses against migrants, asylum seekers and refugees in Libya. I also encourage
Libyan authorities to fully cooperate with the International Criminal Court, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1970 (2011), to help bring about justice
and accountability for crimes in Libya under international la w.
88. I wish to reiterate my appreciation to the Government of Nepal for providing
the personnel of the United Nations Guard Unit. I also wish to express my gratitude
to my Special Representative for Libya, Ghassan Salamé, and to the staff of the United
Nations system in Libya for their dedication and hard work in support of a peaceful
end to the transition in Libya.

16/16

18-13987
