S/PV.8216

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8216th meeting

Tuesday, 27 March 2018, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Blok . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Netherlands)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Dah
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on progress in the implementation of the
31 December 2016 political agreement (S/2018/128)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2018/174)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-08563 (E)
*1808563*

S/PV.8216

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2409 (2018).

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on progress
in the implementation of the 31 December 2016
political agreement (S/2018/128)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2018/174)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2018/260, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/128, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on progress in the implementation
of the 31 December 2016 political agreement, and
document S/2018/174, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Côte
d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, France,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru, Poland,
Russian Federation, Sweden, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
2/8

27/03/2018

Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I would
like to welcome you, Sir, as you preside over the
Security Council today. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Delattre for France’s work on this very
important mandate.
We are entering a critical time with regard to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and today’s vote
represents a pivotal juncture for the United Nations
Mission there. Just as the previous United Nations
Mission helped organize the first free elections in more
than 40 years in 2006, the current Mission is now poised
to help support the first peaceful transfer of power in
the country’s history. It has not always been clear that
this day would come. Last year the Council said all
the right things about prioritizing the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), but throughout
the year it was clear that the Mission continued to be
pulled in multiple directions. Its mandate was too broad
and unfocused.
The
Secretary-General’s
strategic
review
recognized that lack of focus and called for
streamlining the mandate to emphasize a limited set
of priorities. We shared that view and have fought to
ensure that the protection of civilians and support of
the electoral process are at the heart of the Mission.
By streamlining the number of non-priority tasks and
directing the Mission to allocate resources according
to the tasks that remain, we have made it clear that
the Mission and the Council will work to fulfil their
common purpose, which is ensuring that elections are
held. After all, without free, open and credible elections
in December, anything that MONUSCO sets out to do
will be complicated by political unrest and the spectre
of violence.
We even took the step of endorsing key benchmarks
leading to elections in December. In advancing those
benchmarks, the Mission must work closely with the
country’s Independent National Electoral Commission,
while the Secretary-General must provide honest,
accurate assessments of progress — or the lack of
it, as the case may be — in the approach to election
day. However, adhering to an electoral calendar will
18-08563

27/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

mean little if the Congolese people are denied their
fundamental rights to freedom of expression and
assembly, or the right to choose among a variety of
credible candidates. Free and fair elections simply
cannot coexist with attempts to harass, intimidate or
otherwise silence voters.
Beyond elections, we sought to make the Mission
more responsive by clarifying that the Intervention
Brigade operates under the command of the United
Nations Force Commander. That mandate enables the
Force Commander to deploy the Intervention Brigade
throughout the entire country rather than confining it to
the east, and ensures that a unified command structure
can respond to the needs of the Congolese people. We
also sought to improve the performance of MONUSCO’s
troops. Too many peacekeepers and innocent civilians
lost their lives in the past year when the Mission’s forces
failed to respond. We must hold troops to the highest
possible standards and demand accountability if they
underperform. The Secretary-General can make a real
difference by ensuring that troop performance reviews
presented to the Council are clear and actionable.
That includes taking concrete steps to address sexual
exploitation and abuse. MONUSCO had more reported
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse than any
other United Nations peacekeeping mission in 2017.
That cannot continue.
Ultimately, the leaders of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo must take responsibility for the future
of their country. No Security Council resolution or
peacekeeping mission will bring about this incredible
country’s true potential. There must be the political will
necessary to bring about change and to see elections
through in 2018. We call on the United Nations, and
all States Members of the United Nations, particularly
regional partners, to invest more than troops or money.
We call on them to invest their time and political
capital in promoting free and fair Congolese elections
in 2018. The people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo must know that we have their backs, and the
Government must know that failure is not an option.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation supported the
adoption of resolution 2409 (2018), which renews
the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) for one year. When drafting the
resolution, we took into account the overall situation
in the country, the assessments by regional Powers and

S/PV. 8216

the views of the leaders of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We hope that holding the elections on
23 December, as scheduled, will help to reduce tensions
in the country.
We welcome the measures that the authorities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have undertaken in
preparation for the December elections, including the
passing of a new electoral law, finalization of the revised
electoral lists, Parliament’s approval of an electoral
budget and publication of the election timetable by the
Independent National Electoral Commission. In the
light of comments that have already made today on the
subject of elections, we would like to note that one of
the core principles of resolution 2409 (2018) is respect
for the sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In that regard, there should be no attempts
to impose solutions to electoral issues on Kinshasa.
That also applies to discussions on the issue of using
voting machines.
During the critical pre-election period we call on
MONUSCO’s leadership to keep strictly to the mandate
set forth in the resolution adopted today. We would
like to recall that pursuant to resolution 2409 (2018),
the protection of civilians during the electoral process
must be carried out with full respect for the core
principles of peacekeeping and without interfering in
Kinshasa’s domestic affairs. It will be crucial to avoid
any possibility of a situation in which MONUSCO will
be supporting one of the Congolese parties, especially
especially under the pretext of combatting violence
surrounding the elections.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): In
recent years, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has been actively advancing the
peace process and enhancing capacity-building in the
area of security and governance, and China commends
those efforts. Meanwhile, the country is still facing
multiple challenges on the political, security and
humanitarian fronts and needs the ongoing support and
assistance of the international community.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) has played an important role in
maintaining peace and stability there, and the
international community should continue to support it
in implementing its mandate. Against that backdrop,
China voted in favour of the Council’s adoption today

18-085633/8

S/PV.8216

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

27/03/2018

of resolution 2409 (2018), which extends MONUSCO’s
mandate.

where necessary, including dealing with the question of
temporary reinforcement.

China has always maintained that in providing
assistance to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the international community should ensure that its
Government takes the lead in resolving its own issues
and that its sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity is fully respected, helping it to strengthen its
own security so that it can achieve peace and stability
on its own.

The resolution is clear that the elections must go
ahead on 23 December and lead to a peaceful transfer of
power in accordance with the Constitution. All parties
must ensure that the conditions are in place for credible
elections to take place, which means sticking to the
electoral calendar and ensuring full implementation
of the December 2016 political agreement, including
ensuring respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms. The Security Council should closely
follow progress against these benchmarks in the
coming months.

China has always supported a peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and has taken an
active part in peacekeeping operations there. We have
also provided humanitarian assistance, such as medicine
and food, and we have actively participated in its
reconstruction and economic and social development.
China stands ready to work with the international
community to continue to play a constructive role in
achieving peace, stability and development in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
welcome you to the Council today, Mr. President, and to
thank France for its work in facilitating the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2409 (2018).
I would like to concentrate on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) itself, which has a
vital job to do. This is a crucial time in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It stands poised on the verge
of hope. With nine months to go before the elections,
the country is facing increased insecurity and a
deteriorating humanitarian situation in many areas.
MONUSCO needs the strong backing of the
Security Council now more than ever, so our
unanimous adoption today of resolution 2409 (2018)
is all the more important. We particularly welcome
the resolution’s clear focus on two priorities for the
Mission — protecting civilians and supporting the
implementation of the 2016 political agreement. As
outlined in its strategic review, a whole-of-Mission
approach will be needed to successfully deliver on
those objectives. We also welcome the strategic
review’s focus on enabling MONUSCO to evolve so
that it is flexible and agile and can respond to emerging
protection threats. We welcome the proposals to unlock
the Intervention Brigade. At the same time, we should
keep these changes under review and make adjustments
4/8

Finally, I would like to stress that the United
Kingdom strongly welcomes the language in the
resolution on sexual exploitation and abuse. We fully
support the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy
and urge the United Nations to keep the Council fully
informed on its progress in implementing that policy.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): We also welcome
the adoption of resolution 2409 (2018) and thank
the French delegation for its work in facilitating the
Security Council’s work on the resolution.
The year 2018 will be a crucial one for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and it is clear
that the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) has a critical role to play. One decisive
step towards peace and stability will be the holding of
credible, transparent, inclusive and peaceful elections
on 23 December, ensuring the democratic transfer of
power, in accordance with the Constitution and the
31 December 2016 political agreement. MONUSCO
has now been given the task of providing the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with logistical and
technical support and good offices for this endeavour,
including ensuring the participation, involvement
and representation of women at all levels. It has also
been given the task of protecting civilians through a
comprehensive approach, making better use of early
warning and early responses, including prevention, as
well as by improving its military response. In all of
this, the Mission needs to be given adequate resources.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
underline the important role of the relevant regional
organizations and neighbouring countries in ensuring
an environment for credible elections. We look forward
to continuing to engage with regional actors in order
18-08563

27/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

to facilitate united Council action in support of
such efforts.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2409
(2018), which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). With this
unanimous adoption, the Security Council has once
again shown its unity with regard to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, a unity that is an essential
condition for the success of the process under way.
First, the Council has shown its unity regarding
the political and security situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The upcoming electoral period
will be crucial to the future not only of the country but
of the region as a whole. These elections should enable
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for the first
time in its history, to experience a peaceful transfer of
power. The challenge is historic and is being confronted
in a delicate context. Without credible and universally
accepted elections, the stability of the country and the
entire region is at stake. To meet that challenge, several
conditions, which the Security Council stresses in the
resolution, are necessary.
The first is confidence in the technical process
of organizing elections and respect for the electoral
calendar. The Council calls on the Congolese officials
in charge of organizing the elections, and in particular
the Independent National Electoral Commission, to
do everything possible to ensure the transparency and
credibility of the elections. That includes the effective
establishment of the team of international electoral
experts that the African Union, the Southern African
Development Community, the European Union, the
United Nations and the International Organization of la
Francophonie have proposed to deploy.
The second condition is the creation of an open and
peaceful climate in which all candidates can declare
their candidacies and campaign freely without fear
of reprisal. The Council reiterates its call for respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms, starting
with the right to assembly, as well as the need for the
proportionate use of force in the preservation of public
order. It calls for the general ban on demonstrations
to be lifted. It is essential that the violations that have
been seen during the latest demonstrations do not
recur and that the perpetrators be brought to justice. In
this respect, the Council welcomes the establishment

S/PV. 8216

of a joint Congolese commission of inquiry and calls
for the implementation of its recommendations. With
respect to all these aspects, the Council will continue
to follow the electoral preparations very closely and
will work in close coordination with the countries of
the region to facilitate free, credible, transparent and
peaceful elections.
Secondly, the Council has demonstrated its unity
with respect to the role it wishes to give to MONUSCO.
The Mission has two very clear and closely related
priorities: the protection of civilians, on the one hand,
and support for the preparation of elections and the
implementation of the 31 December 2016 political
agreement, on the other. All other Mission activities
must be carried out in support of those priorities.
Without adequate preparation for the elections, the
stability of the country and the security of civilians are
at risk. If civilians are not protected, it is the exercise of
their right as citizens to decide their future that could
be called into question.
Finally, in the resolution, the Council strongly
encourages MONUSCO to pursue the internal
reforms initiated this year following its strategic
review. Progress has been made, and the Mission has
undertaken the necessary adjustments. It is seeking
to be more responsive and mobile and to make better
use of all the tools at its disposal. The integrated
approach to the protection of civilians is welcome, as
is the concept of protection by projection. The Council
has given MONUSCO a clear and achievable mandate
and the means to accomplish its tasks, including
maintaining its troop ceiling. That is an essential point.
It encourages the Secretariat and the Mission, together
with its troop-contributing countries, to pursue these
reforms with ambition.
Beyond MONUSCO, by successfully coordinating
the implementation of the 31 December 2016 political
agreement, it is up to all of us — but first and foremost,
of course, the Congolese themselves, and especially the
regional actors involved under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework agreement, and the region as a
whole — to enable all Congolese to regain confidence
in the electoral process so that free, inclusive, credible
and transparent elections can be held on 23 December.
The measures for easing tensions that are provided for
in the agreement should contribute to this end.
In our view, those are the conditions for the success
of the electoral process in the Democratic Republic

18-085635/8

S/PV.8216

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of the Congo within the agreed timetable. The unity
we have shown today is an essential asset in this
respect. The Council should rest assured of France’s
firm commitment in this direction in support of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the Netherlands.
Today the Security Council sends a strong signal
that it stands united in support of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). In particular,
the Council has reaffirmed the political and technical
support that MONUSCO will give to the electoral
process. The Kingdom of the Netherlands firmly
believes that MONUSCO can and must contribute to
the restoration of trust among all parties.
We also welcome the clear benchmarks for the
electoral process. We will continue to monitor them,
together with the implementation of the 31 December
political agreement. We also welcome the addition of a
provision on the protection of peaceful demonstrators
as part of the protection-of-civilians mandate. The
Mission is becoming increasing mobile and agile. We are
therefore pleased with the emphasis on the importance
of community engagement, key enablers and early
warning and response. These are conditions for the
successful implementation of the strategic review.
We look forward to the comprehensive performance
review and efforts to improve the Mission’s effectiveness.
Lastly, the Netherlands fully supports the request
to the Secretary-General to carry out contingency
planning. That could be a vital tool for preventing the
conflict from escalating. This is a crucial year for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as the country
prepares itself for its first-ever democratic transfer
of power. Today the Council has sent a strong signal
that it not only stands united behind MONUSCO but,
more importantly, behind the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): As your
presidency of the Security Council nears its end, my
6/8

27/03/2018

delegation is honoured to be able to congratulate you,
Sir, and express its satisfaction and appreciation for the
outstanding way in which the Netherlands has led the
work of the Council for the month of March.
My delegation is also grateful for the opportunity
you have given me to speak to the Council at today’s
meeting, held to adopt resolution 2409 (2018), which
renews the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). I also want to emphasize how
much we respect the Council and once again convey to
its members the gratitude of the Government and the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for
the consistent interest that the Council has taken in my
country’s situation.
My delegation takes note of the Council’s
adoption of resolution 2409 (2018), thereby extending
the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) to 31 March 2019. We believe
that in taking this action, the United Nations, through
the Council, has reaffirmed its willingness to spare
no effort to continue the struggle begun nearly two
decades ago to help us restore peace and stability in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In that regard, what should the Congolese people
expect from the mandate? Before answering that question,
it is worth mentioning here that, as we have always said,
MONUSCO is in the Democratic Republic of Congo
at the explicit request of the Congolese Government. It
has been operating there for almost 20 years. During
that time, the Security Council has renewed successive
mandates of the Mission despite the fact that none of
them have been implemented to the satisfaction of our
people, with the result that many friendly countries are
still wondering what this United Nations Mission has
been doing in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for all those years. As Mr. Léonard She Okitundu, our
Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Regional Integration, underscored to the Council on
7 March (see S/PV.8198), my Government’s view is that
the renewal of MONUSCO’s mandate must not become
mere routine but should rather represent an opportunity
to assess the achievements and failures of previous
mandates so as to make the necessary adjustments and
corresponding improvements.
Accordingly, the renewal of the mandate should
take into account the expectations of the Congolese
18-08563

27/03/2018

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

people, whose greatest desire is to see the negative
forces and various armed groups that are running
rampant in the eastern part of our country totally
eradicated. In other words, the new mandate of
MONUSCO should be implemented in such a way as
to enable it to effectively achieve the goals that the
Council has set for it, so that peace will be restored
to the people in the country’s eastern regions. As we
understand it, therefore, while the initial mission of the
United Nations forces in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was about peacekeeping and later became part
of the efforts to stabilize the situation on the ground,
they should now be dedicated first and foremost to their
main, defined tasks.
Given that, we believe that today’s resolution has
two major shortcomings that could jeopardize the ability
to achieve its goals. They are the excessive number of
its tasks and its ordering and choice of priorities. With
regard to their excessive number, we should point out
that in the context of stabilizing the situation on the
ground, MONUSCO’s first responsibility, as most
Council members have said, is combating armed
groups so as to protect civilians and restore the peace
and security that we so urgently need in the country’s
eastern region. In that regard, we have to say that the
Congolese people find it difficult to understand why
MONUSCO has to take on other responsibilities when
it has still not satisfactorily fulfilled its primary task.
In our view, assigning it new tasks takes it even further
away from its essential mission.
With regard to the choice of priorities, we believe
that better results would be achieved by organizing
them starting with combating the armed groups and
protecting civilians. Members of the Council will
agree that the best way to protect our civilians must
be by combating the armed groups, considering that in
the eastern part of our country, which is embroiled in
armed conflict, civilians are suffering from the worst
misdeeds and every kind of abuse at the hands of armed
groups and negative forces. Considering the time that
MONUSCO has dedicated to resolving that issue, we
believe that the resolution could have included a timeline,
with a deadline for their eradication. Moreover, given
the close links between the armed groups’ activities
and the illicit traffic in minerals, it would have made
a great deal of sense for the resolution to prioritize
combating the illicit trade in natural resources in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Needless to say, it
is an illusion to believe that we can protect civilians

S/PV. 8216

without countering the armed groups, just as we cannot
eradicate the armed groups without addressing their
sources of funding and supply channels.
The second priority could have focused on
stabilization and implementing the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration (DDRR)
programme. In order to achieve stabilization in the
eastern part of the country, stabilization and the support
programme for DDRR need to be included among
the priorities of MONUSCO’s mandate. As Council
members are aware, the DDRR programme is crucial to
reintegrating ex-combatants into their communities in
order to prevent them from being re-recruited by armed
groups. The third and fourth priorities could have been
reform of the security sector and, lastly, support for the
electoral process.
I should add to this the fact that the Council has
failed to take into consideration my Government’s
position regarding its desire for a substantial decrease
in the numbers of MONUSCO’s troops before the
Mission’s final withdrawal, which we have expressed
to the Council for two years through the strategic
dialogue with MONUSCO and which was reiterated on
7 March by my Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration. We believe
that the Council’s position on this cannot be justified by
using the holding of elections as a reason not to honour
that request.
Despite all those issues, we are pleased to note
that the resolution recognizes the importance of the
Intervention Brigade and provides for strengthening
its operational effectiveness. For my Government, the
Intervention Brigade, which so far has been the only
offensive force dealing with armed groups, will have to
work closely with the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC). If it is to regain
its former effectiveness, it will have to be adequately
equipped. It will therefore appropriate to authorize, as
part of its arsenal, its use of Tanzanian artillery and
South African aviation, which at one point it had to give
up, leading to its ineffectiveness.
In conclusion, I would be remiss if I did not convey
the mixed feelings of the Congolese people who, given
the failure of MONUSCO’s efforts to combat the armed
groups, would like to see it finally fulfil its mandated
mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
that context, as my Vice-Prime Minister said in this
Chamber, we believe that the United Nations will have

18-085637/8

S/PV.8216

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

succeeded in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
only when the question of the renewal of MONUSCO’s
mandate no longer needs to be discussed, because we
will have achieved the goal for which it was deployed in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that regard,
again as my Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration underscored,
we hope that today’s resolution will represent the

8/8

27/03/2018

penultimate renewal of MONUSCO’s mandate. It is
therefore important to ensure that it is built up under the
leadership of the FARDC so that all the negative forces
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are finally
neutralized and the peace that the people in the eastern
regions of my country dream of becomes a reality there.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

18-08563
