United Nations

S/PV.4087 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth Year

4087th Meeting
Monday, 10 January 2000, 2.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Holbrooke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .

Mr. Listre
Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Duval
Mr. Qin Huasun
Mr. Dejammet
Miss Durrant
Mr. Hasmy
Mr. Ouane
Dr. Amathila
Mr. van Walsum
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Mustapha
Mr. Yel’chenko
Sir Jeremy Greenstock

Agenda
The situation in Africa
The impact of AIDS on peace and security in Africa

00-23493 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation
concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The meeting resumed at 2.40 p.m.
The President: Before I call on the next speaker on
my list, I would like to ask members, now that the
Ministers have all had their say, to consider shortening their
statements, especially — as was said earlier by the
Ambassador of France — when they repeat statistics that
we have already heard.
Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): You have invited us,
Mr. President, to be brief and to the point in our statements
and to concentrate on what Member States or the
international community as a whole can do to address the
devastating impact of AIDS in Africa. We will of course
comply with your wish, but we do so with some hesitation,
for anyone who speaks about AIDS in Africa feels an urge
to show that he is aware of the almost unimaginable scale
of this humanitarian emergency. To that end, he is tempted
to highlight at least some of the mind-boggling statistics
about the impact of AIDS in making his own contribution
to the debate.
But we agree with you, Sir, that after the statements
we have just heard from the Secretary-General, from VicePresident Gore, from World Bank President Wolfensohn,
from United Nations Development Programme
Administrator Malloch Brown, from Executive Director Piot
of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) and from the Ministers of Health of Namibia,
Uganda and Zimbabwe, there is really no need for a further
description of the unspeakable tragedy that afflicts Africa.
In that respect virtually everything has been said, not only
today but also quite recently during the meeting on the
International Partnership against AIDS in Africa. Yet when
we ask ourselves what the Security Council can do — and
we understand this is the first question you want us to
address — we are inclined to conclude that strengthening
awareness has to be our primary objective.
My delegation does not need to be convinced that the
impact of AIDS is a legitimate subject for an open meeting
of the Security Council. The interface between AIDS and
conflict in Africa seems to be obvious. AIDS is a health
problem, but it is one that devastates whole economies,
overwhelms entire public health systems and ultimately
tends to destroy the very fabric of complete societies. As
such it is responsible for an unprecedented degree of gloom
and despair, which in itself is one of the most virulent
seeds of conflict.
Conversely, conflicts clearly have an accelerating
effect on the spread of AIDS. Soldiers and displaced

2

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
civilians on the move are important sources of HIV
dissemination, and in areas of conflict the fight against
HIV/AIDS is particularly difficult. According to a
UNAIDS report, the degree of HIV infection among
military personnel may well be two to five times higher
than that of the civilian population. Therefore, if the
Security Council is expected to contribute to increased
awareness, it might usefully concentrate on this particular
aspect of the problem and call on all African States to
demonstrate their commitment to combating AIDS by
focusing on the armed forces under their command. Let
the awareness and the responsibility and the discipline
start with the military.
The Netherlands will continue to contribute to the
battle against AIDS — especially in Africa — at at least
the current level. According to reports from UNAIDS and
the Harvard AIDS Institute, the Netherlands is the second
largest donor worldwide in both absolute terms and on a
per capita basis. Our contributions are made available
both in a multilateral and in a bilateral context. Bilateral
AIDS programmes exist with Tanzania, Ethiopia,
Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Guinea-Bissau and Zambia. In
addition, an AIDS component is integrated into basic
health care activities supported by the Netherlands.
It is understood that the Netherlands subscribes to
the statement the representative of Portugal will deliver
on behalf of the European Union.
Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): As this
is my first statement in the Security Council, I should like
to extend my greetings to you, Mr. President, and to all
the members of the Council, the Secretary-General and
the staff of the Secretariat, who so efficiently contribute
to the work of the most important body responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Argentina has for some time maintained that, with
the end of the cold war, it has become easier to recognize
the fact that threats to international peace and security are
not exclusively related to the threat or the use of force,
but that they instead encompass a broader criterion that
has been called human security. I acknowledge that this
concept is still evolving and that it is not yet clearly
defined.
We have also said that peace and development are
two sides of the same coin. There can be no lasting peace
where the basic conditions for subsistence, education and
health are not guaranteed for the inhabitants.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
It is in this framework linking the concepts of human
security, peace and development that we believe the serious
issue of AIDS should be considered as a factor leading to
situations that have an effect on international security. In
this regard, we consider it appropriate to recall that His
Holiness Pope Paul VI, in his 1967 encyclical on the
development of peoples entitled Populorum Progressio,
stated that development was the new name of peace.
We have no doubt that AIDS erodes the potential for
human, social and economic development — elements that
are at the root of most current conflicts, both of
international conflicts and of domestic ones with
international repercussions.
The magnitude of the AIDS problem in Africa is
evidenced by the fact that the question is being taken up in
an open meeting of the Security Council, with the
participation of the Vice-President of the United States of
America, Mr. Al Gore, and of the President of the World
Bank, James Wolfensohn, for the first time in the history of
the Council, as well as by the high-level participation of
Members of the Organization in the debate.
The actions that are taken, or not taken, over the next
five years in combating AIDS will be decisive for the
future of the countries of sub-Saharan Africa and indeed
that of all humankind. In this connection, we would venture
to make the following suggestions as to measures that
should be taken.
In the view of the Republic of Argentina, the first step
should be to recognize that AIDS is not exclusively a health
problem but also affects development and, consequently,
security — a key issue in the elaboration of national and
regional policies. We believe that combating AIDS should
be a part of national development agendas along with issues
relating to combating illiteracy, hunger and infant
malnutrition.
The second step, we believe, should be increasing
financial assistance to this end. At the present time the
international community is allocating inadequate resources
to programmes to combat AIDS. The level of international
response must be commensurate with the spread of the
epidemic, which is increasing three times faster than the
resources allocated to control it. Likewise, an increase in
official development assistance, which has been declining
in recent years, is necessary. This is the principal
responsibility of those that have more resources — in other
words, the developed countries.

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
In this context, in the spirit of the G-8 summit held
in Cologne in June 1999, we should consider reducing the
debt of the African countries most seriously affected by
AIDS and least able to muster the resources to combat it.
We also believe that the private sector has an important
part to play in mobilizing resources.
The third step should be more active participation by
civil society, including non-governmental organizations.
Fourthly, we believe that insofar as is possible we
should increase cooperation among international
organizations. In this respect, the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Bank, inter alia, all do
important work in the area of prevention, dissemination
of information, education, and technical and financial
assistance. This work should continue, intensify and,
ultimately, be coordinated with the work of regional
organizations.
Fifthly, we believe it necessary to intensify the
coordination among international organizations, nongovernmental organizations and governmental authorities.
Lastly, we cannot fail to mention the situation of
AIDS orphans, which, as UNICEF has pointed out, is
indeed a unique tragedy in both its scope and nature. It
deserves priority attention and an emergency response.
We have just heard the situation described most
eloquently. We believe that the United Nations must
restate its commitment to tackle this epidemic, which is
particularly serious in Africa, where it affects one out of
four people, but which also exists throughout the world,
including Latin American and the Caribbean, as was
demonstrated by the data that was presented by the
United Nations Development Programme Administrator,
Mr. Malloch Brown.
I cannot conclude my statement without quoting the
Secretary-General's words of 6 December 1999:
“We must make the struggle against AIDS a true
priority in our work throughout Africa, on an equal
footing with our work for peace and security.”
(SG/SM/7247, p. 3)

3

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The Republic of Argentina fully agrees with that
statement and undertakes to provide its fullest cooperation.
Lastly, I must thank, on behalf of our delegation, the
delegation of the United States of America for having
brought such an important issue to the Council for
discussion.
The President: I thank the representative of Argentina
for his kind words about our presentation and for his
presence here today.
Mr. Duval (Canada): The Canadian delegation is very
appreciative of the briefings provided by the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Wolfensohn, Mr. Malloch Brown and
Dr. Peter Piot on ongoing efforts to address the unfolding
tragedy of AIDS in Africa. We also very much welcome
the profile given this crucial problem by the participation of
Vice-President Gore in this important meeting of the
Security Council. Canada has consistently argued that the
Council must broaden its definition of security to include
non-traditional threats, especially those which affect human
security. We commend you, Mr. President, and the
American delegation for giving the Security Council the
opportunity to consider the AIDS issue in the context of
peace and security in Africa. We also wish to commend the
work of Ambassador Greenstock of the United Kingdom
delegation, focused during December on difficult issues of
peace and security in Africa.
(spoke in French)
The AIDS pandemic represents a formidable threat to
the development of government institutions, economic
growth, political stability and human security in several
parts of the world. The figures that we heard this morning
show that in Africa this pandemic is more murderous than
war. The reality is that a third, if not half, of Africans
employed in the sectors of health, education, and security
and in the civil service are likely to die of AIDS over the
next five to 10 years. This is not just a human tragedy but
also a real threat to peace and stability in the countries
affected, which are already confronting many other
challenges. The efforts of African Governments to stem the
AIDS tide are hampered by civil strife, refugee flows, rapid
urbanization and poverty, each of which, in turn,
contributes to the further spread of HIV infection and
AIDS.
We must also consider the pandemic's impact on the
ability of African States to continue to play their part in
several peacekeeping operations around the world and in

4

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
Africa itself. In sub-Saharan Africa, Ministries of Defence
report averages of 20 to 40 per cent HIV positivity within
their armed services. As the disease progresses, this will
mean a loss of continuity at command level and within
the ranks of the army, and a reduction in the effectiveness
of prior peacekeeping training. Furthermore, in line with
the guidance provided by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, all peacekeepers, international observers and
relief aid workers need to fully understand, both
personally and professionally, the risks associated with
inappropriate sexual behaviour, and this is usually what
is involved.
Canada has been involved in the international fight
against AIDS since 1987. Total Canadian funding in
support of HIV/AIDS projects in developing countries
reached $22 million in 1999 alone. Canada's focus has
very much been on Africa, with four of five major
projects on that continent dealing with the promotion of
sexual health, HIV/AIDS control and prevention, the
strengthening of primary health-care capacity and
addressing the special needs of women and vulnerable
groups.
Last September, Carol Bellamy spoke of the need to
break the conspiracy of silence surrounding AIDS as an
important step in addressing the problem in Africa. We
congratulate Uganda and its Minister; indeed, that country
has set an example by reversing this devastating trend.
We also welcome the importance given to the issue by
President Moi of Kenya and President Mkapa of Tanzania
in their recent millennium addresses.
Like Secretary-General Kofi Annan, we also
welcome the courageous decisions of most African
Governments in recognizing that the first battle to be won
in the war against HIV/AIDS is to break the silence and
remove the stigma surrounding it. Dr. Piot reminded us
this morning that efforts already taken have yielded
positive results. Clearly, strong political commitment and
a united response on the part of Africans themselves will
go a long way in mitigating the impact of AIDS over the
short term, stemming the disease's growth over the
medium term and, hopefully, over the longer term
working towards its complete eradication.
It is equally clear that Africa cannot face this
problem alone. Canada is one of many countries which
has joined efforts with non-governmental and multilateral
organizations to assist Africans in their fight against
AIDS. The Secretary-General's launch of the International
Partnership against AIDS in Africa last December is a

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
welcome development which should help ensure a
coordinated approach involving national Governments,
private enterprise and multilateral agencies.
Only two decades after the breakout of HIV/AIDS,
important progress has been made in understanding the
virus and the relationship between HIV/AIDS and human
development. AIDS is no longer a single health problem. It
has become a complex, multifaceted issue for development.
The pervasiveness of conflict in Africa has been a key
stumbling block to development. War steals resources.
Therefore, the first and most obvious way the Council can
contribute to Africa's fight against AIDS is to intensify its
engagement in preventing and resolving conflict on that
continent.

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
with a tragedy we can barely comprehend, let alone
manage”.
Its effects are of tragic proportions, destroying the very
fabric of society. Over the last two decades, since it first
reared its head, it has become not just a public health
problem, but a problem with socio-economic and,
increasingly, security dimensions. It presents an enormous
challenge to African Governments in their developmental
efforts as the best of national planning goes awry in the
face of the devastating effects of the disease, especially
when valuable human capital trained at great cost falls
victim to the disease.

Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): At your request,
Mr. President, I shall go straight to the subject without the
usual complimentary remarks to Vice-President Gore, to
you, Sir, and to Ambassador Greenstock, which have been
well expressed by previous speakers with which my
delegation associates itself.

It is obvious that the AIDS issue is no longer an
essentially African problem. It has become a global
problem affecting many regions of the world, including
my own region of Asia, where it is also becoming an
issue of major concern. Indeed, very few regions have
been spared its pernicious effects, although the developing
countries bear the greatest burden on account of their lack
of capacity to contain the HIV/AIDS virus. Therefore, it
is fitting and proper that the fight against AIDS be
mounted on a global scale, as that is the only way the
scourge could conceivably be contained and eventually
stamped out. For this purpose, there is a need to launch
a concerted and vigorous global campaign against
HIV/AIDS involving a multipronged approach, involving
publicity to sensitize both Governments and publics, care
and education at every level of society, policy
coordination within and between Governments, medical
research, and greater involvement of civil society and the
private sector.

We are all too familiar with the AIDS statistics
affecting Africa. Many of these compelling facts have been
cited and highlighted by virtually all of the distinguished
speakers during this morning's session. I will therefore not
repeat them here. Suffice to say the AIDS epidemic in
Africa is indeed a pandemic affecting millions of people,
many of whom have succumbed to this terrible disease and
many still living but barely surviving. Many more will be
infected in the years to come until and unless humanity
finds a way to stop the spread of the pandemic once and
for all.

In this regard, the first ever meeting on international
partnerships against HIV/AIDS in Africa, held at the
United Nations Headquarters in New York on 6
December 1999, was welcome and timely. In his address
during that meeting Secretary-General Kofi Annan, inter
alia, underscored a number of priority objectives, namely,
to break the conspiracy of silence at every level, to meet
the needs of those already infected and their families, to
make effective treatment available at affordable prices to
Africans, to speed up the work of developing a vaccine
and to use all available means to halt the spread of the disease.

Clearly, the impact of AIDS on Africa has been
particularly debilitating. In the words of the SecretaryGeneral,

The meeting on international partnerships was the
first major step in the right direction in galvanizing and
coordinating global action towards addressing this scourge
of our generation. It was an action-oriented meeting. The
United Nations and other agencies involved, namely the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS

For its part, Canada pledges to support African
Governments as they take the lead in generating their own
national strategic plans to combat HIV/AIDS, to support
communities and community groups in their responses to
HIV/AIDS, to establish priorities in programming to ensure
optimal impact and cost effective interventions, and to
promote sustainable human development through a broad
approach including basic human needs — basic education,
primary health care and gender equity.

“the AIDS pandemic — unexpected, unexplained,
unspeakably cruel — presents us, especially Africa,

5

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
(UNAIDS) and its cosponsors, must be commended for this
initiative in focusing on the impact of AIDS in Africa. We
wished this meeting could have been organized much
earlier so that the AIDS issue in Africa could have been
addressed much sooner, but late is better than never. There
should be concrete follow-up actions in the coming months,
and in this regard my delegation looks forward to an agreed
plan of action expected to be finalized in May this year.
In our efforts to galvanizing global action to combat
the HIV/AIDS virus worldwide, beginning with Africa as
being the most seriously affected region, we should not lose
sight of the fact that while the virus knows no boundaries
and attacks indiscriminately, it is the poorer developing
countries that are most traumatized by the disease.
Therefore there is a need for the wealthier developed
countries — out of enlightened self-interest, if not pure
altruism — to make available more resources to ameliorate
the effects of the disease in the developing countries,
particularly the affected African countries.
Many of the African countries, burdened with
crippling debts, simply do not have the resources to carry
out effective prevention programmes or to provide
treatment to their people infected by HIV, as the drugs
necessary for the treatment are exorbitantly expensive. This
is where developed countries can and should play a major
and constructive role. They can, through their economic aid
programmes, make available the necessary drugs to African
countries. More importantly, they should pressure their
pharmaceutical companies to reduce the prices of these
drugs or allow compulsory licensing of life-saving drugs.
Indeed, at the International Congress on AIDS in the
Asia-Pacific region held recently in Kuala Lumpur, the
Prime Minister of Malaysia, Mahathir Mohamad, drew
attention to the fact that compulsory licensing was allowed
under the World Trade Organization but that, regrettably,
certain countries had aligned themselves with the giant
pharmaceutical companies, thereby denying developing
countries the right to produce cheaper drugs to save the
lives of their people. While it is true that pharmaceutical
companies have made heavy investments in research, they
should not try to recoup their costs and reap profits at the
expense of the sufferings of the poor. As Prime Minister
Mahathir said, it is regrettable that profit is taking precedent
over people's lives. He felt that the developed countries,
with their unprecedented wealth, could do more to reduce
the burden of the poor countries in this regard.
We must not only do more in addressing the AIDS
epidemic; we must do it better. The United Nations system,

6

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
with its global mission of protecting and promoting
human rights, peace and security, is uniquely placed to
provide assistance on very often difficult policy matters
relating to AIDS. The role of the United Nations in
combating AIDS is particularly pertinent, for, after all,
two of the most fundamental of human rights are the right
to life and health.
It is regrettable that when the world first learned
about HIV/AIDS infections, we underestimated the
breadth of the deadly path it would cut through the world.
Even as we are gradually coming to grips with it, we are
still underestimating the impact of the epidemic. And,
unfortunately, we are also underestimating our ability or
capacity to stop it — or at least to slow it down, as
evidenced by some of the success stories we have heard
this morning, particularly regarding Uganda. We look
forward to hearing further success stories in the coming
months and years.
In Africa, comparisons with the medieval bubonic
plague are not misplaced. To prevent an even greater
catastrophe, we need to work together — Governments,
businesses, universities, non-governmental organizations,
religious organizations and the media — to do more, to
do it better and to do it now. Yes, new resources will be
required. But the cost of action will certainly be less than
the cost of inaction. In this regard, my delegation
commends the important package of initiatives that the
United States intends to take, as announced by VicePresident Gore in his statement this morning.
We welcome these initiatives as a manifestation of
enlightened leadership on the part of the most influential
member of the international community. We trust these
initiatives will be vigorously pursued and emulated by
other developed countries that have not yet done so.
Indeed, nothing could be more appropriate and more
welcome than for the developed countries, led by the
United States, to launch a kind of Marshall Plan for
Africa to assist the continent in combating this scourge.
I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
organizing this meeting of the Council on the impact of
AIDS in Africa and its consequences for regional peace
and security, which has dramatized the concerns of the
international community on this important subject. It is a
timely wake-up call for the international community and
reinforces the efforts of the General Assembly and other
organs of the United Nations, as well as that of the
Secretary-General.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000

The President: I thank the Ambassador of Malaysia
for his important comments and kind words and for his
support in this innovative concept.

southern Africa, and more than £1 million going to train
volunteers to go out into African countries and spread the
message.

The representative of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland set the tone for this month's
focus on Africa by his enlightened and inspired leadership
of the Security Council in the last month of the last
century.

We have a £35 million health programme with
Malawi that is focusing on sexual and reproductive health
assistance programmes, and many other detailed
programmes with individual countries, including the
distribution of condoms. These programmes are beginning
to attack the actual problem we are facing.

Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I am
setting aside my speech and will just make one or two
extempore remarks. First of all, I applaud your initiative,
because you have hit on the first thing we can do and are
doing, which is to give this subject profile. Our thanks go
to Vice-President Gore for doing that in spades. It needs
profile, because not all African Governments are even
acknowledging that they have got a problem. Let us
applaud those who are — such as Uganda and Senegal for
actually starting efficient programmes on AIDS, and several
other countries whose leaders are now beginning to
acknowledge that something needs to be done.
Mozambique, Kenya, Swaziland, Botswana, Zimbabwe and
Namibia are all clearly beginning to do that; but there are
many others that are not. I think they need to report this
meeting and our interest in this subject, as a security
subject, to begin to get behaviour to change, as the
Ugandan Minister told us so clearly.
We ourselves, I think, are adding to the destigmatization of AIDS by having this meeting. But it has
got to be taken up by Africans. The fact is that the
prevalence of AIDS in Africa is a symbol of the
comparative failure of development, security and education
in Africa. That is an African failure, and it is an
international failure. It is not just one or the other. It is the
failure of both Africans and non-Africans. We have got to
inspire a different approach.
The second thing that is needed, apart from profile, is
resources. I think there is nothing that has been said today
in detail that is more important than the American
announcement on resources, but let us all put in our own
bit where we have done something. Last January, the
United Kingdom started a £100 million programme over a
three-year period on global AIDS. My Prime Minister
announced that £23 million of that would go to Africa last
month. Let us see what this money is going to be spent on.
It is going to be spent in the following way: £40 million
worth to research a vaccine; £7.5 million for a regional
AIDS initiative focused on prevention activities with the
Southern African Development Community (SADC), in

Mr. President, now I want to ask you a question:
how are we going to follow this up? It is all very well to
produce rhetoric, but, as I said earlier, we have done the
main work of today in the fact of having this meeting,
and rhetoric is not going to help. The Security Council is
only one element of this. I hope that before your month
is over, you will have organized a systematic cooperation
between the Security Council and other organs of the
United Nations that takes this subject forward. Otherwise,
we will stop with the words that we produced today.
Secondly, the United Nations — and the SecretaryGeneral must lead here — must have a system and a
structure for cooperation with other international
institutions and with Governments — and, as people have
said, with civil society. How is that going to happen? For
a start, I have mentioned one or two things that the
United Kingdom is doing. Is there going to be a register
or a clearing house of what programmes are being done,
in which countries, to what end? Otherwise, we will start
duplicating, or we will leave great gaps in countries that
desperately need help. So can we have a register or a
clearing house that exemplifies the coordination that we
are now all calling for?
Thirdly, we need leadership on this. That leadership
has got to come partly from the United Nations, from the
Secretary-General and from the Security Council, from
the Economic and Social Council, from the World Health
Organization, from the World Bank and others. The Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) can
perhaps bring this together. The United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) can play its part.
The UNAIDS analysis of where we have got to with
the AIDS catastrophe in Africa was an excellent piece of
work. No further analysis is needed today. Where is this
leading? And what kind of role is the Security Council
going to play?

7

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
What I think we need has already been said; but let us
say it again. It is five things: political will — that means
also profile; resources; capacity on the ground so that
programmes are well led and get to the points that are
necessary with expertise; partnership and coordination; and
research — we have got to have a vaccine.
Every developed country should be able to say
publicly what money it is putting into an AIDS
programme — and an AIDS programme in Africa. And
then we might be getting somewhere.
The President: The representative of the United
Kingdom has asked a series of questions that we cannot
leave hanging in the air. I hope future speakers will address
these questions.
The next speaker is the Ambassador of Tunisia, but
before calling on him, I would like to ask Dr. Piot if he
would respond to one specific point that Ambassador
Greenstock raised, and that is the question of a clearing
house. Does one now exist? Do you have a plan? Could
you give us all just a very precise response to that specific
question?
Dr. Piot: Yes, actually, this is one of our major
functions and roles. Such a clearing house exists on a
regional basis and in countries. The theme groups on
HIV/AIDS started doing that within the United Nations
system four years ago. Now they are reaching out; bilateral
donors, other actors, are joining these groups, and one of
the first functions is information exchange. That is also
happening at the continental level; and it is something that
is available partly through web sites as well as through
other means.
What I think will be needed is to push that through,
because, first of all, not every body has included HIV in its
development portfolio; and secondly, we also have to do a
better job when it comes to the private sector and nongovernmental organizations — what they are actually taking
on. The basis for that certainly exists and has to be
improved. I think this debate will greatly help that.
The President: I would simply request Dr. Piot —
bearing in mind that we have never discussed this issue
before, but that it may, as many speakers have suggested,
remain open for continuation — perhaps to circulate to the
members of the Security Council responses in writing to
some of the specifics, such as that one, in order to further
illuminate us, as I am sure he already does with the
Economic and Social Council.

8

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
Mr. Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic):
Although you, Sir, have asked us to refrain from
conveying expressions of admiration and gratitude, as
well as statistical analyses, I cannot help but express,
albeit briefly, our admiration and gratitude to your
friendly country for this important initiative, which
reflects the international community's interest in the
situation in Africa and highlights the disastrous impact of
HIV/AIDS on peace and security in Africa. We must also
thank the Secretary-General and those who spoke this
morning.
The very fact that the Security Council is addressing
the issue of HIV/AIDS is in itself a positive step that will
help increase international public awareness of the
dangers of this epidemic and of the need to adopt a global
strategy, mentioned repeatedly this morning, to combat
HIV/AIDS in the context of coordination and
complementarity and through the agency of competent
structures and organizations. We know that poverty,
hunger, debt and natural disasters, along with HIV/AIDS,
undermine African communities and destabilize African
societies. This is likely to lead to the expansion of
conflicts and crises. Tunisia hopes that all these problems
will be taken up by the international community with the
same degree of interest.
I shall not repeat the frightening statistics cited by
speakers this morning, although they clearly show that
HIV/AIDS is a major threat and that we must all act to
halt this crisis, which has touched countless people,
especially in Africa, and has jeopardized their basic right
to life. We feel that the enormous amounts of money and
efforts aimed at achieving peace, security and
development can be fully realized only if all the parties
involved act with resolve and allocate sufficient resources
to control this scourge. Thus, we reiterate the need for the
social commitment of all governmental and nongovernmental institutions and of civil society in order to
lift the veil of silence surrounding this disease and to
prevent discrimination in treating its victims. We would
urge the international community to support the
commitment of African States to combat this epidemic.
As an African country, Tunisia cannot but welcome
the courageous initiatives taken by brotherly African
countries that have adopted effective measures for
prevention and awareness and borne the economic and
social burdens of HIV/AIDS. We welcome the positive
achievements of some of these countries, which deserve
support and encouragement at the national level.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
At the continental level, we must recall that this
question was accorded early interest by African leaders.
The 1992 Dakar summit of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) adopted a declaration on HIV/AIDS, through
which all the leaders of Africa committed themselves to
mobilizing all the resources necessary to combat and
prioritize this disease. The Tunis summit of 1994 adopted
a resolution recommending that the Secretary-General of
the OAU create a special mechanism to follow up and
ensure the implementation of the Dakar declaration.
At Tunis, the OAU studied this question closely and
the President of the Republic of Tunisia sent a message to
the international community that focused on three factors:
the need to ensure international cooperation; the need to
strengthen international commitment and African efforts;
and the need to support scientific research and to make it
available to all countries. At the 1998 Ouagadougou
summit, the OAU established a fund to combat HIV/AIDS
and its Council of Ministers, at a meeting held in Algeria
last year, adopted a project for cooperation between the
OAU and programmes of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) to ease the suffering
of those afflicted.
The United Nations role in coordinating and
establishing intervention priorities remains important and
desirable if we are to achieve the anticipated goals. The
initiative of the International Partnership against AIDS in
Africa, mentioned by the Vice-President of the United
States, reflects the will and determination of the
international community to define an integrated strategy and
to deepen awareness of the enormity of human losses. We
also support the proposal made by the Secretary-General in
his statement of 6 December 1999, which established
priorities for action.
In order to implement these priorities, however,
structures and mechanisms must be created, such as the
international fund proposed by the representative of France
this morning. It is also necessary to have a clear vision of
the future that will allow us to create a better tomorrow for
Africans.
In conclusion, we welcome the United States intention,
announced by Vice-President Gore this morning, to allocate
extra funds to combat HIV/AIDS worldwide, as well as the
measures and projects of the World Bank aimed at
supporting and assisting the Governments concerned. We
hope that these will encourage all parties. We are willing to
coordinate our efforts with those of the international
community and African countries to combat this disease,

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
which we have been fortunate enough to limit to a
minimum in our country, despite the estimated 5.5 million
tourists who visited our country last year.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I would
ask the representative of Tunisia if he might, at some
future date, distribute a paper on his last point, outlining
how he thinks prevention was successful in Tunisia,
where it was not in every other country.
Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): Like previous speakers,
my delegation would like to thank you, Sir, for convening
this meeting on a subject of common concern to the
international community. We are also grateful to the
Secretary-General, as well as to Mr. Wolfensohn,
Mr. Malloch Brown and Mr. Piot for their informative
and stimulating introductions.
It is symbolic indeed that the first formal meeting of
the Security Council in the new millennium, so ably
launched by Vice-President Gore, opens up the discussion
of issues of a global dimension and importance, among
which the problem of AIDS ranks as one of the gravest.
This also demonstrates an increasing role of the Security
Council in addressing humanitarian, economic and social
aspects of international peace and security.
Ukraine is honoured to take part in this discussion as
a member of this body. This status and the trust of the
international community, placed in Ukraine when it was
elected to serve in the forefront of the United Nations
efforts to maintain international peace and security, confer
upon us an enormous responsibility. Having been elected
to the Security Council for the first time since its
independence, Ukraine is ready to make its meaningful
and worthy contribution to the Council's work and to
discharge this important mission in a spirit of openness
and cooperation while maintaining a wide and
constructive dialogue with all Member States. We will
strive to bring the Ukrainian perspective into the Council's
activities. Standing at the crossroads of North and South,
East and West, we will bring to the Council all the
knowledge and experience of our geographic destiny. Our
work in the Security Council will be a recognition of the
vital role that the United Nations has played in
consolidating Ukraine's independence, preserving its
territorial integrity and securing its peaceful integration
into the commonwealth of nations.
For almost two decades mankind has been at war
with an invisible enemy. So far, we have only been on
the defensive, and our losses are comparable to those in

9

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
real warfare — we have already heard the statistics. There
is virtually no country in the world which has been so
lucky as to escape the dark cloud of the HIV/AIDS
pandemic. Yet for Africa, the story is the worst.
The impact of AIDS on the countries of sub-Saharan
Africa is especially devastating. It kills the most productive
and active part of the population, thus increasing labour
costs, reducing formal and informal sector productivity,
eroding human, social, economic and infrastructure
development and increasing health and welfare
expenditures. AIDS also threatens the ability of African
States to sustain credible defence forces, thus making it
increasingly difficult to maintain domestic and regional
security.
One cannot but mention another horrible result of the
AIDS epidemic in Africa that has already started to develop
into an even bigger human tragedy. In previous decades,
about 2 per cent of children in the developing world were
orphaned. Because of AIDS, the rates in some African
countries, according to studies, have risen to 11 per cent,
thus creating a generation of children who have not been
nurtured, properly fed or educated. They in turn also
become susceptible to AIDS, as well as to crime, induction
into rebel militias and other destabilizing phenomena.
I would also like to mention yet another disturbing
aspect of the problem, also rightly referred to by the
Secretary-General, and that is the connection between the
HIV contagion and military conflict. The rise of inter-State
and inter-ethnic hostilities in Africa in the 1990s and the
large number of refugees created by them became a catalyst
for a major explosion in the spread of the virus, which is
yet to show up statistically.
By defusing existing conflicts on the continent and
preventing new ones, the Security Council will thus make
its meaningful contribution to the work carried out by the
agencies and organizations within and outside the United
Nations system in fighting HIV/AIDS.
Ukraine fully shares the concern that brought about
this meeting in the Security Council. My country has also
been hit by the AIDS epidemic, which has been spreading
at an alarming rate in recent years. At some point this
problem became so evident that the Government of Ukraine
began to address it, not simply as a health or social issue,
but rather as a national security issue. The first and
probably the most important lesson we learned is that the
problem of AIDS should be fully recognized; it must never
be ignored or underestimated.

10

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
We are confident that today's discussion will
contribute to increasing the global awareness of the AIDS
problem. At the same time, we realise that AIDS will
continue to be a serious challenge for many years to
come. Only the concerted efforts of the international
community will be able to address it successfully.
Ukraine stands ready to join these efforts.
In conclusion, Mr. President, let me express our
strong hope that this Security Council meeting will
provide a powerful impetus to the beginning of a
qualitatively new stage in the struggle of the international
community against AIDS. Ukraine believes that it is high
time for the United Nations to update a comprehensive
agenda for action against this pandemic. In this
connection, it might be appropriate that the Security
Council use its prerogatives and recommend to the
General Assembly that it convene a special session to
consider new strategies, methods, practical activities and
specific measures to strengthen international cooperation
in addressing this problem.
The President: Thank you, Mr. Ambassador,
particularly for the insight into your own country's dealing
with this problem. I would call everyone's attention to the
fact that the Ambassador concluded with a proposal that
we consider a General Assembly session on this issue at
a later date.
It is now my pleasure to call on another new
member of the Security Council, the representative of
Mali, Ambassador Ouane. Welcome to the Security
Council, Mr. Ambassador.
Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): Mr. President,
I would also like to defer to your wish to save some time
for the Security Council, but before expressing my views
as Permanent Representative of Mali, I must ask you to
allow me to read aloud a message from Mr. Alpha
Konaré, President of the Republic of Mali and current
Chairman of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), addressed to you on the occasion of
this meeting. I quote:
“In my capacity as Chairman of ECOWAS, it
is my pleasure to address to you, Mr. President, my
warmest congratulations on behalf of the
Governments and peoples of our subregion on the
excellent initiative that you have taken in devoting
a meeting of the Security Council to the
consideration of the impact of AIDS on peace and
security in Africa. This initiative, there can be no

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
doubt, makes it possible to break the complicitous and
unacceptable silence that allows AIDS to develop
today. This silence is aggravated by the well-known
insufficiency of the resources applied until now to
eradicate this scourge, the impact of which needs no
evidence beyond the following figures.
“Of the 33 million people affected by the AIDS
virus, 22 million, in other words 70 per cent, are in
Africa south of the Sahara. Today, AIDS orphans
number 8 million, and every minute five more people
become infected. This pandemic is a tragic threat to
the future of our countries and in some regions is even
a factor of economic and social destabilization which
is a threat to peace and security in Africa.
“In the face of this distressing situation, we must
organize ourselves as of now and to wage a crusade
against AIDS in which African leaders must bear their
share of responsibility. I appeal for a significant
increase in the international community's commitment
in the framework of this crusade in order to step up
research throughout the world on AIDS, to increase
prevention and to provide the necessary support to the
millions of persons who are affected by HIV/AIDS, in
particular the men, women and children of Africa
infected by the pandemic.
“In expressing the wish that, above and beyond
this historic step taken now by the Security Council to
increase the awareness of the pandemic, there will be
concrete measures as a result of this meeting that will
give hope to all humankind, the hope of fair treatment
for all, I wish your work every success.”
The message is signed by Alpha Konaré, President of
the Republic of Mali and current Chairman of ECOWAS.
I shall now speak in my capacity as Permanent
Representative of Mali. I would like first of all to associate
myself with those who have congratulated your country,
Mr. President, and you personally, for having organized this
meeting. As a prelude to other meetings also devoted to
Africa during the course of this month, today's meeting
bears witness to your own personal commitment and to
your country's interest in Africa. The presence at this
meeting of Vice-President Al Gore offers further evidence
of this, and I should like to thank him for his important
statement.
Our thanks also go to the Secretary-General for his
enlightening statement on a subject of fundamental

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
importance to Africa. Today's meeting has also enabled us
to hear Mr. James Wolfensohn, President of the World
Bank; Mr. Mark Malloch Brown, the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP); and
Dr. Peter Piot, the Executive Director of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), who all
made detailed and instructive statements which make
clear the enormous extent of the challenge before us.
I will not refer to the absolutely horrifying statistics
on the consequences of the AIDS epidemic in Africa.
They have been described at length since this morning.
For my part, I would like to draw attention to a very clear
fact: peace and security do not consist merely in the
absence of military conflict; they also depend on the
socio-economic realities of nations. In that respect, the
AIDS pandemic today undoubtedly constitutes a factor for
upheaval in the economic and institutional order,
especially in Africa. In fact, many studies indicate that the
direct cost of AIDS will be 15 to 20 times higher for
national budgets in Africa than for those in Western
countries. As for the indirect costs, as the productive
sector in particular and the population in general are
affected directly, there will be a drastic decline in skilled
and unskilled labour. The foreseeable economic
consequence will be a decline in the competitiveness of
the African economy, which in the short term is already
seriously ailing at the international level. It seems,
therefore, that the AIDS epidemic is the most serious
threat to the development of the continent.
Therefore, we cannot evade the question of how to
explain the humanitarian disaster and the threat to the
development of Africa that the AIDS pandemic
constitutes. We know that AIDS has appeared against a
backdrop of crises, first and foremost and economic and
social crisis. Indeed, the growing impoverishment of
African societies related to global recession has led to a
disintegration of the social fabric and the progressive
disappearance of the familial and social controls that
govern the lives of communities and individuals.
Secondly, there is an identity crisis. This results
from the economic and social crisis and also from the fact
that individuals lose their bearings and reference points,
as well as from the fact that the continent is increasingly
open to the outside, even to aggression. In fact, powerful
media influences, with which local resources cannot
compete, flood Africa with overwhelming sounds and
images of violence that are not always positive.
Stabilizing indigenous cultures are collapsing a daily
basis.

11

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
Lastly, there is a political crisis, characterized by
crumbling State health systems that manage to cover barely
20 per cent of the health-care needs of the population,
almost 30 years after independence.
My delegation believes that the solution to the
problem of AIDS involves, at least in part, the search for
answers to each of the crises that affect the continent.
Dr. Piot made a similar comment this morning. It is clear
that to conquer AIDS, the international community must
implement a global and coordinated strategy. In this
respect, our thinking could focus on three questions. First,
how do we organize health services in order to deal with
the AIDS epidemic, especially the explosion in health-care
costs? Secondly, how do we manage the ethical problems
relating to people who are HIV-positive or who have
AIDS? Thirdly, what communications policies can be
adopted to encourage the individual to adopt new sexual
behaviour?
African countries are already tackling the AIDS
problem. Useful experience has been gained in different
areas. In Mali, the Government has implemented a shortterm plan, covering the period 1997-1999, and two
medium-term plans covering the period 1989-1998, and a
10-year health development plan, covering the years 19982007. These plans, like other experiences and experiments
in different parts of the continent, involve innovative
measures to take the problem of AIDS out of the realm of
medicine and to socialize it. It is essential that such efforts
be stepped up.
In this context, we can identify three main areas for
action. The first relates to the decentralization of the
struggle against AIDS. More or less everywhere throughout
the continent non-governmental associations and
organizations have shown proof of their dynamism and
commitment to the fight against AIDS. They have begun to
use new methods of social mobilization that address
different age categories and initiation rights. The second
area relates to the definition of an institutional framework
to resolve legal and ethical problems related to AIDS. This
is also essential if we are to maintain a society that is
united in the struggle against the pandemic. The third area
involves identifying new channels of communication so as
to prompt individuals to change their patterns of behaviour.
Because of its extraordinary complexity, AIDS
requires the commitment of individuals and of society, of
the elite and of communities in general. The challenge that
it poses to humankind is an incentive for commitment
which must be unwavering, because the very survival of

12

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
humankind is at stake. Africa, burdened by its many
handicaps, is facing a tragic situation. That is why it
needs international solidarity in order for it to make full
use of its own fighting capacities. In that respect, my
delegation fully supports the initiative of the UNAIDS
programme, which is intending to implement an
international partnership against HIV/AIDS in Africa.
That partnership will need the international community to
mobilize with the main objective of dealing with the
disease so as to reduce significantly its human, social and
economic cost in Africa.
The President: I should like to ask the
representative of Mali to thank President Konaré for his
important message to the Security Council, which we
welcome.
The next speaker on my list, and the last member of
the Security Council to take the floor today, is the
representative of Jamaica. We are delighted that Jamaica,
which is welcomed here by its many friends in the United
Nations, has joined the Security Council.
Miss Durrant (Jamaica): First of all, I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for the welcome extended to Jamaica
as a new member of the Security Council and to
commend you and the delegation of the United States for
having organized this debate on an issue of importance
not only for Africa but for the international community as
a whole. My delegation was therefore very pleased that
Vice-President Gore opened the meeting and set the tone
for our deliberations. I also wish to express our
appreciation to your predecessor, Sir Jeremy Greenstock
of the United Kingdom, for his effective guidance of the
Council during December.
Today, the Council is taking a new step forward in
recognizing the threat that the HIV/AIDS epidemic in
Africa poses to the peace and security of that continent.
The many reports available to us point to one undeniable
fact: the AIDS epidemic has reached catastrophic
proportions and has created a serious development crisis,
threatening the future growth and prosperity of the
affected countries.
As the
December:

Secretary-General

reminded

us

last

“Twenty years ago, the global community had
not even heard of AIDS. Today, the AIDS
pandemic — unexpected, unexplained and
unspeakably cruel — presents us, especially in

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
Africa, with a tragedy we can barely comprehend, let
alone explain.”
For us to ignore the effects of the AIDS epidemic on
the people of Africa would be an abdication of our
responsibilities. It would be morally wrong. Indeed, the
AIDS epidemic is a worldwide phenomenon having
deleterious effects on all regions of the world, including my
own region of Latin America and the Caribbean.
We have heard the grim statistics that point to the
conclusion that AIDS can no longer be treated solely as a
health crisis. As it continues to take its deadly toll on the
population, it has adverse impacts on the social fabric of
society. It destroys the productive capacity of the people,
significantly reducing life expectancy and per capita gross
domestic product. This, in turn, exacerbates poverty, often
leading to political unrest and violence, and provides a
feeding ground for conflict and rebellion. Marginalized and
orphaned children further add to the pool of recruits
fuelling violence and, possibly, armed conflict.
We know that internal political pressures lead to
internal conflicts. We also know that before long, many
internal conflicts spill across open, unprotected borders into
neighbouring countries. Very soon, what may have started
out as a local conflict becomes internationalized. Massive
flows of refugees, many infected with HIV/AIDS, provide
even more opportunities for the spread of the disease. The
data further demonstrate that the risk of contracting AIDS
in a refugee camp is six times the risk in the general
population.
We also know that in situations of conflict, HIV/AIDS
spreads indiscriminately. It spreads to women, children,
humanitarian workers, peacekeepers, soldiers and rebels
alike. The cycle of the epidemic seemingly has no end in
sight, unless the world community acts in unison to end this
scourge.
We are cognizant of the efforts undertaken by national
Governments and regional and global organizations to
respond to the AIDS epidemic in Africa. We may conclude,
from the interrelationship between the AIDS epidemic and
peace and security in Africa, that the Security Council has
a role — indeed, a responsibility to join with these
forces — in seeking solutions to the problem. We therefore
call upon the Council to recognize this relationship in its
peacekeeping and peace-building mandates and to seek
ways of cooperating with all interested parties.

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
Furthermore, the Security Council's role in conflict
prevention must be enhanced so as to eliminate the
environment that is conducive to the spread of
HIV/AIDS. In this regard, increased resources must also
be allocated to the preparation of peacekeepers, military
observers and humanitarian workers.
Today's debate points once more to the recognition
of the fact that peace and security cannot be divorced
from the socio-economic root causes of conflict. It further
points to the need for greater coordination between the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the specialized agencies, the Bretton
Woods institutions and the United Nations funds and
programmes.
My delegation wishes to thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, the Executive Director of the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) and the President of the World Bank for
demonstrating in their statements the commitment of the
United Nations system to the fight against AIDS.
The recently launched International Partnership
against AIDS in Africa — which brings together
Governments, the United Nations, civil society and the
private sector — is a significant step in the right
direction. The Security Council can, and should, provide
the moral and political commitment necessary to garner
the global financial and technical resources needed to
support the work of UNAIDS and of the Partnership in
general.
While researchers continue to seek a cure for AIDS
and to develop vaccines, the international community
must build on the experiences and lessons learned from
those countries that have successfully reduced the spread
of the disease. We must remove the stigma of AIDS
through public education, providing information on how
the disease is transmitted and changing at-risk behaviour.
We must provide public health facilities for testing,
particularly for women of child-bearing age. We must
reduce the cost of medication and treatment and make
them widely available. We must provide social and
economic support, particularly to those orphaned by
AIDS.
We have indeed embarked upon an urgent mission
that requires the full attention of the international
community if we are not to lose the brightest and best of
an entire continent.

13

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The President: This completes the speeches by
members of the Security Council. We will hear the
remaining speakers after a suspension of three minutes.
I would like to point out that at the current rate of
speaking, we have over three hours left to go. If each
speaker would kindly try to cut his or her remarks to four
or five minutes — which I think is quite possible in most
cases, although those countries that are the subject of the
debate may legitimately wish to take a few extra
moments — it would be greatly appreciated.
The meeting was suspended at 3.55 p.m. and resumed
at 4 p.m.
The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations, and in the
absence of objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Dr. David Satcher,
Assistant Secretary for Health and Surgeon-General of the
United States.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Dr. Satcher to take his seat at the Council
table.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of Algeria. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Mesdoua (Algeria) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, out of a desire for concision you asked us to
omit the customary congratulations and to refrain from
quoting figures, alarming though they are, as they have
been set out at length and in detail since this morning. But
if I agree to make a sacrifice of these figures, since they
have been mentioned repeatedly, allow me at least to
congratulate you warmly, on behalf of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and of Algeria, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and to express to
you our profound gratitude for your interest in our
continent. This interest gives us a great deal of hope.
We would like to believe, as we enter the millennium's
first month — much of which, Mr. President, you wish to
devote to African issues — that the Council will finally be
able to assume its responsibilities vis-à-vis Africa by
moving from the stage of statements of intention to that of
action.

14

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
In this respect, the important statement made by the
Vice-President of the United States this morning and the
substantial financial contribution that he announced,
which we welcome, heighten our expectations. Likewise,
the very useful debates held last month — initiated and
led by Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock, whom we
thank — charted courses for us to follow. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his important
contribution at the beginning of the meeting this morning.
For nearly two decades, Africa, which, under the
most adverse conditions, is already facing numerous
challenges and threats, has been suffering from the full
impact of a fearsome pandemic that is attacking what it
holds most dear: its human capital. The pandemic is also
increasingly compromising its chances of recovery and of
regaining its place in the family of nations.
The consequences of this terrible scourge are serious
and numerous, and they affect equally the peoples and the
economies of the countries concerned.
At the human and social levels, the cost is very high.
Women and children are paying the highest price. The
vulnerability of women — and particularly of pregnant
teenagers in the age group 15-19 — is frequently
increased by numerous other factors. Children, for their
part, are either infected by the virus, to the point where in
some countries three quarters of the beds in paediatric
wards are occupied by children with AIDS, or abandoned,
their parents having succumbed to the disease.
Even more serious is the fact that in certain
countries the mortality rate for children under the age of
5 is likely, in the next 10 years, to be three and half times
higher than that it would have been without AIDS.
In economic terms, AIDS is now affecting broad
economic sectors, in some countries up to 10 percent of
the active population. It is thus compromising the
economic and social gains achieved at the cost of great
sacrifices and imposing on already heavily strained
budgets additional costs that they cannot bear.
Thus AIDS, which finds fertile ground in moral and
material poverty, will only expand its empire. It will
continue to do so because people who are poor,
unemployed and uneducated, with no access to basic
health care, are particular targets of the disease.
Lastly, at the political level, because public services
and security are also affected by the disease, and political

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
and social structures are damaged, social equilibrium is
disturbed. Thus the stability and security — the very
foundation — of African States is at risk.
Africa has since the beginning of the 1990s been
aware of the danger of the HIV/AIDS pandemic for its
populations, particularly in its sub-Saharan region. In 1992,
during the OAU summit held at Dakar, Senegal, the
African heads of State or Government adopted the OAU
Declaration on the AIDS Epidemic in Africa. That
Declaration was paired with a six-point Programme of
Action, with targets and quantifiable results. Following on
from this Declaration, the African leaders directed their
efforts at developing a global plan of action aimed at
facilitating and accelerating the implementation of the
Dakar Programme of Action, which led to the adoption in
1993 of the Cairo guidelines on HIV/AIDS.
Aware of the impact of this scourge on children,
African leaders also adopted in 1994 the Tunis Declaration
on AIDS and the Child in Africa, paired with, as in the
case of Dakar, a two-point Plan of Action covering specific
aspects and complementing the Dakar Programme.
All of these measures testify to the awareness of
African leaders of a problem that over the years has daily
become more worrisome. But given the scale of the
resources needed to combat this scourge and the complexity
of actions which it requires, the African leaders quickly
realized that merely mobilizing local means, which are very
limited, along with some external support, also very limited,
was far from sufficient to guarantee even the slightest
tangible progress.
This means that combatting AIDS in Africa requires
coordinated, decisive and long-term action through
combining efforts at both the national and international
level. It is thus in the spirit of the OAU that its summit of
1998, held in Ouagadougou, launched an appeal for
international assistance. It was moved by the same spirit
that the African heads of State at the thirty-fifth summit,
held in Algiers in July 1999, approved the International
Partnership against AIDS in Africa as a new framework for
urgently mobilizing Governments, civil society,
development partners and international assistance bodies so
as to work in a way proportionate to the challenges linked
to the situation of the pandemic in Africa. A plan of action
for combatting AIDS exists. It will be a question of finding
the resources necessary to implement it.
As we see in the broad lines now being prepared at
the level of African Governments and of the bodies

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
involved, the International Partnership against AIDS in
Africa will depend on the efforts which Africa and
especially the rest of the world invest in the approach to
ensuring that the targets agreed at the international
level — that is, collectively — at the special session of
the General Assembly in June 1999, devoted to the fiveyear review of the implementation of the Programme of
Action of the International Conference on Population and
Development in Cairo in 1994 — ICPD+5 — are the
beginning of a genuine long-term battle of the entire
international community.
One of the priorities, from our viewpoint, is to
ensure that by 2005 at least 90 per cent of young people
between the ages of 15 and 24 have access to information
and to the necessary facilities to reduce their HIV
infection and to reduce the incidence of HIV in this age
group by 25 per cent.
It is of the utmost importance that we focus our
efforts on prevention to reduce the spread of this disease.
But at the same time we cannot ignore the fact that
necessary care for current patients must be available to
Africans at a reasonable and affordable price, without
which humanity will have every difficulty in dealing with
this pandemic. This is why the Security Council and the
entire United Nations must make all means available to
cope with the pandemic which is affecting large
populations throughout the continent.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Portugal. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, and thank you for this debate, as the first
of this year.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the Union — Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia — and the
associated countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey align
themselves with this statement.
The European Union deeply shares the concern of
the Secretary-General at the grave humanitarian
emergency the world is facing, particularly in Africa, with
the spread of HIV/AIDS. In Africa, the European Union
has been helping countries deal with this disease and its
tragic effects for many years, and we are well aware of

15

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
its devastating consequences. In fact, AIDS now risks
becoming a destabilizing factor in the development of many
African States. The effects of this disease are compromising
economic development and tearing at the social fabric of
entire communities, which in turn presents risks for peace
and security in specific regions and beyond. Furthermore,
situations of instability and conflict make it harder to
combat the scourge of HIV/AIDS and to implement
effective policies designed to control and stem the spread
of the disease. It is clear, therefore, that AIDS presents a
challenge to the entire international community and, with
regard to its effect in Africa, is deserving of the attention
of the Security Council.
As a global problem it therefore requires a global
strategy based on collaborative partnerships and
responsibility. This is why the European Union supports the
idea of developing strong national and international
partnerships to address this issue. To this end, the European
Union reiterates that the adverse impact of the epidemic on
individuals, communities and nations can be overcome only
through the combined efforts of Governments, the
international community, non-governmental organizations
and civil society as a whole — religious organizations, the
corporate sector and foundations — the United Nations
system and people living with HIV/AIDS.
However, efforts must be coordinated, and the
European Union believes that the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) has an important role
to play in this regard. The European Union fully supports
UNAIDS and its co-sponsoring organizations in their joint
efforts against HIV/AIDS. The Union also looks forward to
the further development of the strategy of International
Partnership Against AIDS in Africa.
Education, information, counselling and sexual health
services accessible to young people are of the essence. In
this respect, we welcome the Programme of Action for the
Decade of Education by the African Ministers of Education
and the Organization of African Unity (OAU) summit in
Algiers that acknowledged the need for education on
HIV/AIDS. Knowledge is and will remain the best
preventive measure against this deadly disease. This is
proof that a growing number of African Governments are
demonstrating a stronger political commitment to fighting
HIV/AIDS than ever before. This is a welcome
development that should be encouraged and supported by
the international community.
For our part, the European Union has, over the last 10
years, allocated a total of 1.5 billion euros through its

16

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
Programme on Health, HIV/AIDS and Population (HAP)
for African, Caribbean and Pacific countries. This is in
addition to a number of national programmes being
carried out by European Union member States. In 1998
alone, close to 120 million euros were committed by the
European Development Fund for this purpose and another
22 million euros were committed for AIDS and
population under specific budget lines. This European
Union support for the Programme on Health, HIV/AIDS
and Population presently represents more than 10 per cent
of total European Union aid and is expected to increase.
In 1999, at the special session of the General
Assembly for the overall review and appraisal of the
implementation of the Programme of Action of the
International Conference on Population and Development
(ICPD+5), the international community set a new
internationally agreed target for addressing HIV/AIDS in
the world. The European Union fully supports the
attainment of the goals set during the special session and
will continue to work in cooperation with African
Governments to attain them, and it encourages all
involved to lend their support to this task.
And what can the Security Council do? Given its
threatening impact on social and economic development,
HIV/AIDS has a destabilizing effect on peace and
security in the region. Therefore, the Security Council has
a responsibility to take HIV/AIDS into consideration in its
work. HIV/AIDS cannot be dealt with effectively by
single United Nations bodies, but needs instead to be
handled in a holistic manner by all sectors of the United
Nations aiming at stable peace and security and long-term
social and economic development.
The European Union commends the United States
for initiating this debate in the Council. The debate will
strengthen the urgency of implementing the imperatives
for action on the security aspects of HIV/AIDS as
proposed by UNAIDS.
The suffering of HIV/AIDS victims in Africa should
not go unheeded, and efforts are under way to increase
the effectiveness of national and international action
addressing this difficult problem. The Security Council's
awareness of the effects of HIV/AIDS in Africa is
necessary for effectively addressing issues of peace and
security on that continent. The prevention of conflicts is
now regarded as a priority task of the United Nations, and
there can be little doubt that tackling the challenges posed
by HIV/AIDS in Africa constitutes preventive action at its
best.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Cape Verde. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Once again, I would ask that we shorten the length of
our statements, or else we will either be here all night or
not be able to finish.
Mr. Leao Monteiro (Cape Verde) (spoke in French):
On behalf of the African Group, I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for the initiative you have taken in
convening this meeting of the Security Council and for
having convened it in an open format, thus making it
possible for interested Member States to benefit from the
meeting and to be heard on a subject of extreme concern to
our African continent. The participation by the VicePresident of the United States of America in this meeting
and the important communication that he made before this
Council convince us that your country intends to make its
own valuable contribution and also to use its capacity to
influence others to bring about urgent mobilization on
everyone's part, with the objective of stopping and reversing
the present course of the AIDS scourge in Africa and
worldwide.
The eloquent points made by Vice-President Gore,
emphasizing the potential of AIDS to increasingly
jeopardize peace and security in Africa if the dynamics of
the epidemic are not vigorously countered on the continent,
really come as no surprise to us. We have known for a long
time that the different elements that combine to form the
fabric of society are interdependent and therefore affect
each other. From the historical perspective, experience
reveals that deadly epidemics can become factors of acute
social destabilization when they assume catastrophic
dimensions. Moreover, Africa is living under the threat of
another epidemic — poverty — which is acquiring vast
proportions and which, in the context of underdevelopment
that fuels the spread of AIDS, increases its impact. The
struggle against AIDS in Africa will be waged in conditions
that are all the more difficult if the environment of poverty
and underdevelopment prevailing in Africa is not dealt with
at the same time.
Member States, and Africans in particular, are very
grateful to the Secretary-General for having applied his own
leadership to increase awareness world-wide regarding
AIDS, and also for having persisted successfully in
promoting the establishment, made formal a month ago, of
an International Partnership against AIDS in Africa. He
thus gave major impetus to the response requested by the
African heads of State and Government when they appealed

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
in 1998 in Ouagadougou for mobilization of the
international community to gather global resources against
this scourge. The combined efforts of African
Governments and friendly countries and the commendable
efforts of the United Nations system — by the World
Health Organization (WHO), from the very outset to the
launching of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) in 1996, which represented a major
innovation — certainly slowed the spread of AIDS on the
African continent. Nonetheless, efforts have fallen far
short of the results that the magnitude and complexity of
the phenomenon would require.
The excellent briefings presented this morning by the
President of the World Bank, the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the
Executive Director of UNAIDS described to us the
terrifying magnitude of AIDS in Africa and how the
effort of economic and social development of African
countries, already hindered by many important constraints,
is now even more complicated. I have statistics, but I will
not refer to all of them. I do want to recall, however, that
it is estimated that since the outbreak of the epidemic,
some 80 per cent of deaths resulting from AIDS have
been in Africa.
Human suffering is thus immense, and the human
losses also affect the socio-economic lives of the most
affected countries. The delayed effect of the current AIDS
carriers also casts its shadow on the future, and this is
true even if by some miracle the cycle of infection were
to be suddenly broken. It is therefore obvious that only a
real global coalition of efforts and resources, working
concertedly and synergistically, can offer a chance of
ultimate success over this contemporary scourge. In this
respect, the International Partnership fortunately seems to
have conceptual and organizational means that will give
it real effectiveness, if the will to make all the needed
ingredients available is not lacking.
We have been reminded here that the spread of
AIDS in the world has benefitted from a wall of silence
and an attitude of denial, which arise from shame and
stigma. Africa can be no exception to this. Like
everywhere, it is the initiative of individuals and of
responsible and prestigious organizations that leads to
decisive action to break the wall of silence and to help
release energies.
In Africa, this type of action has grown in scope and
strength, in particular in the past year, and at the highest
level. We must do everything within our power so that

17

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
this continent can turn, as soon as possible, from being
fertile ground for the spread of AIDS to being an
environment capable of channelling and being a catalyst for
a movement of prevention, containment and reversal of the
epidemic's impact.
The International Partnership against AIDS in Africa
agreed on a deadline — next May — to establish a frame
of reference for work and a plan of action for the first
years. Let us recall that the objective is to considerably
reduce the impact of AIDS on human suffering and on
human, social and economic development in Africa, and to
be guided in assessing the progress accomplished by
indicators to be defined for the different specific areas of
activity.
In keeping with the problem to be confronted, the
response must be unprecedented, as described by the
Secretary-General. The political weight of the Security
Council, as well as the political dimension and the
resources of many of its members, will certainly provide
credibility and invaluable encouragement for the
implementation of exactly such a collective response. This
undoubtedly will be an endeavour with a strong human
component in its spirit, in the resolve inspiring it and in the
innovation and intelligence that will be required for the
concerted work of Governments, civil society, the United
Nations, non-governmental organizations and the private
sector.
In addition to the human resources that need to be
mobilized, the Partnership's plan of action will also involve
an increase and a significant rehabilitation of the African
health systems that are overwhelmed and under-equipped to
confront new and fast-increasing demands. Some of the
activities to combat the very spread of AIDS, such as the
effort to prevent the spread of AIDS from pregnant women
to their children, will require the generous use of
medication, the current commercial cost of which is well
beyond the means of Africans, as is the case with antiretro-viruses. Thus, the reduction of human suffering,
cruelly widespread on our continent, will involve making
other types of medication available, certainly at less cost
but possibly in larger quantities. It is estimated at this stage
that the overall costs would range from $1 billion to $2.5
billion annually. This is a relatively modest sum in light of
the task involved, but it would represent a very important
difference in the capacity to act, as compared with today's
level, which is extremely insufficient.
The other face of the human emergency in which
AIDS is now plunging Africa is that it offers us the

18

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
continuing opportunity for a collective behaviour that can
give meaning to the concept of an international
community to which we all aspire.
I wish once again to express our gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for your timely initiative in convening this
important briefing, and we wish to express the hope that
the struggle against the scourge of AIDS in Africa will
yield excellent results.
The President: I again implore speakers to keep
their remarks as brief as possible.
The next speaker is the representative of Norway. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Hønningstad (Norway): Let me begin by
expressing Norway's appreciation to the United States
presidency of the Security Council for taking the initiative
to hold this open meeting on the impact of AIDS on
peace and security in Africa.
We would also like to thank Vice-President Al Gore
for his comprehensive and thoughtful intervention this
morning. My delegation particularly liked the part about
new and fresh money and we think this should be a
guiding light for all donor countries.
For far too long, AIDS was regarded mainly as a
health problem and was left to the health sector. But
gradually, the international community has recognized that
the devastating effects of this accelerating pandemic on
human, social and economic development in Africa call
for much broader action. The HIV/AIDS epidemic is
becoming one of the main constraints on development in
large parts of the continent.
This meeting of the Security Council is an
acknowledgement of the links between AIDS and peace
and security. Norway warmly welcomes the initiative to
establish an International Partnership against AIDS in
Africa and hopes that it will lead to broad and concerted
action at all levels. In December last year, I participated
in the launching meeting presided over by the SecretaryGeneral here in New York. That meeting certainly gave
very important impetus and inspiration to the work of the
Partnership, but I must say that you, Sir, have really
heightened the level by calling this meeting of the
Security Council, for which we thank you.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
More resources are clearly needed, both from the
international community and from national and private
sources. Norway places very high priority on this
cooperation. We are one of the major contributors to the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS)
and a month ago we also granted a special allocation of
28.5 million Norwegian kroner to be used within the
framework of the new Partnership in Africa.
We must certainly step up international efforts to
develop a vaccine against HIV. We must also find ways to
make existing drugs more accessible to those who need
them. Public/private partnerships are crucial to making this
happen.
While preventive measures are important, we must not
forget those millions of people who are already infected
and affected by the virus. We must make sure that people
living with HIV/AIDS receive appropriate care and that
their human rights are fully respected. We need a broad
multisectoral approach to mitigate the effects of the
pandemic on social and economic development in Africa,
as well as on peace and security. The erosion of human
capital affects the education system, the productive sectors,
government and administration, and hence the security
situation, and cannot be dealt with by the health sector
alone. A broad range of actors within the international
community — including, but not limited to, the co-sponsors
of UNAIDS — have important roles to play in supporting
the efforts of member States. This meeting of the Security
Council should help to move the issue higher up the global
agenda.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of South Africa. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table.
I would remind members that, next week, we will
have the honour of being joined here in the Burundi
discussion by Mr. Nelson Mandela, the mediator for
Burundi. I hope the representative of South Africa will
extend to him the high appreciation of the entire Security
Council that he will honour us for what I understand will
be his first appearance before the Security Council.
I invite the representative of South Africa to make his
statement.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): As hurried as we are, let
me welcome you, Sir, to the position you occupy today. I
cannot resist also bursting with pride at seeing some of my

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
dear friends who have joined this Council. It is a
wonderful, wonderful day today.
It is important for me to say that HIV/AIDS is a
global problem. There is no country that has been spared
this epidemic. It is said that, at the end of 1999, there
were more people living with HIV/AIDS in the
developing world than in the developed world. The
majority of people living with HIV/AIDS are indeed in
the developing countries, yet the human beings affected
are the same. The disease is the same.
The reason for the disparity is not hard to find. The
core difference between the developed and developing
world is the level of development itself. The answer,
therefore, lies in the difference in the standard of living
of the people infected. In other words, until there is a
cure for HIV/AIDS, the level of development in each
country will influence how much such a disease spreads.
Poverty and underdevelopment destroy families and
health systems. While we must continue striving to find
ways of halting the spread of and curing HIV/AIDS, the
only way to immediately address the spread of this
disease is through raising the standard of living in
developing countries. Addressing issues of poverty is
central to this approach.
If you have an educated populace, it is easy to
communicate AIDS-prevention programmes in a manner
which does change behavioural patterns. We have found
instances in our own country where communities know
that there is a disease called HIV/AIDS, but do not
appreciate the connection between that disease and their
sexual behaviour. This connectedness is understood better
within literate communities in our own country. More
spending on health care results in HIV/AIDS preventative
tools, such as condoms, being more accessible to
communities.
The better levels of nutrition in high- and middleincome societies ensure stronger resistance to disease. The
positive impact of good nutrition on opportunistic
infections is well known to all of us. The accessibility and
affordability of ordinary drugs are also central to this
issue. A body weakened by ordinary diseases is more
susceptible to AIDS. We use these few examples to
illustrate the relationship between HIV/AIDS and poverty.
At the Third African Population Conference held in
Durban, South Africa, in December 1999, it was noted
that

19

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
“AIDS is 100 per cent preventable through openness
and proper education”.
However, a look at the countries with the largest number of
people who live with HIV/AIDS shows that there has been
a decline in social spending. There is less money for
alleviating poverty and for improving the nutrition of the
people as a defence against nutritional diseases such as
tuberculosis and pneumonia, which make it easier for
HIV/AIDS to fester. Many developing countries are
overburdened with paying off international debt, which
leaves them with little money for development.
The decline in social spending happened over many
years, mainly as a result of policies of multilateral
institutions. We are encouraged by efforts now being made
by such institutions to evaluate some of these policies and
to focus on their core mandate, which is development.
The Charter of the United Nations, in Article 24,
paragraph 1, bestows upon the Security Council the
“primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security”. In the age of globalization, it has
become important to define security in broader terms. In
other words, the definition of security has to include
economic security, food security and health security. The
Security Council, whose job is to guarantee security around
the world, must use its peacekeeping operations to create a
space and climate for other institutions and regional and
subregional organizations — such as the World Health
Organization (WHO), the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), which are best suited to address other
aspects of security — so that they can do their work.
Already, the Security Council has set a wonderful
precedent in Sierra Leone, where the Council's Chapter VII
mandate allows peacekeeping troops to be accompanied by
expert United Nations personnel dealing with social issues
that result from conflict. They include experts sent to assist
women and children caught in conflict, including many
people who had their limbs cut off by ruthless guerrillas.
The Security Council must be applauded for having
adopted this innovative decision. We hope that the same
creativity will prevail soon when the Security Council
decides on a mandate for a peacekeeping force for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Perhaps it is time that all 188 Members of the United
Nations participated in a General Assembly debate on the

20

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
challenge posed by the spread of HIV/AIDS throughout
the world and developed a comprehensive plan to address
this disease that knows no boundaries.
Furthermore, the donor countries must ease
restrictions on the money they earmark for the treatment
of HIV/AIDS in Africa so that recipient countries can use
it to alleviate poverty, help improve the living standards
of their citizens and fund education programmes on this
disease. Otherwise, the money given for the treatment of
HIV/AIDS may not produce the results that are needed in
fighting off this epidemic.
Let me conclude by saying that there is no cure for
AIDS at this point. As we await a possible cure, we have
the ability to halt its spread. Let us not shy away from
this.
The President: I would request the Ambassador of
South Africa to please convey to President Mbeki the fact
that Vice-President Gore referred specifically to him and
quoted him.
In order to shorten the rest of the day, I request all
representatives to refrain from any further compliments to
the new President of the Security Council or for the
holding of this meeting. I appreciate them greatly, and so
does my country, but the time is short, and we still have
a very large number of speakers to hear.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Japan. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Satoh (Japan): I will cut my compliments to
you, Mr. President, but I have to say that this meeting is
very timely and well focused.
HIV/AIDS is a serious threat to human security in
many parts of the world. However, the situation is most
serious in Africa. There, this deadly disease is threatening
the security of the life and dignity of communities and
their members. In many African countries, it is already
having a devastating impact on the population,
particularly on young people. More than that, the disease
has become a serious impediment to economic and social
development, as well as to the peace and security of the
countries concerned.
This situation demands a clearer recognition of the
seriousness of the issue of AIDS and a stronger
commitment to fight the disease both by African countries

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000

themselves and by their partners outside the region.
Africans themselves are already engaged in the fight against
AIDS. However, given the magnitude of the problem, it is
evident that the African countries need stronger support and
cooperation from the international community.

grants over a five-year period starting in 1998 in such
areas as education, health care, medical services and the
supply of safe and clean water in Africa. It is our
intention to use these grants with a particular emphasis on
the fight against AIDS.

Japan, for its part, is engaged in a combination of
efforts aimed at combating AIDS in Africa, primarily
through the following three approaches, and we are
determined to strengthen our efforts in the years to come.

I would also like to point out that African and Asian
countries have much to learn from each other in their
fight against AIDS and that the exchange of information
and experience between the countries of the two regions
should be promoted. I am pleased to inform the Council
that this proposition received broad support from the
participants at the TICAD regional review meeting held
in Zambia last November.

First of all, Japan places a high priority on the issue
of AIDS in its official medium-term policy on official
development assistance, and under its Global Issues
Initiative on Population and AIDS, launched in 1994, Japan
has been providing technical assistance and grants to many
countries in Africa to assist them in fighting this deadly
disease.
I want to add that some of the programmes in this
Global Issues Initiative are integrated into the so-called
common agenda that Japan and the United States are
pursuing together on a broad range of global issues. For
example, our two countries sent a joint mission to Zambia
in 1998 for the purpose of formulating projects on
population, AIDS and children's health.
Japan's financial contribution under the Global Issues
Initiative had already reached approximately $3.7 billion by
the end of fiscal year 1998. Although the seven-year
Initiative is due to be completed at the end of fiscal year
2000, the Japanese Government is determined to expand its
support for the fight against AIDS by building upon what
has been accomplished thus far.
Secondly, Japan is firmly committed to supporting the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS)
and has contributed a total of $23 million to its
programmes since its establishment in 1996. We highly
commend UNAIDS for the coordinating role it has played
and for its achievements to date. We are considering
strengthening our financial support for its programmes
relating to AIDS in Africa.
Thirdly, it was decided at the second Tokyo
International Conference on African Development (TICAD
II), which Japan sponsored with the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) in October 1998, that
African countries and their development partners should
strengthen cooperation in their fight against AIDS and other
sexually transmitted diseases. In response, Japan announced
its readiness to provide approximately 90 billion yen in

I am convinced that this open meeting will greatly
enhance the level of attention paid by all concerned to the
serious issue of HIV/AIDS in Africa. It is our strong hope
that today's discussion will result in more intensive efforts
by Africans themselves and their partners, which we need
now in order to improve the situation quickly. I would
therefore like to conclude by reaffirming yet again the
strong commitment of the Japanese Government to the
urgent task of fighting AIDS in Africa.
The President: We note, Mr. Ambassador, your
comment that your Government is considering additional
support of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS).
We have now reached the mid-point in the list of
speakers, which does not necessarily mean the mid-point
in terms of time. But this is an appropriate time for me to
invite the Surgeon-General of the United States to take a
seat at the Council table and to make some very brief
comments before he has to return to Washington.
Dr. Satcher: Let me thank the Security Council for
this opportunity to be here today and to address it. I have
heard that I might well be the first Surgeon-General ever
to address the Security Council, and that, for me,
represents a tremendous opportunity and challenge. Over
50 years ago Surgeon-General Leonard Scheele, speaking
to the first meeting of the World Health Organization,
said, that the world cannot exist half healthy and half
sick. So we are challenged today by that commitment
expressed on behalf of the United States by a SurgeonGeneral.
As the Security Council has heard, AIDS has had
and is having a devastating impact on sub-Saharan Africa
and on many other areas of the world. But I think that it

21

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
is also important to point out that, as we have heard, we are
not without hope. When we look at what partnerships and
global strategies have already achieved, we have to have
hope. Together, we have eradicated smallpox, the last case
occurring in the late 1970s. We are very close to
eradicating polio from the world. In this respect, I must
point to the dynamic leadership of Rotary International and
of the business community, which is going to be so
important to our efforts in this context, working in
partnership in areas such as Uganda. Certainly, when I was
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
we learned much about what can be accomplished through
comprehensive programmes of counselling, education and
testing.
We appreciate the opportunity we have had to work
with our colleagues. Working with our colleagues in
Thailand, we learned about what can be accomplished in
the military, where AIDS was a major problem, and as a
result of working together, we have seen a dramatic
decline. So we have learned a lot of lessons by working in
partnerships throughout the world, and we hope to continue
those kinds of partnerships.
We have also learned much from our experience in the
United States. As the Council has heard and knows, we
have made significant progress in the United States. But, in
the words of Robert Frost, we still have promises to keep
and miles to go before we sleep.
We have learned that it is possible to decrease the
onset of HIV, which has gone from a high of 150,000 cases
a year in the late 1980s to 40,000 cases a year today. We
have also invested in science, as a result of which we have
developed treatments, including the highly active antiretroviral therapies that are making a difference and have
reduced mortality from AIDS by 60 per cent compared to
1995. However, we know that this is not the answer to this
epidemic in our country or anywhere else in the world. So
our commitment today is to work in global partnership —
not just providing the funds that have been committed by
the Vice-President and Ambassador Holbrooke — in
combating this epidemic throughout the world.
We are committed to a balanced approach to this
epidemic. We believe that it is important to invest heavily
in prevention, including surveillance, so that we can
monitor this epidemic throughout the world, including in
sub-Saharan Africa. We believe that it is important to invest
in treatment. I believe that treatment is in and of itself
preventive when applied correctly. For example, working
together in Tanzania, we learned that the aggressive

22

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
treatment of sexually transmitted diseases significantly
reduced the spread of HIV/AIDS. So we have learned the
importance of comprehensive treatment, and we have
learned the importance of treating opportunistic infections
in people infected with AIDS. But we have also learned
that we must continue to work together to provide
treatment to all people who are infected with this virus,
a commitment that was made by the Vice-President this
morning.
We are also committed to continuing to invest in
research, especially in research to develop a vaccine. We
believe that prevention is the most important investment
that we can make in dealing with this epidemic. We are
very pleased to be able to work with our partners
throughout the world — in Thailand, Uganda, the United
States and other places — in the development of a
vaccine. In fact that is now in phase III trials in parts of
the world. We are committed to continuing that research
and that investment.
Our Secretary of Health and Human Services, Donna
Shalala, has said that our ethics must be as sophisticated
as our science. In response to comments that we have
heard today, I want to say that together we must make
that commitment as we work in prevention, treatment and
research and in dealing with orphans throughout the
world, especially in sub-Saharan Africa. Our ethics must
be as sophisticated as our science, and we must hold each
other to that commitment.
The interrelationships among health and social,
economic and political stability and well-being, and their
impact on peace and security, is a point that has been
well made in this meeting of the Security Council. We
hope that as we work with the Council throughout the
world we can keep this in mind.
In closing, let me say that our partnerships must be
interdisciplinary. Our experience with business and labour
response to AIDS in the United States has been really
critical — I have mentioned the eradication of polio and
Rotary International. We have also benefited from the
faith community. We have benefited from other nongovernmental organizations and from the military and the
role of the military. The Security Council will soon hear
from the Secretary of Labor of the United States, as we
attempt to gather with our partners throughout the world
to make a commitment in the area of labour in dealing
with the AIDS epidemic, as we have tried to do in our
country.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
In closing, let me say again how very pleased I am
that the Security Council has raised the issue of AIDS in
Africa to this level and presented to all of us the challenge
of keeping before us the relationships between health and
security. We look forward to working with the Security
Council in the days, months and years ahead to conquer
this global pandemic.
The President: I am delighted that the SurgeonGeneral honoured us today with his presence. I thank him
for staying exactly within the five-minute limit.
The next speaker is the representative of Brazil. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): I should like to express to you
very briefly, Mr. President, our compliments, which are
well deserved. I must say that it is an honour to return to
this table as a non-member of the Security Council and to
speak on behalf of the Brazilian delegation at this very
important meeting. If you will allow me, I should like to
express my best wishes for success to the members that are
just beginning their term of office, and especially to
Jamaica, which has replaced Brazil in one of the seats of
the Latin American and Caribbean Group in the Council.
As previous speakers have stressed, in many African
countries AIDS overburdens State institutions, undermines
traditional family support schemes and adds to the climate
of despair and disarray that tends to fuel conflicts. Although
the reality in Africa may be harsher than elsewhere, the
social, economic and political implications of AIDS are felt
everywhere. Its spread is a global problem that must be
addressed in a comprehensive manner. The impact in Africa
is especially severe because of the lack of resources for
prevention and treatment. Africa requires the instruments of
cooperation to be strengthened. In doing so, the
international community will be helping itself, not just
Africa.
What we need most at this moment is international
solidarity. Africans themselves have much to offer, with
their many successful national experiences in combating
AIDS.
It is clear that the international response to the AIDS
epidemic in Africa does not fall within the specific mandate
of the Security Council. But our debate today may help
raise the worldwide awareness of the social and economic
devastation wrought by AIDS and of the greater threat
ahead if effective action is not taken. Our debate places the

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
problem of AIDS in Africa in the spotlight of
international attention and stresses its implications, which
extend far beyond health issues.
Notwithstanding the support provided by multilateral
agencies, bilateral and plurilateral partnerships remain
fundamental. Throughout the 1980s, Brazil benefited from
international cooperation and has since consolidated its
national programme for preventing and combating AIDS.
At the regional level, Brazil took an active part in the
setting up, in March 1996, of a horizontal technical
cooperation group on HIV/AIDS.
Brazil's contribution to that group, which brings
together a number of Latin American and Caribbean
States, is centred on training and capacity-building in
organizing local programmes for the prevention and
control of AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases.
Based on our regional experience, the Brazilian
Government developed, in 1997, a similar cooperation
scheme with the Portuguese-speaking countries of Africa.
In 1999 experts from the Brazilian Ministry of Health
visited Kenya, Zimbabwe, South Africa, Namibia and
Botswana with a view to identifying cooperation projects
that could be quickly set up.
Being a developing country, Brazil is not a major
donor. Nevertheless, our technical expertise has been put
at the disposal of others, and we will continue to work
closely with UNAIDS and the donor community in
helping third countries to curb the spread of AIDS.
Furthermore, Brazilian policies to cope with both the
causes and consequences of AIDS may provide a useful
example to other countries that face similar budgetary
constraints.
Our health system distributes free anti-HIV drugs to
all patients. This policy has helped reduce the number of
hospitalizations.
In Brazil, strong public campaigns through the mass
media have been key in our preventive strategy.
Education and dissemination of information
concerning AIDS constitute the best way to halt the
spread of the disease in Africa and all over the world.
It is tempting to compare the effects of AIDS to
those of wars. The so-called age factor is a characteristic
shared by AIDS and war, for both AIDS and war impose
a heavy toll on young adults, depriving many societies not
only of an important part of its workforce, but also of

23

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
loving parents. The consequence is a rising population of
orphaned children left behind, often without adequate
assistance. If our debate helps reverse even in a modest
way the fate of these helpless children, it will have been
worth undertaking.
The impact of AIDS on Africa is a test case for the
United Nations capacity to be both a catalyst of
international solidarity and a vehicle for transforming pious
words into tangible action.
The President: I would like to thank Ambassador
Fonseca for the support he gave us last month when this
issue was first raised.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Republic of Korea. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Lee See-young (Republic of Korea): In the
course of today's Council meeting we have listened to all
sorts of dismal statistics and have heard about symptoms
and diagnoses available regarding the AIDS problem in
Africa. Now is therefore the time for us to act, and to act
decisively with concrete measures to fight this
unprecedented tragedy and to turn the tide against AIDS.
We therefore commend the Security Council for its
willingness to become an additional partner in the
comprehensive and coordinated efforts of the international
community to combat AIDS in Africa, with particular
emphasis on the security aspect of the epidemic. We are
confident that the initiatives taken by the Security Council
at this juncture will generate momentum for a global
response by all actors on all fronts to combat this
pandemic, which threatens not only Africa, but also the rest
of the world.

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
March 2000. We hope that this working group will soon
begin its activities by monitoring the AIDS situation in
Africa and subsequently making recommendations
thereon, including the suggestion made today by my
colleague the Ambassador of Ukraine to consider holding
a special session of the General Assembly devoted to the
AIDS problem.
My delegation also considers it necessary that the
working group's mandate be further broadened to include
devising a more comprehensive and coordinated strategy
involving all actors within and outside the United Nations
system, in close cooperation with the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS).
By the same token, we welcome the substantive
progress made at the meeting on the International
Partnership against AIDS in Africa held here in New
York last December. We look forward to an agreed plan
of action to be submitted by all the participating actors
next May.
Secondly, my delegation suggests that the Security
Council establish a mechanism for close cooperation and
coordination with UNAIDS, the focal point for a wide
range of actors devoted to fighting AIDS. To that end, the
Security Council may wish to arrange regular open
briefing sessions with the Executive Director of UNAIDS
to keep Member States up to date on the aspects of the
AIDS crisis in Africa that have peace and security
implications.

First, my delegation believes that the international
community should address the problem of AIDS in Africa
with the full force of an institutional response. In this
context, we welcome the Secretary-General's suggestion to
the General Assembly at its last session that it set up a
working group that — among other responsibilities —
would forge effective partnerships with the goal of reducing
HIV/AIDS infection rates in Africa.

Finally, we believe that the social, economic and
political scale and dimensions of the AIDS epidemic in
Africa call for a comprehensive and integrated approach
that requires not only active participation but also close
cooperation and coordination among all major
stakeholders, namely, local populations, African leaders,
the United Nations system, non-governmental
organizations and donors. To echo Vice-President Gore,
independent initiatives to fight AIDS by the various actors
must be more focused and coordinated in order to take
maximum advantage of their synergy and success. We
therefore consider it essential that we reinforce the
leading role of UNAIDS vis-à-vis these crucial actors by
strengthening its mandate, providing it with greater
resources and enhancing the coordinating authority of its
Executive Director.

In the ensuing resolution, the General Assembly
requested its President to convene an organizational meeting
of the open-ended ad hoc working group no later than

In conclusion, it is our sincere hope that the views
and suggestions put forward at today's meeting will create
momentum that will unite the global fronts to fight AIDS

Having said that, let me put forward several practical
suggestions related to today's topic of discussion.

24

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
in Africa and ultimately help prevent the spread of this
horrendous epidemic from threatening peace and security
on the African continent.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Republic of Korea for those provocative and valuable
suggestions, which I hope we will all consider.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to point out that the days devoted to
Africa in the Security Council have increased in number
since 25 September 1997, when we decided to devote a day
to Africa in the Council. Other days followed in 1998, and
in 1999 several meetings were devoted to Africa —
including the meeting of 29 September, as well as another
in December. The Council has now decided to devote a
whole month to Africa. Africa thanks all those who are
devoting days, weeks and months to it.
In reality, it would take years to consider the questions
related to Africa. But what has actually taken place since
25 September 1997, when the Council devoted a day to
Africa at the level of Ministers for Foreign Affairs? The
then Chairman of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), Mr. Mugabe, participated then, and President
Compaore took part the following year. What has happened
or been decided upon this year regarding Africa in the
Council?
Questions related to Africa comprise over 60 per cent
of the work of the Council. Africa needs not only pious
hopes and eloquent speeches to solve its problems. Good
intentions are not enough. Africa needs tangible work. It
knows its maladies and their remedies. It is just that Africa
is unable to obtain those remedies, given the shortage of
resources to deal with these maladies. As I already stated
in the Council, on 27 September 1999, when it devoted a
meeting to the situation in Africa:
“an urgent international programme should be set up
under the auspices of the United Nations and the
OAU, supervised by the World Health Organization,
to deal with AIDS treatment, prevention and
awareness. This disease threatens the entire continent
and must be swiftly dealt with through an international
plan of action. It should also adopt a similar
international programme against malaria and other

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
endemic diseases. In addition to the United Nations,
all countries and international organizations,
governmental and non-governmental, foundations,
companies and individuals should provide
contributions, financial and in kind, to this
humanitarian work.” (S/PV.4049, resumption 2,
p. 24)
That is what I said in September last year when we raised
the question of AIDS.
Today I must say very frankly, and I am speaking
here on behalf of Africa and of the African Group in the
United Nations, that the Security Council is faced with a
major challenge. The question of AIDS has been added to
its agenda, so the challenge is to adopt and implement
tangible measures. Otherwise, the Council would be
making great statements without having actually done
anything. The mountain would have given birth to a
mouse, as we say in Arabic. This would be unacceptable
for Africa, as we have already decided to devote days,
weeks and a month to the consideration of questions
relating to Africa. Africa can do without publicity. What
counts for Africa is results.
I would propose, therefore, that the resolution that
we will adopt here take into account the debate at this
meeting, including, inter alia, first, the financing of the
campaign against AIDS through determining a certain
proportion of the contributions of Member States to the
budget of the United Nations and devoting that amount to
combating AIDS.
Secondly, I propose that the Group of Seven finance
a certain amount of that campaign, which would be
commensurate with their economic level; thirdly, that
international financial organizations make a contribution
to this campaign; and fourthly, that universities, research
centres, companies, individuals and non-governmental
organizations also make proportionate contributions. Also,
the media should discharge their proper role in terms of
making the public aware of the epidemic. At least we
should adopt a resolution along those lines. If we do not,
Africa will never forgive those who have made this
merely a media issue and a forum for political oneupmanship.
The President: May I make one brief comment. I
thank you very much, Ambassador, for your comments.
Just one brief clarification: you referred to a Security
Council resolution. This is a legitimate point, but it is not
our intention to have a resolution or a presidential

25

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
statement today. That is not the purpose of this particular
meeting. But your point, had this been the case, is well
taken.
Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): At the outset, Mr. President,
I wish to express the deep appreciation of my delegation
for your innovative and highly imaginative interpretation of
international security as including human security as well
in this post-cold-war era. I commend you for your
exemplary courage and foresight in making the longneglected problems of Africa the theme of your presidency.
This morning the presence of the Vice-President of the
United States at this inaugural meeting highlighted very
specific suggestions, measures and commitments. In this
respect, I would like to highly laud his efforts and those of
his Government in this direction.
In many ways, it is fitting to begin this focus on
Africa with an examination of the economic and social
devastation wrought by the AIDS epidemic, which is now
the number-one killer in Africa. Obviously, AIDS has had
a catastrophic impact on peace and security in Africa. Since
the beginning of the epidemic, 50 million individuals
worldwide have been infected with HIV, 16 million of
whom have died. Of those who died, 12 million, or nearly
75 per cent, were in Africa. Two million died there last
year alone, which corresponds to five times the number of
deaths due to AIDS in the United States in the entire last
two decades. Most stunning of all, of the 34 million people
currently affected and still alive, roughly 23 million, or 68
per cent, are in sub-Saharan Africa. A syndicated columnist
in Newsweek wrote last week that
“every minute 11 people worldwide are infected with
HIV, 10 of them in sub-Saharan Africa”.
In the 1950s, sub-Saharan Africans had an average
lifespan of 44 years, a figure which, with improved living
standards, had risen to 59. Today that figure is rapidly
declining, and could, before the end of the decade, reach 45
years, wiping out the gains of half a century. Yet all the
sub-Saharan countries combined have a mere $160 million
to spend confronting AIDS, and the challenge they face is
simply enormous.
The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) literature states that Africa remains the global
epicentre of the epidemic. However, certain other regions,
it seems, are catching up with Africa, in particular the
newly independent States of the former Soviet Union and
the Eastern and Central European countries. What this

26

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
shows is that AIDS cannot be dismissed as an African
problem. Rather, it is a global human problem, or, more
correctly, a global human tragedy, one which concerns
every one of us, wherever we may be. Hence, Mr.
President, your ingenious idea of convening this meeting
on a health issue, the first in the history of the Security
Council. Since AIDS is killing far more people than war,
it certainly deserves the Council's attention. Hopefully,
this laudable effort will nudge the global conscience
towards action, more specifically to leverage the resources
of our planet to defeat this plague of our era. Many
countries in Africa, as has been noted at this meeting, are
responsibly tackling this problem. They need, however,
recognition, more meaningful assistance and long-term
support.
Africa, ironically, cannot rely on the wonder drugs
that have cut mortality in rich countries, because those
drugs cost over $20,000 per person per year, whereas
poor countries, which bear the brunt of AIDS, cannot
afford more than $20 per person per year. The answer
does not lie only in reducing the cost of treatment, but in
providing the necessary health infrastructure, as well as in
investing in the development of a cheap, easily delivered
vaccine. But this remains a long-term proposition.
We enter the new millennium with more poor people
than the world has ever known, and we are in the midst
of plenty, awash with resources. Out of the world's
current 6 billion people, 1.3 billion, or about 20 per cent,
live below the absolute poverty line, on less than $1 a
day; and 2.8 billion, or about 50 per cent, eke out survival
on less than $2 a day. Obviously, inequality has
multiplied enormously. The majority of Africans lack a
minimally decent life, as expressed in such things as
clean water, sanitation, health services and education —
hence, the excessive prevalence of AIDS in Africa. In
truth, the peril of HIV and AIDS in Africa lies in the
continent's poverty. So, in an era of declining
international resource flows for Africa's development
needs, the worry is that the AIDS peril may continue to
ravage the continent's vital asset: its scarce human capital.
Fighting AIDS requires a more holistic approach.
We must improve societies, institutions and economies to
eliminate poverty, the source of most of Africa's ills. In
particular, the elimination or containment of AIDS will
require concrete steps to prevent, to cure and to treat. Dr.
Bruntland, Director-General of the World Health
Organization, wisely notes that

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
“while prevention is the most promising strategy for
managing AIDS epidemic in the long term, we cannot
lose sight of the fact that millions of people are
affected today. For them we must do a much better
job of increasing access to health care and support,
including inexpensive antibiotics that can add many
months to the lives of people already sick with AIDS,
to palliative therapies that can help increase comfort
and reduce suffering and to psychological and social
support for patients and their families.”
In conclusion, let me say AIDS in Africa is not all
poverty, but at current levels, it is very close.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of Mongolia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and make his statement.
Mr. Enkhsaikhan (Mongolia): My delegation also
would like to express its appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for taking the initiative of convening this open Council
debate on this issue. We believe that this question,
especially its far-reaching implications not only for
individual States but for international peace and security in
general, demands that it be taken up in the Council without
delay. Our appreciation and thanks also go to the VicePresident of the United States and to the Secretary-General,
as well as to the representatives of the United Nations
agencies for their briefings and contributions to the Council.
My delegation fully agrees with the previous speakers
that the spread of infectious diseases, in particular the
proliferation of the most deadly infectious diseases such as
HIV/AIDS, especially across the African continent, has
become one of the most disturbing human security issues
facing the world today. It has indeed become a security
issue in its broader sense.
Since the first cases of AIDS surfaced in 1981, this
disease has killed almost 14 million men, women and
children worldwide. By 1998, there were over 30 million
people worldwide infected with HIV/AIDS, of whom 23
million were in Africa. It is estimated that 87 per cent of
the world's children infected with the HIV virus live in
Africa. The statistics also vividly demonstrate that with
only 13 per cent of the world's population, Africa alone has
about 70 per cent of the world's HIV/AIDS cases. These
and many other disturbing data cited earlier demand the
urgent attention of the international community and that
effective adequate ways to control and stop this deadly
disease be found.

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
Throughout 1999, the international community,
including this Council, devoted increasing attention to the
question of strengthening peace and security, as well as
promoting socio-economic development in Africa. It is
yet further recognition that global peace and security are
interdependent and therefore cannot be ensured unless
peace and prosperity prevail on the African continent as
well. Tackling the AIDS issue is an important component
of this, since durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa will not be achieved without effectively fighting
AIDS, protecting and preventing the entire population of
the continent from this disease that truly threatens the
very basis of human security.
We concur with the view that the scourge of this
epidemic can be removed and prevented only by joint
efforts, with the active participation of Governments, nongovernmental organizations, civil society and international
organizations.
The United Nations can and should play an
important role in assisting Governments and peoples to
fight against this rapidly growing scourge. It is clear that
one of the root causes of the rapid spread of this disease
is directly connected with poverty. This is confirmed by
the fact that about 44 per cent of Africans and 51 per cent
of those in the sub-Saharan region, which is most affected
by HIV/AIDS, are living in absolute poverty. It is
therefore my delegation's belief that the broad programme
of development assistance and poverty eradication
provided by the international community to African
countries must be directly linked with the intensive
programme of assistance aimed at promoting education,
especially health education, as well as health care.
My delegation associates itself with others in urging
the United Nations and its relevant agencies and bodies to
take decisive measures to address this challenge properly.
We also urge the international financial bodies not to
reduce but, to the contrary, to increase the resources
aimed at assisting African countries. We believe that
effective preventive measures should also be supported by
intensifying research work to eliminate and defeat this
scourge.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate once again our
support for the United Nations efforts to break the virtual
wall of silence regarding this scourge, to take effective
measures to stop the proliferation of this deadly disease
and to reverse it in the nearest future. I hope that today's
discussion in the Council and the follow-up debates will

27

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
contribute in a practical way to achieving concrete results
in the battle against this evil.
The President: Thank you for your very kind
remarks. Once again, I would respectfully request people to
keep their remarks to five minutes.
I would now like to ask the Minister of Health of
Namibia — who has sat very attentively here all day long
through seven hours of speeches and who is the only
Minister of Health here whose country is also a member of
the Security Council — if she would make some very brief
ad hoc observations for all our benefit, but I stress the word
“brief”, Madam Minister.
Dr. Amathila (Namibia): I will certainly be very
brief. I only have three points to make here.
I do not want any impression to be created that the
African Governments are sleeping on the problem. We have
proven that the Governments have made serious, serious
efforts in fighting the scourge of HIV/AIDS.
Of course, as we said, we cannot afford the medicines,
but we are working very hard on prevention. Our
communities are fully informed, and we are not sitting and
waiting for other people to come and do the work for us.
This is a question of partnership. HIV is not only an
African problem; we, as partners, can really work together
in order to fight AIDS as a nation, just as we would any
infections that come our way, such as plague — just as we
are fighting polio and as we fought smallpox. I think this
is what we are requesting other Governments to do; but
they should not think that African Governments are
irresponsible and are not doing anything. That is not the
issue. We are all working very hard on this question.
Secondly, I would like to reiterate the need for
vaccines. I would like to request the researchers, when they
research the vaccines, to also include sub-group C, the
group in our area in southern Africa. I think the vaccines
that they are busy testing include only sub-groups A and B,
if the information that we got in Lusaka in the last three
months is correct. I want the vaccines; we are asking for
these vaccines to be affordable to everybody, particularly to
us in Africa. They should not be made so expensive, like
the anti-viral drugs that we cannot afford. I think that we
have to work very hard so that these vaccines will be
affordable for our people.

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
Lastly, I would like to reiterate that while we are
trying to treat those who are infected — and we treat the
opportunistic diseases and also the other sexually
transmitted diseases — it is important that we continue
with our education programmes. We are also targeting
schools in order to stop the new infections, because we
cannot do much about those who are already infected. I
think the programmes must be strengthened in schools.
We have asked our Ministries of Education to include
HIV/AIDS as part of their school curricula.
On behalf of my delegation and others, I thank you
once again, Mr. President, for making it possible for this
issue of HIV/AIDS finally to come to this Council, and
it should not be the last time. I think we should continue
to fight together. I am very happy with the input from
everybody who spoke.
The President: I thank the Minister of Health of
Namibia, and I hope she will extend our appreciation to
her Government in Windhoek for sending her here today,
and to her for making this long visit. I hope she will
convey to the peoples and fellow African Ministers the
historic and unprecedented nature of today's meeting.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Indonesia. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): Allow me to extend our
sincere congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. The Indonesian delegation would like to take
this opportunity to express its appreciation to you and the
members of the Council for convening today's open
debate. We also commend the format of the discussion
today, which enhances the possibility of the further
involvement of Member States that are not members of
the Council in issues under discussion in the Security
Council. Likewise, we look forward to the application of
such a format in the discussion of crucial issues
concerning the maintenance of international peace and
security.
In welcoming this open debate on an issue which
has evoked widespread interest and concern, it is worth
noting that AIDS, particularly in Africa, is complex and
multidimensional. It needs to be urgently addressed by the
international community.
Certainly, at this stage it is beyond the capacity of
any single Government to respond. In that regard, this

28

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
issue has also been the focus of other bodies of the United
Nations system. Today's discussion before the Council will
surely enhance the multidimensional approach to addressing
this issue in the continuing endeavour to overcome its
devastating repercussions.
The Secretary-General has underscored the fact that
the struggle to bring about peace and security in Africa is
inextricably linked to economic growth and development.
In the absence of sustained socio-economic progress, it is
doubtful that lasting peace and stability could be secured.
As the report further highlights, conflict prevention and
post-conflict peace-building are meaningless unless they can
enable a society to develop.
What has not been so clearly established or so widely
recognized is the impact of the HIV/AIDS epidemic on
peace and security. Though there has been little direct study
on the impact of AIDS on stability and security in Africa,
many believe that the devastating impact of the disease on
the fabric of society is self-evident. At the same time,
deprivation and poverty are well recognized as non-military
sources of conflict and instability. Thus, the connection
between AIDS and security is a credible one. The
widespread epidemic that is currently devastating many
countries in Africa can be clearly seen not only to have an
impact on development but also to constitute a perennial
source of political insecurity and instability.
According to available statistics, it seems that poor
people, drug users and neglected populations, including
women, are the most vulnerable ones. What is also of deep
concern is the increasing numbers of infants and children
who are being infected with and dying from AIDS. With
the growing costs of providing health services in many
countries, it is no longer possible to meet the escalating
demands created by HIV.
To address this complex and pervasive crisis in Africa,
my delegation believes that the international community
should undertake a sincere commitment to eradicate this
scourge through a developmental approach. The health
needs of Africa must be borne by international burdensharing. However, we are all aware of the difficult road
ahead, as the financial and human resources to deal with
this epidemic are woefully inadequate, both at the national
and the international level. What does show promise,
however, is the multisectoral approach of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) which is
sponsored by many bodies of the United Nations and
provides effective system-wide coordination. In this light,

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
a coordinated, multisectoral approach, backed by adequate
resources, is urgently needed.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to share the
vision that we should all seek to work for a world free of
the unprecedented human disaster of HIV/AIDS — a
world in which HIV/AIDS transmission is substantially
reduced; where there is affordable treatment; where there
is a substantial reduction in individual and collective
vulnerability to the epidemic; where there is a significant
alleviation of the adverse impact of the disease on
individuals, communities and nations; and where the
silence surrounding the disease is broken for ever, thereby
sharply reducing the stigma and denial that have stifled
resolution. Indonesia believes that this vision can be
achieved only through partnership, and we thus support
the recommendation that the Economic and Social
Council should encourage UNAIDS in its efforts to
develop a global strategy based upon this shared vision.
I sincerely believe that only through such a multisectoral
approach, promoted through partnership, can HIV/AIDS
be successfully combated in Africa, development
successfully fostered and peace and security successfully
ensured.
The President: I thank the representative of
Indonesia for his comments, which I greatly appreciate.
We have 12 speakers remaining on the list for the
closing section of this meeting. Before we continue with
the list, I would like to invite Dr. Peter Piot to respond on
behalf of the World Bank, the United Nations
Development Programme and the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS to what he has heard so far
today, reserving the right, of course, for him to make
additional comments after he has heard the remaining
speakers.
Dr. Piot: Thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to make a few very brief follow-up points. As
you said, I am speaking on behalf of Jim Wolfensohn,
Mark Malloch Brown, and the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) partners.
I think we are faced with a great opportunity, and I
would like to assure the Council of our collective
determination to do our part. In response to your specific
requests, Mr. President, and those of Security Council
members, we will follow up on at least six specific
points.

29

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
First, we must deliver on our commitment, growing
out of the Secretary-General's meeting of 6 December on
the International Partnership against AIDS in Africa, to
have reached agreement by May among African
Governments, donor Governments, the United Nations
system, non-governmental organizations and the private
sector on a specific plan for a major intensification and
mobilization to address the epidemic in Africa.
Secondly, in response to your specific request, Sir, and
that of the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, we will also ensure that there is systemic
coordination between the development of this Partnership
and the Security Council.
Thirdly, we will work with the presidency of the
Security Council in follow-up to this meeting to work
through the details of how appropriate and regular followup with the Security Council should be implemented.
Fourthly, in response to the request of the Permanent
Representatives of the United Kingdom and France, we will
intensify clearing-house efforts within the United Nations
and ensure the flow of current information to all of the
member States on the international response and report to
the Council within one month.
Fifthly, we will also put forward a specific plan of
partnership for addressing AIDS in emergencies and in the
uniformed services within two months.
Last, we will be very pleased to follow up in writing
individual questions raised by Security Council members,
as requested.
This is a bold step the Security Council has taken
today. Good luck to us all.
The President: I would ask all representatives in the
room whose Permanent Representatives are not here any
more to inform them of the six undertakings that we have
just heard from the head of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS. I would ask the Assistant
Secretary-General to bring them to the attention of the
Secretary-General and other people.
I hope this means the beginning of a deepened and
greater collaboration between elements within the United
Nations family. I commend Dr. Piot for his involvement
today and I hope that we will be seeing him again in the
Security Council in the future. The same, of course, goes
for Mark Malloch Brown.

30

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba hopes this debate will contribute to mobilizing the
international community to make integrated efforts to
assist Africa and that it will help relevant bodies of the
United Nations to surmount obstacles that affect the
fulfilment of their mandates and programmes. It will be
productive if, in essence, it helps the will of the
industrialized countries to be expressed in reality and the
appropriation of resources.
Public opinion should not assume that the United
Nations has only just discovered how serious this
epidemic in Africa is. Ignorance is not the cause of its
inaction. In general, there are no new data or ideas. The
growth of the epidemic and the consequences we are
seeing were foreseen years ago. At a debate right here, on
29 September 1999, these matters were addressed, though
no apparent progress has been made.
We understand with profound and painful realism
that there will be no solutions without economic
development. Africa would have to spend more than $57
billion dollars a year just for anti-retroviral drugs for
current patients and, if the developed countries'
therapeutic schemes were to be followed, they would cost
more than $250 billion. Today, Africa can barely spend
$10 per capita on health, which in some countries
constitutes one ninth of their debt service.
Forty-four per cent of Africans — more than half of
the sub-Saharan African population — live in conditions
of absolute poverty. Eight million African refugees
scarcely receive care or resources. Equally serious are the
malaria epidemic and the deaths of millions of people
from hunger and curable or preventable diseases. Every
year, 4.7 million Africans die of infectious and parasitic
diseases, 92 times the number of deaths by the same
cause in Western Europe. Life expectancy is expected to
drop to 45 years. More than one third of African
countries is or has recently been in a conflict situation.
In 1998, Africa received less than $5 billion — 3
per cent of the world's total — in direct foreign
investments. Its current account deficit was $16 billion,
over three times that of the previous year. The debt
burden was up $350 billion, more than three times
Africa's exports of goods and services. Meanwhile,

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
official development assistance accounts for only 0.23 per
cent of the developed countries' gross domestic product.
Development will be impossible and there will be no
structural or lasting solutions to the AIDS problem in
Africa unless the unjust and unsustainable world order that
we are suffering under today changes. It is imperative that
palliatives be found to the epidemic by means of the
integrated efforts of the international community. The
required resources can be contributed only by the developed
countries, which control 86 per cent of the world's gross
domestic product, 82 per cent of exports, 68 per cent of
investments and 74 per cent of telephones. AIDS in Africa,
like hunger, is a problem of underdevelopment, not of
security.
It is necessary to move on to facts. Cuba reiterates its
proposal to establish a collaboration project through the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, the World
Health Organization and other agencies and funds for subSaharan Africa, the Caribbean and Central America to
confront AIDS, among other health problems, to which
Cuba is ready to contribute medical personnel free of
charge.
Cuba also reiterates its proposal to provide, free of
charge, all the medical personnel required to launch an
integrated and emergency health campaign in northern subSaharan Africa. We propose that the United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes and the developed
countries provide thereto the minimum indispensable
resources, mainly medicines and medical equipment.
With one doctor and oral hydration salts, which cost
just a few cents, a child's life can be saved. The Cuban
people, with the same feelings that cause them to shudder
today and struggle for the fate of just one of their children
illegally and arbitrarily held in the United States, will
provide the doctor.
This effort is feasible and will not require many
resources. Cuba has been undertaking it on its own, to the
extent of its capacities, and currently has 43 medical teams
in 11 countries, providing health care to over 10 million
people. The expansion of this cooperation is currently under
way. A Latin American University of Medical Sciences has
been set up with a prospective enrolment of 6,000 students.
Steps are being taken to establish medical schools with
Cuban professors in two African countries. A vaccination
campaign is being waged in Haiti. All the necessary college
scholarships will be provided free of charge to the
Caribbean countries.

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
Hundreds of African youths are studying in Cuba,
where close to 27,000 professionals and technicians have
graduated and more than 5,000 have been trained. As
physicians and dentists alone, 1,165 have graduated. More
than 80,000 Cuban civilian participants have served in
Africa, nearly 25,000 of them in health care.
With political will and effective social programmes,
the exploitation of resources, the creation of effective and
comprehensive health and education systems for the
whole population, as well as equity in the distribution of
wealth, a small, poor and blockaded country like Cuba
can point to successful experience in AIDS treatment and
control.
Since 1986 through 31 December 1999, 2,676
seropositive persons, 1,001 AIDS patients and 691 AIDSrelated deaths have been reported. The epidemic has
grown slowly and is considered to be a low-transmission
one. Only 0.03 per cent of the population between the
ages of 15 and 49 is infected.
All AIDS-infected Cubans enjoy thorough care;
broad medical coverage, understanding and human
solidarity; the right to confidentiality; and full respect for
their private life. They are not discriminated against; they
are guaranteed their right to work, social security and
health care, generally through modern out-patient
treatment. Their legal status is respected and the
enjoyment and exercise of their human rights are ensured.
Health-related education is effective and universal. The
Cuban AIDS-vaccine project, now in the phase of clinical
testing in humans, is among the most advanced
worldwide. May our experience, which we humbly and
modestly present, serve as an opportunity to demonstrate
that this effort is feasible.
The United Nations has to act. The General
Assembly should define policies and mandates for an
urgent and integrated effort in Africa, either through the
special session proposed today or otherwise. The World
Health Organization (WHO), the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and other agencies,
funds and programmes must take immediate action. The
Economic and Social Council should consider ways to
provide effective coordination.
If humankind's conscience is reflected in actions by
Governments, if other international protagonists
participate responsibly, if developed countries act
altruistically, if it is understood that there will be no

31

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
peace or development without peace and development in
Africa and that in a globalized world the only future that
can be built is a common one, then the fight against AIDS
will be possible.
The President: I thank the representative of Cuba for
his strong contribution.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Italy. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Vento (Italy): Italy, speaking also as a member
of the European Union, welcomes the initiative of the
United States presidency of the Security Council, which
enlarges the notion of insecurity and of the response of the
international community by opening the agenda of this
body, with clear priority granted to the challenges arising
from the African continent, in the broader context of the
initiatives by the Secretary-General and the General
Assembly on Africa. Furthermore, the important statement
of the President of the World Bank this morning delivers
clear and authoritative confirmation of the need for an
integrated international strategy, which the present initiative
has emphasized.
Italy obviously subscribes to the statement made by
the Portuguese Presidency of the European Union.
Therefore, like a number of Permanent Representatives
from other European Union member States who have
already taken the floor, I will confine my remarks to a few
factual comments and data on the specific contribution that
Italy is planning to make for the year 2000 in the
framework of the International Partnership against
HIV/AIDS in Africa.
The Italian initiative is grounded in two specific areas
of policy: first, the experience of Italy itself as a country
which has been engaged with African countries for decades
in development cooperation and official development
assistance, specifically in fields related to health, scientific
education and the environment; and secondly, the major
flows of African immigrant workers that have moved to our
country in the last 10 years, which have enhanced our ties
with Africa.
Our integrated strategy of support for the national
efforts of African countries is based on the scientific
knowledge and therapies developed in my country through
a yearly allotment of resources amounting to about $163
million since 1993 in the field of research and related
contacts carried out by Italian institutions, academic bodies

32

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
and specialized hospitals. This cooperation strategy will
focus primarily on actions of prevention through
vaccination programmes and education and
communication campaigns in schools, workplaces and the
media; epidemiological surveillance; decreasing the rate
of maternal transmission; assistance to orphans and
families affected by HIV/AIDS; capacity-building;
personnel training; and research support.
The overall size of Italy's financial contribution to
fight the HIV/AIDS epidemic in Africa will be
approximately $20 million in the year 2000, and it will be
channelled through multilateral and bilateral programmes.
A contribution of $8 million will be provided to the
World Health Organization, in addition to the
disbursement of $2 million to the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS). Furthermore,
bilateral emergency intervention amounting to about $5.5
million will be organized in the most affected African
countries. Finally, we envisage, on a bilateral basis, about
$4 million for a specific subregional programme for the
Great Lakes area, in Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda.
Wherever possible we shall seek to involve nongovernmental organizations and local Italian communities
in order to help build and consolidate a grass-roots
approach.
We owe it to the African people affected by this
scourge to deploy every means necessary to defeat the
pandemic, without ignoring or disregarding the other
serious problems affecting the African continent in the
areas of basic needs, poverty, environment, infrastructure
and development financing, which interact with this
plight.
The President: I apologize, Mr. Ambassador, for
not having begun by welcoming you to the United
Nations and to the Security Council. I know this is your
first appearance here, Ambassador Vento. We welcome
you. We are delighted you are with us.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of New Zealand. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Powles (New Zealand): I have the honour to
speak today on behalf of the following members of the
South Pacific Forum: Australia, Fiji, the Marshall Islands,
the Federated States of Micronesia, Papua New Guinea,
Solomon Islands, Tonga, Vanuatu and New Zealand.
Despite the length of this list, our statement is very short.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
We welcome the focus by the Security Council on the
issue of AIDS and its impact on peace and security in
Africa. We also endorse the broadening of participation of
non-members in the work of this Council.
The sheer magnitude and severity of the AIDS
epidemic in Africa warrants urgent attention. The spread of
the disease in the region is, to borrow the words of the
Executive Director of UNAIDS, nothing short of an
unprecedented human disaster, eroding human, social and
economic development and needing a response of
emergency proportions.
In his 1998 report on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa (S/1998/318), the Secretary-General recognized that
AIDS and the public health crisis facing Africa have
serious consequences for the economic and social progress
which is central to reducing conflict in the region.
AIDS is a global problem. It does not recognize
national borders. It is therefore imperative that a concerted
global effort be made by the international community to
combat this disease around the world, but the scale of the
problem in Africa makes that region's needs unique.
Through our membership in United Nations funds and
programmes and the specialized agencies active in this
field, the countries of the South Pacific will continue to
support all efforts for effective measures to combat the
spread of this disease.
Our South Pacific region is about as distant from
Africa as can be. But as they face these awesome
challenges, we would like to underline our solidarity with
our friends in Africa.
The President: I thank the representative of New
Zealand for his kind words about this meeting.
The next speaker is the representative of Zambia. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement. May I say how much we are looking forward
to the arrival in New York, in less than two weeks, of his
President to join us in this historic set of meetings on
Africa.
Mr. Kasanda (Zambia): My delegation is particularly
grateful for the fact that the first Council meeting of the
new millennium has dealt with this high-profile discussion
on the AIDS pandemic in Africa. We thank you very much,
Mr. President, for making this possible.

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
There is no doubt that the AIDS epidemic is having
a negative impact on the sustainable development of
African countries. It destroys the most productive sector
of African populations. Technicians, teachers, factory
workers, doctors — all fall victim to this pandemic.
Virtually no aspect of public or private life remains
untouched by its devastating impact. The disruption of the
social fabric of African communities is immense. The
numbers of orphaned children, street kids and households
headed by teenagers who are themselves HIV-positive are
all on the increase throughout Africa. The AIDS scourge
is threatening the very foundations of African societies,
threatening economic and social stability and, in the end,
leading to political instability throughout the continent. In
this new millennium, HIV/AIDS will constitute the key
factor that will determine the pace and quality of our
development, well-being and survival.
It is clear from what we have heard this morning
and this afternoon that the AIDS pandemic presents the
greatest challenge not only to Africa, but to the
international community as a whole. A number of
responses have been offered by many speakers today.
However, my delegation would like to emphasize several
points.
I will start with African countries. In this regard, the
most important first step, as we see it, is political
commitment. We must recognize the disease for what it
is: a threat to our very survival as viable nations.
Secondly, we must step up the effort that we are engaged
in to discontinue traditional or cultural practices that
encourage the spread of HIV/AIDS. Thirdly, we must
reduce the stigma associated with HIV/AIDS. We must
embrace people living with AIDS and recognize them as
equal members of society. The conspiracy of silence must
be broken and we must begin treating AIDS like any
other disease that must be openly confronted. Fourthly,
AIDS education should form an essential part of the
curricula in our schools. We must openly discuss, in the
workplace, the prevention and treatment of AIDS, and
care for those living with AIDS. Education not only
removes the stigma on the AIDS condition but also leads
to favourable and positive change in behaviour patterns
by groups most at risk.
The next stage in the fight against the AIDS
pandemic is international support. The world and Africa
must fight the disease as partners. International
partnerships in research activity and treatment already in
place must be strengthened, improved and better
coordinated. In the end, however, it is the lack of

33

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
financial resources that is proving the greatest obstacle to
success in the war against AIDS. At this juncture, my
delegation would like to thank the United States
Government for the contribution which the Vice-President
announced this morning to the global war against the AIDS
pandemic. We must hope that this example will be
emulated by other Governments and international financial
institutions.
The next track of international support to Africa lies
in a renewed commitment to increase official development
assistance to Africa. In this regard, it is our belief that
development assistance from donors could include specific
components for AIDS-related activities. There is also the
eternal problem of the debt burden of African countries.
Scarce resources continue to be spent on servicing the debt.
If the war against AIDS is to be meaningful, a
comprehensive and lasting solution must be urgently found
to the debt problem. Creditor nations have the capacity and
the will to bring about positive change and make a
difference in this regard.
The last area in which international support is required
is treatment and drugs. Africa must have access to
affordable drugs that prolong the lives of people with HIV,
together with treatment for opportunistic infections that
occur in people with AIDS. There are also the problems of
dual infections, such as HIV infection concurrent with
tuberculosis or with other sexually transmitted diseases.
There is also the problem of mother-to-child transmission.
All of these can be prevented only if appropriate and
affordable drugs are available.
The Zambian delegation values the discussion that has
taken place today on a subject that is so vital to human
development, and my delegation shares your hope,
Mr. President, that the dialogue that has begun today will
be continued in the Council's later work.
The President: We have only a few speakers left. I
am optimistic that if we move rapidly we will finish
shortly. If any representatives wish to make any concluding
observations, they will, of course, be welcome to do so.

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
appreciation for your initiative, Mr. President, to convene
this open meeting of the Security Council. We are
encouraged by the fact that the Vice-President of the
United States, Mr. Al Gore, opened this first Council
meeting of the year 2000 and by his pledge of increased
United States contributions. We share the concern
expressed by the Secretary-General at this grave
humanitarian emergency facing the world, particularly in
Africa, with the spread of HIV/AIDS.
Cyprus considers the discussion in the Security
Council to be a good opportunity for refocusing the
attention of the international community and its
commitment to confronting this pandemic, as well as to
supporting Africa's endeavours for economic and social
development, which is inextricably linked with
strengthening regional peace and security. The AIDS
epidemic is a serious threat to mankind, and especially to
Africa, since, as was so grimly pointed out, it takes more
African lives each year than all the conflicts in that region
combined. We also express our particular concern about
the rising number of infected children and women.
We hope that the dialogue that is being initiated
today in the Security Council will address not only the
major scientific and medical challenges which remain but
also the socio-economic consequences in many countries.
We need, however, to go beyond discussions and pursue
effective solutions and practical responses. Sub-Saharan
Africa is experiencing a disproportionately high level of
the epidemic, which is causing great human and material
suffering. We must also address the need to invigorate the
efforts to make scientific discoveries and to provide
solutions to stop the transmission of the disease. Efforts
to develop a vaccine which will not be costly and will not
have severe side effects must be intensified. In this
respect, I would also stress the need for HIV screening of
blood donors.

The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Cyprus. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.

Over the years, through the efforts of the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and
of international and regional conferences, many of the
taboos and myths about HIV have been dispelled. It is
important that, on such a sensitive issue, people be
provided with the necessary knowledge and health
information, which will act as the best preventive
measure.

Mr. Zackheos (Cyprus) My delegation aligns itself
with the statement made on behalf of the European Union.
However, I would like to make a few additional remarks.
I wish at the outset to express my Government's

While our specific discussion concerns the region of
Africa, we must not lose sight of the fact that AIDS is an
international epidemic which requires a global response
based on a common strategy, solidarity and compassion,

34

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
as well as close coordination between Governments, nongovernmental organizations, including organizations dealing
with people living with HIV/AIDS, religious organizations
and the business community. Of course the United Nations
role remains indispensable.
Speaking about international cooperation on this issue,
I would like to stress once again the need for helping
Africa overcome its serious economic problems, which,
despite progress in some countries, still persist. Noting the
courage and the burden carried by African countries in
pursuing economic reform, we believe that the international
community should redouble its efforts to alleviate the
suffering of millions of people in the continent.
Special attention should be given to debt relief and the
needs of the least developed countries and other African
countries that are in danger of marginalization. Part of the
savings resulting from debt relief can be effectively utilized
for awareness campaigns about HIV/AIDS and for better
infrastructure to assist the victims of this disease.
Being so close to Africa, we have always had strong
ties with the African peoples. These special bonds were
forged during the decolonization era and by the presence of
Cypriot communities in many African countries. Cyprus,
within its capabilities, has consistently offered assistance to
African countries. In particular, the Cyprus Government is
providing scholarships for graduate and post-graduate
programmes in various fields, as well as special
programmes such as nursing. We pledge our continued
support to the efforts of the international community, in
solidarity with Africa, to confront the AIDS pandemic and
to strengthen peace, cooperation and development in the
continent.
The President: I thank the representative of Cyprus
for his kind words addressed to me.
I also thank him for staying well within the fiveminute recommendation, as I should have likewise thanked
the representative of New Zealand.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Nigeria. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): As much as I am tempted to
speak without my prepared speech, I find that in order to
save time it would be wise to confine myself to my
prepared text.

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
On behalf of the Government and the people of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria, I thank you most sincerely,
Mr. President, for convening this dialogue in the Security
Council on the situation in Africa and the impact of AIDS
and security. The fact that no less a person than the VicePresident of the United States presided over the
proceedings today underscores the importance your
country attaches to the HIV/AIDS pandemic in Africa. In
this regard, the financial commitments announced by the
Vice-President are welcome.
The Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, deserves
special commendation for his statement, which not only
painted a true and pathetic picture of the scourge of
HIV/AIDS in Africa but also called for urgent
international action to save mankind from the looming
catastrophe.
As my President, Chief Olusegun Obasanjo, recently
reminded the General Assembly, Africa is bearing the
brunt of this terrible disease, which now kills about 2
million people annually on the continent. Indeed, it has
overtaken malaria as Africa's major primary health-care
problem. In fact, the World Health Organization report
released last November showed that of the 5.6 million
people in the world diagnosed with HIV last year, 70 per
cent were in Africa, and nowhere is the rate of HIV
infection growing faster than in Africa.
The impact of HIV/AIDS is multidimensional. That
it threatens the security of any nation cannot be in doubt.
Demographically, the population is incrementally
decimated or, at best, debilitated. Economically, the
labour force suffers attrition, thereby paralysing national
productivity, economic growth and sustainable
development. It destroys communities by generating social
disharmony. The physical defence of the nation is not
spared either, as the manpower needed to secure nations'
territorial integrity is most adversely affected. Even the
residual population is systematically whittled down
through death from this pandemic. Women and children
are not spared. The worst impact of all is the looming
extinction of entire populations of nations.
It is now scientifically well established that this
killer disease does not respect national boundaries. It thus
poses a serious and real threat to humanity and universal
security. Global statistics have not shown any nation,
developed or developing, to be free from HIV/AIDS. But
its prevalence in Africa, a continent of 53 developing
countries and toddling economies clamped down by huge
external debt overhang and lack of technically skilled

35

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
human resources, deserves urgent national and international
joint action to find solutions and work towards the
eradication of this global scourge.
What must be done? As one of its new national
priorities, Nigeria has renewed its commitment to the
crusade against HIV/AIDS at various levels. President
Obasanjo has assumed personal leadership of the campaign
against HIV/AIDS in Nigeria. Indeed, the cabinet
committee on HIV/AIDS was inaugurated this morning in
Nigeria. Policies are being reviewed to ensure a more
favourable environment for HIV/AIDS control. More
stakeholders are being mobilized in the response against
HIV/AIDS through the Expanded National Response to
AIDS (ENRA). More funds are being allocated to our
national AIDS programmes. The media awareness campaign
is being intensified at all levels of government, with an
active response from both local and international nongovernmental organizations. HIV surveillance has been
intensified to define the determinants and driving force of
the epidemic.
The Nigerian Government hopes that access to
information and the prevention of mother-to-child
transmission of HIV, combined with access to curative
drugs, will have a positive impact at the grass-roots level of
society to stem the spread of the disease. It is of the view
that HIV/AIDS-diagnosed persons must not be stigmatized
and treated as outcasts of society. They need understanding
and therefore must be encouraged to be open about their
affliction, as this is the only way to ensure that the problem
is adequately tackled at all levels. Education and
information therefore must play vital roles for the
containment and the subsequent eradication of this global
problem.
Such national efforts as these stand to achieve little,
given the enormity of the pandemic and the socio-economic
and scientific hindrances prevalent in the African continent.
Just as the impact of AIDS is multidimensional, so should
the solution to it take into account not only the aspect of
medical cure but also the concomitant hindrances that
militate against Africa's efforts to rid itself of disease and
develop its people and its economies.
Africa has been ravaged by intractable armed conflicts,
disease, poverty and so on. As if the devastating effects of
those things were not enough, HIV/AIDS has been added
to its woes. The HIV/AIDS pandemic, which threatens
mankind with extinction — and especially today in
Africa — together with armed conflicts, deserves no less
attention from the Security Council than the use or threat of

36

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
nuclear weaponry in any part of the world, which is
rightly regarded as a threat to international peace and
security. Nigeria therefore hopes that the results of this
discussion today will mark the beginning of the
establishment of concrete action plans to address this very
urgent world problem.
Encouraged by the goodwill of the global partnership
against AIDS, we believe that the issues of AIDS and
armed conflicts, with all their impact on the African
situation, will be accorded the status of an international
security agenda item, which they deserve and which, we
also believe, fall within the competence of the Security
Council.
The President: I thank the representative of Nigeria
for his important statement. If there is no objection, I
would ask him to convey, on behalf of the entire Security
Council, our congratulations to President Obasanjo for the
new HIV committee that he established today in Nigeria.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Australia. I invite her to take a seat at
the Council table and to make her statement.
Ms. Wensley (Australia): Australia is extremely
concerned about the continuing advance of the HIV/AIDS
epidemic in Africa and elsewhere. We associate ourselves
fully with the South Pacific countries' statement to the
Council.
I have a prepared statement, which I will circulate.
I wish simply to highlight several points.
The priority that Australia accords the fight against
HIV/AIDS in Africa is reflected in our aid programme.
Despite the fact that our international development effort
is primarily directed towards the Asia and Pacific region,
Africa does receive a high proportion of our global
HIV/AIDS expenditure. As a relatively small donor in
Africa, we will continue to direct a significant proportion
of our overall aid to Africa towards HIV/AIDS and to do
our best to play a supporting role in this area.
We have committed ourselves to spending $10
million over four years to help fight HIV/AIDS in
southern and eastern Africa in particular. Our HIV/AIDS
programme in Africa targets rural communities and the
more vulnerable members of society, including women
and children. In implementing the programme, we are
working very closely with the Governments of African
countries, with multilateral agencies and especially with

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
local non-governmental organizations — not something that
I have heard a great deal about in today's discussion, but an
aspect that we think is very important in the effective
implementation of programmes.
In our future bilateral projects, we will continue to
seek to strengthen partner Governments' capacity to engage
in long-term planning to address the social and economic
impact of the epidemic. In that respect, I have heard many
speakers place emphasis on the value of research, and they
have particularly emphasized the importance of medical
research. But for our part we think that there is very
important research that needs to be done in other areas and
which should be maintained. The sort of thing I am
thinking of is the kind of study that was done at the
Australian National University by the demographics area,
which was a 10-year study of AIDS in Africa. That
produced very important data — things like studies of life
expectancy in Zimbabwe, which has been reduced from the
50 years expected in the year 2000 to now 37 years. That
sort of data is very important for us all to be factoring into
our long-term planning to deal with the AIDS pandemic.
We wish also to place particular focus in our strategies
on youth and on mothers at risk of transmitting HIV to
their children. One initiative that we have taken recently
which may be of interest is to fund something called an
“optimal feeding practices programme” to reduce the risk
of mother-to-child transmission in southern Africa.
I would like to make three final points that are not in
my written statement but are in response to matters raised
in the discussion today, which I have found extremely
valuable.
First, I have noticed a constant interest in best-practice
lessons learned and in education and awareness-raising. The
focus of this discussion today is Africa, but AIDS is present
in Australia and in our region, and we have very welldeveloped national and regional programmes at those levels
that we would wish to share and to draw on, in consultation
particularly with the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS.
In that respect, references to the clearing house and
the response that Peter Piot gave earlier in the day
underline, I think, the importance of that concept's being
developed and refined further, picking up on many of the
points made in today's debate.

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
long list of speakers, a certain diminishing attention span,
and I noted the comment by our colleague from the
United Kingdom that just the very fact that we have had
this debate was probably enough. And perhaps there has
been some repetition. But from the viewpoint of nonmembers of the Council in particular, and of non-African
Member States, there are two very valuable things about
having a long list of speakers. First, it involves us in the
business of the Council as non-members, and secondly, it
is really important, not just that we are raising awareness
here, but that Member States speak and can convey
statements back to their own Governments.
Donor countries need to sensitive, galvanize and
mobilize our own communities in the support for AIDS,
and this sort of debate has an enormously beneficial
impact on helping us to sensitize our own communities,
not just the international community. After all, democratic
Governments are going to act only in response to
pressures from their communities and from their
electorates.
The third point is that the Permanent Representative
of Jamaica referred in her statement to peacekeeping. I
hope that Member States will bear what she said in mind
at the resumed session of the Fifth Committee in May and
June, which focuses on peacekeeping finance. I make that
point not just because I am the Chairman of the Fifth
Committee, but because one of the problems with the
United Nations is that we over-compartmentalize our
work, and what Member States say and do in one forum
and one part of this system does not necessarily flow
through to their actions in other parts of the United
Nations.
What I would hope, in picking up the challenge that
Jeremy Greenstock laid down, and in asking what we are
going to do to follow up and where is the follow-through,
is that we will make an active and determined effort to
examine how what we have said here as Member States
is reflected in the decisions and the actions that we take
elsewhere, whether it be in the Commission on Human
Rights in Geneva or the Commission on the Status of
Women — which is especially important in view of the
vulnerability of women, to which so many people have
referred — whether it be in the meetings of executive
boards or in the decisions that are being made about
resource allocation, in committees dealing with
peacekeeping or in the preparations for the Millennium
Summit.

The second point is that I detected a certain
impatience, perhaps, towards the end of the day, with a

37

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
There have been a lot of calls here for people to be
creative and committed, but I think that we have to be
opportunistic and look at everything we are doing in this
House and in this Organization to give reflection to the sort
of concerns that have been expressed here, and that we
should be consistent in what we say and do as Member
States in addressing this epidemic and the threat that it
represents to international stability and security.
The President: I wish to comment on one thing that
Ambassador Wensley said, which is quite important. She
spoke of over-compartmentalization at the United Nations.
Nothing underlines more what we are trying to do than that
comment, because we are trying to break down those
compartmentalizations. With respect to the six undertakings
mentioned in Peter Piot's statements, we will also move in
that direction.
Mr. Mohammed (Ethiopia): First of all,
Mr. President, I wish to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. Your
initiative, as President, to focus attention this month on
African issues is a most welcome sign of hope in the
Council in addressing the often-justified criticism of its
record in handling African issues. We wish you success in
your endeavours.
To come back to the issue before the Council, namely
the impact of AIDS on peace and security in Africa, much
has been said by representatives and participants in today's
Council meeting in stressing the fact that combating AIDS
is of vital importance and urgency to all nations, as this
scourge poses socio-economic as well as political and
security challenges with serious implications.
Since the time of its emergence, the spread of HIV
and AIDS has been dramatic, especially in Africa. Of the
estimated more than 34 million HIV-positive people
worldwide, about 21 million are from the African continent.
What this means is that the demographic, economic and
social effects, as well as the national security impact, of
AIDS on our countries in Africa are enormous. The
epidemic consumes our potential and forces us to divert our
meagre resources from our development endeavours to
AIDS-related activities.
AIDS affects every social group in our societies. It is
taking the lives of our citizens, be they old or young,
educated or uneducated, rich or poor. AIDS does not
discriminate, but the young are the most frequent victims of
this disease. As this sector of the population constitutes the
skilled manpower in any nation, the impact of the loss of

38

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
the young on economic and social development can
hardly be over-emphasized. The number of children
infected or orphaned by AIDS is ever increasing.
In sum, AIDS is a threat to present and future
generations. Here lies the seriousness of the challenges
and of the threat it poses to human security and survival,
if not met with an urgent and adequate response. The
AIDS epidemic undermines our efforts to build our
economy and frustrates our people's hopes and aspirations
to make a decent life. Above all, it deprives our children
of their parents, our men and women of their ability to
care for their families, and our countries of the enterprise
and ingenuity of a whole generation.
Although AIDS can be seen largely as a medical
problem, its consequences and impact on nations are
complex and alarmingly serious. Therefore, the
responsibility for finding solutions requires a
comprehensive approach at all levels. As underlined by
many speakers, in order to fight AIDS effectively,
partnership between Government agencies, nongovernmental organizations, the business community,
private citizens, HIV-infected people and AIDS activist
groups is essential. Communities and Governments should
work hand-in-hand to find a solution.
In Ethiopia, efforts to contain the spread of
HIV/AIDS through public awareness campaigns have
been made since the mid- 1980s. Accordingly, in 1987 a
National AIDS Control Programme was established within
the Ministry of Health. To complement the effort of the
Programme some civic groups undertook awarenesscreation activities on effects of AIDS. However, the
efforts could not produce the desired results. In
recognition of this reality the Government of Ethiopia
formulated an HIV/AIDS policy aimed at creating an
environment conducive to enhanced partnership among
the Government, the civil society and the international
community to fight the disease. Currently, in order to
mobilize all resources of the society, the Federal
Government is focusing on a comprehensive programme
and is in the process of establishing a national council to
monitor its implementation. To bring about the desired
results, these efforts require international support and
assistance. This is also true of all other African countries.
As the Secretary-General pointed out this morning,
the HIV/AIDS epidemic is not only an African problem.
It is global, and as such its prevention and eradication
require the commitment and action of all nations. It is our
earnest hope that this meeting of the Council, opened by

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
the Vice-President of the United States of America, with
the participation of heads of important institutions such as
the World Bank, the United Nations Development
Programme and the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) will pave the way for more effective
and coordinated international cooperation and action in the
fight against HIV/AIDS. We welcome the announcement by
Vice-President Gore that the United States will devote
additional resources to the fight against AIDS worldwide.
International support and assistance to Africa is
indispensable to its efforts to fight the HIV/AIDS scourge.
While Africa at present faces the heaviest burden of
HIV/AIDS of any part of the globe, the assistance and
support it has received thus far is very disappointing, as
rightly illustrated by Dr. Peter Piot, Executive Director of
UNAIDS.
The response by the international community to the
HIV/AIDS challenge in Africa should be concrete and
practical. While support to African countries to prevent the
spread of HIV/AIDS is important and urgent, ensuring
affordable access to effective treatment and addressing the
various socio-economic impacts of HIV/AIDS remain
urgent tasks to be undertaken.
The President: I thank you for your kind words. The
next speaker is the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and make his statement.
Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo)(spoke
in French): Mr. President, your presidency of the Security
Council for this month has been placed under the sign of
Africa. My delegation would therefore like to congratulate
you for this praiseworthy initiative and take this opportunity
to express our hope, which is entirely legitimate, that during
this month many scourges now afflicting the African
continent will begin to be solved in a concrete and credible
way.
My delegation would like to congratulate you as well
for having organized this special Security Council meeting
particularly devoted to the struggle against HIV/AIDS in
Africa. The opening of the meeting by the Vice-President
of the United States of America is undoubtedly a sign of
the growing interest his country has in committing the
international community as a whole to an effective
campaign against this virus which is decimating the entire
continent.

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
My delegation shares your view, Mr. President,
when you say that the devastating figures on AIDS in
Africa demonstrate that this is much more than a question
of health. It is truly a question of security, as well as of
the deteriorating economy and of poverty, because by
decimating elites and creating millions of orphans, this
disease is in effect creating and provoking economic and
social crises which destabilize fragile societies and give
rise to armed conflicts which themselves help to spread
AIDS.
In sub-Saharan Africa, a region of which my
country, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, is part,
the AIDS pandemic is now undergoing its greatest spread.
The Governments of the region have indeed committed
themselves to struggle to find various ways of preventing
even greater spread. They continue to seek even more
effective means to reduce the effects of AIDS, despite the
enormous difficulties they are undergoing due to limited
resources, which are always on a downward curve, to
poverty and to all types of wars. Thus, my delegation
welcomes the measures announced today by the VicePresident of the United States while expressing our hope
that they will be put into effect quickly.
In the past, my country was in the forefront of the
struggle against AIDS in Central Africa. Benefiting from
consistent bilateral and multilateral cooperation, it
developed with the assistance of the donor community an
AIDS project which seriously attacked the effects of the
virus and which was a success mainly in the field of
prevention and access to information about AIDS.
Unfortunately, in 1991 and 1993 my country
underwent large-scale pillaging which destroyed that
infrastructure. Furthermore, the nameless embargo which
my country has suffered for more than a decade has made
obsolete any hope of resumption of this cooperation,
which was nevertheless beneficial to all the Congolese
people.
In 1994, my country was the unwilling host of
millions of refugees who came mainly from neighbouring
Rwanda. Their presence on our soil was a disaster
ecologically, socially and economically. In the eastern
provinces this undesired presence was also the vector of
sexually transmitted diseases and very clearly of the
HIV/AIDS virus as well.
Since 2 August 1998, my country has been
undergoing the horrors of aggression on the part of an
armed coalition of the regular forces of Rwanda, Uganda

39

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
and Burundi. This war, with its accompanying suffering,
displaced populations and new flows of refugees living in
extremely precarious sanitary conditions, is a major
contribution to the spread of AIDS.
However, it is true that during the past year the
leading cause of death in my country has remained malaria,
closely followed by the direct victims of war and of AIDS.
But the impact of this war should not be underestimated. At
the present time, both in the occupied provinces and the
free zones, war is the main source of the general
deterioration of the living conditions of the Congolese
people, thus making it difficult, even impossible, for our
people to have access to such things as basic health care.
The Congolese people have thus become a feeding ground
for all sorts of diseases, including viruses that had been
unsuspected until very recently — the Ebola virus and the
Marburg virus — and for which, just as for AIDS, there is
no vaccine.
The war has also witnessed an increase in a military
practice that, to say the least, is of a strange nature,
practised by the armed forces of Uganda — that is, the
sending into the field of operations thousands of AIDSinfected or seropositive soldiers whose mission is to rape
women and young girls in order to spread AIDS. The
international community is duty-bound to end this crime
against humanity committed by Rwanda, Burundi and
Uganda on the territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
This month of Africa and this year of the millennium
provide the Security Council with an opportunity to
shoulder its responsibilities with full knowledge of the facts
in order to allow the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
confront the twenty-first century with optimism. The
international community is also duty-bound to assist the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in its efforts to return to
peace, to bring about an economic recovery and
reconstruction of its infrastructure, including health and
medical reconstruction, so that present and future Congolese
generations can again hope for a better and more radiant
future.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Senegal. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Ka (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would firstly
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having taken the
initiative of including the important question of AIDS on
the Council's agenda. Everything has been very well said by

40

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
the Vice-President of the United States, the African
Ministers, the United Nations Secretary-General and the
previous speakers. My privileged position as the last
speaker means that I can be very brief at this very late
hour of our discussions.
There can no longer be any doubt that the AIDS
epidemic is far from being a simple public health
problem. For our continent, which pays the heaviest price,
this epidemic also poses a development problem, maybe
even a problem for the future of the continent. It is good
that the United Nations and the Security Council today
have grasped the full magnitude of the threat posed by
this disease to the human development of the people of
the continent and has decided to coordinate their efforts
and those of United Nations agencies to tackle the
problem.
Africans have not given up in the crusade against
AIDS. They have deployed tremendous efforts to
eliminate this disease, as was recalled by the Minister of
Namibia a few moments ago.
Upon the initiative of Senegal in 1992, at the summit
meeting of the Organization of African Unity in Dakar, a
resolution was adopted that acknowledged AIDS as a real
threat to the continent's future and called upon the African
States to do their utmost to curb the spread and impact of
this scourge. My country committed itself very quickly to
a broad, multisectoral and multidisciplinary response by
setting up a national programme to fight AIDS. That
programme benefited from a favourable structural
situation in dealing with the disease and was fortunately
supported by a Senegalese society imbued by moral,
traditional and religious values.
From the health standpoint, the real preventive
strategies were realized just after setting up the National
AIDS Committee. Need I recall that it was in Senegal
that researchers proved the existence of the HIV type 2
for the first time? In 1990, there already was general
access in Senegal to condoms, the sale and distribution of
which increased tenfold over the past ten years.
Insofar as information, education and
communications are concerned, beginning in 1992,
Senegal had included sex education for youth in primary
and secondary school instruction on the spread of the
AIDS virus and more than 130,000 schoolbooks devoted
to the information, education and communication on
AIDS were distributed in 1997 in public and private
educational institutions. Hundreds of non-governmental

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
organizations and associations of people living with AIDS
were set up and have been participating in the struggle
against AIDS. Political dialogue, training seminars and
discussions led by community leaders, religious leaders,
parliamentarians, professionals and journalists are some of
the strategies in combating AIDS.
Senegal has also been at the forefront of this new
struggle against AIDS, from the very outset of this thinking
about introducing new strategies throughout the continent.
This thinking has led to the UNAIDS initiative that has
worked to the benefit of two African countries.
Out of concern for cohesiveness and continuity,
Senegal has given supplementary financial assistance to
make it possible for people who have AIDS to receive
treatment. Because of the encouraging results obtained by
my country in the crusade against AIDS, President Abdou
Diouf was honoured by UNAIDS, together with his brother

4087th meeting (Resumption 1)
10 January 2000
and friend, President Yoweri Mouseveni of Uganda. They
received the first prize for excellence in the struggle
against AIDS.
By way of conclusion, I should simply like to say
that these efforts must be supported and reinforced.
Vigilance must be the rule, for the history of these
diseases teaches us that when vigilance drops, the
infectious agents profit.
I should like to pay tribute to our international
multilateral partners — notably, the World Bank, the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the
World Health Organization (WHO) — and our bilateral
partners, who continue to support us in our struggle
against AIDS. I am convinced that we will be able to rely
on the fame and the influence of the Security Council to
be our interpreter to all our partners and tell them how
determined we are to ensure that future African
generations will see a horizon free of the spectre of this
pandemic that seriously compromises the chances for
development, peace and stability on the African continent.
The President: I thank the representative of Senegal
for his special reference to the role of the Security
Council on this issue, which certainly echoes the views of
most of us here and, speaking as the American
representative, our own.
There are no more speakers on my list. I would like
to make some observations about what we have done
today, but, with members' permission, since we have been
here now for nine hours, I would like to reserve those for
the beginning of our Thursday meeting on refugees, when
High Commissioner Ogata will be with us. The
connection between refugees and this issue has been
noted by several speakers today. I believe the Minister of
Health of Namibia made a specific point of it, as did
some others. There is thus a natural connection between
them.
The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m.

41
