S/2019/868

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 November 2019
Original: English

Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2391
(2017), in which the Council requested me, in close coordination with the States
members of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G5 Sahel) (Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali,
Mauritania and the Niger) and the African Union, to report on the activities of the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. It provides an update since my report
of 6 May 2019 (S/2019/371) on progress made in the operationalization of the Joint
Force, international support for the Force, the implementation of the technical
agreement signed between the United Nations, the European Union and G5 Sahel
States in February 2018, challenges encountered by the Force and the implementation
by the G5 Sahel States of a human rights and international humanitarian law
compliance framework.
2.
The period under review was marked by low-intensity activity by the Joint Force
due to the rainy season, which hampered the movements of the Force, and the impact
of persistent equipment and training shortfalls on its operations. In accordance with
resolution 2391 (2017), international partners continued to mobilize in support of the
G5 Sahel. The attack of 30 September on the Force’s base in Boulikessi, Mopti region,
central Mali, inflicted heavy casualties. The terrorist group Jama'a Nusrat ul -Islam
wa al-Muslimin (JNIM) claimed responsibility for the attack.

II. Political, security and humanitarian developments
3.
Combating the threat of terrorism was high on the agenda of Heads of State in
the subregion. On 14 September, the President of Burkina Faso and Acting President
of the G5 Sahel, Roch Marc Christian Kaboré, hosted an extraordinary summit of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) on counter-terrorism in
West Africa. The Heads of State of the five G5 Sahel members attended the summit.
Of the 15 members of ECOWAS, 3 (Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger) are also
members of the G5 Sahel, while Chad and Mauritania participated as observers.
4.
In a communiqué issued at the conclusion of the summit, the Heads of State of
the members of ECOWAS affirmed the organization’s readiness to play a
coordination role in the multiple counter-terrorism initiatives in the region, including
the Joint Force. They decided to launch joint and simultaneous patrols and operations

19-18569 (E)

111119

*1918569*

S/2019/868

along their countries’ vulnerable borders and improve intelligence- and informationsharing within the group and tasked their respective ministers of defence and security
with assessing the possibility of deploying and using the ECOWAS Standby Force in
counter-terrorism operations. The Heads of State pledged to mobilize $1 billion
(2020–2024) for regional counter-terrorism efforts. They also called upon the
Security Council to provide the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) with a more robust mandate to combat
terrorism.
5.
On the margins of the ECOWAS summit, the Heads of State of the G5 Sahel
members held a separate meeting and endorsed the “Desert to power” initiative, led
by the African Development Bank. The initiative is aimed at connecting 250 million
people in the wider Sahel with electricity by 2025, contributing to the reduction of
poverty, which remains one of the root causes of violent extremism.
6.
On 25 September, the United Nations hosted a high-level meeting on Mali and
the Sahel, on the margins of the general debate of the seventy-fourth session of the
General Assembly. The Presidents of Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger
were in attendance, along with regional and international partners. Participants
underlined the urgency to scale up counter-terrorism efforts in the subregion and
highlighted the importance of coherence and complementarity among all regional
initiatives. They also highlighted the urgency of continued support for the G5 Sahel,
including its Joint Force. Some participants reiterated calls for MINUSMA to be given
a more robust mandate.
7.
The security situation continued to deteriorate across the Sahel region, with
attacks by terrorist groups against civilians and security forces and persistent violence
along community lines. The aggravation of the security situation caused resentment
among sections of the population over the inability of security forces to provide
security and protection, which prompted demonstrations both in Burkina Faso and
Mali.
8.
In Burkina Faso, the number of suspected terrorist attacks increased, especially
in the northern part of the country. The increase has forced hundreds of thousands of
people to flee their homes and has led to growing discontent. Civilians were victims
of extremist violence, including during an attack on a mosque in the town of Salmossi,
in northern Burkina Faso, during Friday prayers on 11 October. The attack of
19 August on the military camp of Koutougou, in northern Burkina Faso, was one of
the deadliest in 2019. Government sources reported that 24 soldiers had been killed
in the attack. The northern and north-eastern provinces remained most affected by
intercommunal violence.
9.
In Mali, the security situation remained complex. Attacks by terrorist groups in
northern Mali continued to target national defence and security forces, MINUSMA
and the French forces. Confrontations between armed groups led to violent clashes in
the Gao, Ménaka and Timbuktu regions. Violence surged in central Mali, following a
marked decrease in incidents in June and July. Conflicts along community lines,
exacerbated by the presence of terrorist groups and self-defence militias, resulted in
the killing of civilians.
10. On 1 October, two camps of the Malian armed forces in Mondoro and
Boulikessi, Mopti region, central Mali, were attacked. The camp in Boulikessi housed
a contingent operating under the Joint Force. According to a communiqué by the
Government, 25 members of the Malian armed forces were killed, 4 were injured and
60 were reported missing, while 15 assailants were killed during the attacks. The
Government also noted that a joint operation by the Malian armed forces and the
armed forces of Burkina Faso was under way in central Mali. On 7 October, JNIM
claimed responsibility for the attacks in Mondoro and Bo ulikessi.
2/8

19-18569

S/2019/868

11. In the Niger, on 14 June, the Government extended for three months the state of
emergency in the Diffa, Tahoua and Tillabéri regions, where terrorist groups are
active. On 1 July, unidentified attackers killed 16 members of the national secu rity
forces in an attack on a military camp in the western part of the country, near the
border with Mali.
12. In Chad, in the light of escalating intercommunal violence in eastern Chad and
continued instability in the north, the Government declared a stat e of emergency on
20 August in the eastern provinces of Ouaddaï and Sila, on the border with the Sudan,
and in the northern province of Tibesti, on the border with Libya. On 10 September,
the National Assembly extended the state of emergency for four month s, until
10 January 2020. Chad closed its borders with the Central African Republic, Libya
and the Sudan and deployed 5,000 troops to those areas.
13. Mauritania, which hosts the permanent secretariat of the G5 Sahel and the G5
Sahel Defence College in Nouakchott, continued preparations to assume the rotating
leadership of the organization in 2020. Efforts were made to enhance the capacity of
the Mauritanian troops operating under the Joint Force, including through training
and equipment. The President of Mauritania, Mohamed Ould Cheikh El Ghazouani,
recently outlined the country’s holistic approach to fighting terrorism and extremism,
taking into account economic and social dimensions, and underscored his
commitment to improving the operational readiness of the armed forces and to
continue combating terrorism, organized crime and illegal trafficking.
14. The humanitarian situation across the Sahel continued to further deteriorate. At
the end of September, more than 1 million people were internally displaced across the
five G5 Sahel countries, representing more than twice the number of persons
displaced in 2018. Burkina Faso experienced the most significant rise in internal
displacement, with more than 486,000 displaced persons compared with 80,000
people in 2018. Humanitarian access has become increasingly difficult, with
humanitarian organizations facing increasing difficulties in reaching populations
affected by violence, especially in the border areas between Burkina Faso, Mali and
the Niger. Across the Sahel region (excluding Mauritania and Nigeria), 12 million
people are in need of humanitarian assistance.

III. Operationalization of the Joint Force
A.

Deployment update: military component
15. The Joint Force reported the conduct of two operations during the period under
review. From 18 to 25 June, Operation Ça’igha 2, involving one battalion, was
conducted in the area of Goma Coura and Nampala in the border area between Mali
and Mauritania. From 25 May to 8 June, Operation Dessi 2 was conducted in the area
of Tantiabongou and Kantchari, 90 km south-west of Niamey in the border area
between Burkina Faso and the Niger. Two combat task forces, one from Burkina Faso
and one from the Niger, were involved.
16. From 29 September to 7 October, the French forces and units of the Malian
armed forces led a joint operation in Tessit, Mali, in the border area between Burkina
Faso, Mali and the Niger, during which arms and ammunition were seized. From 1 to
10 October, the French forces and the armed forces of the Niger operating under the
Joint Force conducted a joint operation in the border area between Chad and the Niger.
Five suspected terrorists were arrested and a large quantity of arms and ammunition
were reportedly seized. More activities may have been undertaken by units operating
under the Joint Force. However, there was no official communication in that regard

19-18569

3/8

S/2019/868

and such activities were not reflected in the information received through the
coordination mechanisms and other channels.
17. A permanent location for the headquarters of the Joint Force in Bamako has yet
to be identified. Following a series of protests, the Government of Mali announced
on 14 June the transfer of the headquarters from its temporary location in a residential
area of Bamako to another neighbourhood. In early September, the headquarters was
again relocated on a temporary basis.
18. In June, the Defence and Security Committee of the G5 Sahel, a strategic
governing body of the Joint Force comprising the five national army chiefs of staff,
approved a protocol for the exchange of intelligence among its member States. In
July, it approved a plan of operation and a quarterly planning directive.
19. On 17 July, General Oumarou Namata Gazama of the Niger was appointed as
the new Commander of the Joint Force, replacing General Hanena Ould Sidi of
Mauritania.
20. The tripartite meeting, bringing together the Joint Force, the European Union
and MINUSMA, was held on 17 July in Bamako. The For ce provided an update on
planned operations. The European Union gave a briefing on the status of pledges
disbursed and equipment procured thus far. Logistical constraints were also
discussed, including the need to identify a permanent location for the head quarters of
the Force in Bamako. On 29 August, MINUSMA convened a meeting of the Instance
de coordination au Mali, comprising representatives of national and international
security presences in Mali.
21. The Joint Force continues to face significant training, capability and equipment
shortfalls, which hamper its full operationalization. The lack of air assets, armoured
vehicles and transport capabilities and individual protection equipment compounds
the threat posed by the use of improvised explosive devic es.

B.

Deployment update: police and civilian component
22. Countries of the G5 Sahel continued their efforts to operationalize specialized
investigation units within national jurisdictions to address cases related to terrorism
and transnational organized crime. These units, together with provost brigades, form
part of the national police components. In Burkina Faso, 22 officers of the specialized
brigade on terrorist investigations and organized crime took up their function during
the reporting period. In the Niger, 15 investigators were deployed to a base of the
Joint Force in Bankilaré, Tillabéri region.
23. The integration of the provost corps into the ranks of the Joint Force battalions
is improving. Chad has, for example, incorporated a provost corps into the battalion
deployed in August 2019, while in Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger,
provost officers have been deployed within or in proximity of the Joint Force units.
24. In cooperation with other partners, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) continued to assist G5 Sahel member States in developing their
police components and strengthening their criminal justice systems to enhance
efficiency, accountability and accessibility.

C.

Implementation of the human rights and international
humanitarian law compliance framework
25. Additional steps were taken to advance the implementation of the human rights
and international humanitarian law compliance framework of the Joint Force, with

4/8

19-18569

S/2019/868

the support of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) and other partners.
26. In June, the Defence and Security Committee approved the status -of-forces
agreement of the Joint Force, which sets out the immunities and privileges for the
Joint Force troops and is aimed at ensuring compliance with international legal
standards, including on the capture, detention and transfer of detainees. The
agreement will be submitted to the G5 Sahel countries for endorsement.
27. A standard operating procedure on internal investigations and a doctrine for the
provost corps are under development, with support from the European Union
capacity-building mission in Mali (EUCAP Sahel Mali) and the United Nations. Once
adopted, these guidelines will contribute to strengthening the internal monitoring and
accountability processes of the Joint Force. In addition, specialized training modules
on international humanitarian law, international human rights law and refugee law
have been refined to ensure that they adequately reflect doctrine and context. Mobile
training teams were established by OHCHR, the Joint Force and the G5 Sahel Defence
College in support of strengthening regional and national protection training
capacities, while additional “training of trainers” sessions were held in Chad, Mali
and Mauritania. The permanent secretariat and the Joint Force, supported by UNODC
and OHCHR, held a workshop on the integration of women into defence and security
forces in G5 Sahel countries and developed a road map to ensure that adequate steps
are taken to strengthen the presence of women in national forces.
28. OHCHR deployed staff to Mali and Mauritania to assist contingents of the Joint
Force in implementing the compliance framework. The deployment of officers to
Chad and the Niger is under way.
29. MINUSMA continued to monitor the human rights situation in the context of
operations conducted by the Joint Force in Mali. The Mission documented one alleged
violation by the Force in Boulikessi, Douentza cercle, Mopti region, following a
human rights special investigation mission to Mopti from 6 to 13 August. Preliminary
findings indicate that on 30 July members of the Malian armed forces, operating under
the Joint Force, may have committed serious human rights violations, including
extrajudicial executions of two men in the village of Boulikessi. The violations were
allegedly committed in retaliation for the improvised explosive device attack against
the Force, which had occurred earlier in the day, killing one soldier and injuring four.
This is the third incident recorded in the area of Boulikessi involving members of the
Force. Previous incidents had occurred on 19 May and 28 October 2018. Criminal
investigations into those incidents have yet to be concluded.

D.

Trust fund for the Joint Force
30. The trust fund for the Joint Force is now operational, with all staff administering
the fund deployed to Nouakchott. The fund has received a total contribution of
€16.5 million, including from Rwanda, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates, the
West African Economic and Monetary Union and ECOWAS. In August, the fund
placed its first order for 84 transport vehicles for the Joint Force, which are expected
to be delivered by 2020.

19-18569

5/8

S/2019/868

IV. International support for the Joint Force
A.

Support from the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali
31. Following the adoption of Security Council resolution 2480 (2019) on 28 June,
MINUSMA put in place arrangements to provide life-support consumables to all
contingents of the Joint Force, provided that the Force or other partners take the
responsibility of ensuring the delivery of the consumables to their respective areas of
operation outside Mali. On 3 October, MINUSMA received a request for fuel and
rations from the seven battalions of the Force operating in all three sectors, including
in Burkina Faso, Chad, Mauritania and the Niger, for the period from October to
December. The request included 34,800 combat ration packs and 428,600 litres of
fuel and lubricants, for approximately $1.28 million. On 19 October, MINUSMA
briefed the Force on the need to first conduct a risk assessment, as mandated under
the human rights due diligence policy on United Nations support to non -United
Nations security forces, and is expecting to provide assistance to the Force bef ore the
end of October 2019. As at 1 October, of the $6.2 million disbursed by the European
Union to MINUSMA for support to the Force in line with the technical agreement,
$528,087, or 8.5 per cent, has been expended. Once the requests of 3 October are
considered, this percentage should rise in line with the increased pace of planned Joint
Force operations in 2019 and into 2020.
32. Discussions are under way to ensure the alignment of the technical agreement
with relevant provisions of resolution 2480 (2019). In addition, an aide-memoire has
been prepared, setting out the modalities, steps and limits of the support that
MINUSMA is mandated to provide to units operating under the Joint Force.

B.

Multilateral and bilateral support
33. According to the European Union coordination hub, of the more than
€430 million pledged by donors and partners in support of the Joint Force, equipment
worth €56 million has been delivered to the Force to date, including i ndividual
protective equipment, vehicles and capabilities to be used in efforts to counter the use
of improvised explosive devices.
34. Within the framework of the African Peace Facility, the European Union
continues to support the operationalization of the Joint Force through €100 million in
funding. Funds have been earmarked for the provision of equipment, services and
infrastructure to the Force through Expertise France for an amount of €75 million. In
this regard, the European Union is scheduled to deliver armoured vehicles to the Force
before the end of the year. The other areas of support include MINUSMA support
(€10 million), the implementation of the human rights compliance framework
(€10 million) and the G5 Sahel governance structure, for which sup port is provided
through the German Agency for International Cooperation (€5 million).
35. On 9 July, in Burkina Faso, the G5 Sahel and the European Union held their
fifth meeting of ministers for foreign affairs, during which the European Union
announced a pledge of an additional €120 million for the Joint Force and €18 million
for the establishment of the police component of the Force.
36. The United States of America provided equipment and training to troops
operating under the Joint Force, including $15 million to the armed forces of Chad,
$15 million to Mauritania and $21 million to the Niger. Other bilateral donors
continued to support individual States members of the G5 Sahel.

6/8

19-18569

S/2019/868

V. Observations
37. I remain deeply concerned about the spiralling violence in the Sahel, which has
spread to coastal States of West Africa, along the Gulf of Guinea. Terrorist groups
have strengthened their foothold across the Sahel region, making large swathes of
territory unstable and stoking ethnic violence, especially in Burkina Faso and Mali.
The challenges are caused by poverty, marginalization, impunity and weakened State
presence and are compounded by the impact of climate change and the scarcity of
natural resources. Civilians bear the brunt of the surge in deadly attacks and violence.
The numbers are shocking. Since January alone, more than 1,500 civilians have been
killed in Burkina Faso and Mali. In addition, more than 1 million people have been
internally displaced across the five countries, representing more t han twice the
number of persons displaced in 2018.
38. The responsibility to combat terrorism cannot be outsourced to the G5 Sahel
countries, the region or the continent. Terrorism is a global issue, and the entire
international community has a responsibility to contribute to the collective effort of
tackling extremist violence in the Sahel, along with other cross -border challenges,
including trafficking in persons, illicit goods, weapons and drugs, and migration and
displacement.
39. I am particularly encouraged by the commitment made by the leaders of
ECOWAS during their extraordinary summit of 14 September in Burkina Faso to step
up their efforts to combat growing insecurity and terrorism. The meeting, and the
multilevel process that preceded it, mobilized all the stakeholders – including civilian
actors – necessary for an effective and durable response to rising violent extremism.
The pledge made by the participants of $1 billion dollars to fight terrorism and
extremism over the next five years illustrates a willingness to take ownership and
address the challenges facing their countries. I also welcome the new partnership for
security and stability in the Sahel announced in August by the Chancellor of Germany,
Angela Merkel, and the President of France, Emmanuel Macron, on the margins of
the summit of the Group of Seven in Biarritz, France. This new initiative has the
potential to further strengthen the Priority Investment Programme of the G5 Sahel
and the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel and help to ensure that security
operations and development programmes are planned and programmed in an
integrated manner.
40. I applaud the leadership of the European Union in managing the coordination
hub and commend all stakeholders involved for their willingness to collaborate. My
gratitude also goes to all donors who have contributed generously to the trust fund
for the Joint Force, as well as to my Special Representative for Mali, Mahamat Saleh
Annadif, and MINUSMA colleagues for their steadfast support for the Joint Force.
41. In this context, it will be important to enhance existing joint security
mechanisms, such as the Joint Force and the Multinational Joint Task Force of the
Lake Chad Basin Commission. The Joint Force remains an important part of a series
of national, regional and international security responses in the Sahel. I commend
steps taken to further operationalize its police component, which will be a critical
component of the Joint Force, including through the new partnership fo r security and
stability in the Sahel. I would also like to commend the Joint Force for
operationalizing its own trust fund, which is an important step towards effective
ownership.
42. I commend the progress made by the Joint Force towards the implementat ion of
its human rights and international humanitarian law compliance framework, which
will help to enhance the security of civilians and mitigate risks of violations by the
Force. Adherence to the compliance framework is critical to winning the hearts and
19-18569

7/8

S/2019/868

minds of the populations affected by operations. Timely investigations into
allegations of violations by units of the Force are important and will only strengthen
its credibility. In this context, I call upon the authorities of Burkina Faso to investigate
serious allegations of extrajudicial executions and reiterate my call upon the Malian
authorities to conclude the investigations into incidents involving their contingent.
The United Nations remains committed to supporting national authorities in the
development and implementation of judicial cooperation measures and training for
the investigation and prosecution of cases related to terrorism and transnational
organized crime.
43. In order to fully play its role and yield more tangible results, the Joint F orce will
need more support. The Security Council’s decision to lift geographical restrictions
with regard to the provision by MINUSMA of life-support consumables to the Force
was an important step in the right direction. I urge partners to urgently and pr omptly
honour their pledges to the Force. I am encouraged by the comprehensive request
received from the Force for all battalions, which illustrates readiness on the part of
the Force to step up operations in the near future. MINUSMA is making every effort
to respond quickly and favourably to all requests for support, in compliance with the
human rights due diligence policy. However, this alone will not be enough, and I
reiterate my call for the provision of predictable and sustained funding to the Force.
44. I condemn in the strongest terms the attack against the Malian contingent
operating under the Joint Force in central Mali, during which at least 25 soldiers of
the Malian armed forces were killed. I pay tribute to the dedication and courage of all
security personnel operating in the Sahel as part of the Joint Force, as well as to
members of national and international forces who continue to serve at great risk and
sacrifice.
45. Addressing violent extremism and terrorism through security measures is
essential but must be accompanied by development programmes and civilian
capacity-building activities. It requires offering people, in particular young people, a
perspective that goes beyond their daily needs to ensure development, promote gender
equality and ensure access to economic opportunities and social services. The time
has come to urgently mobilize in order to support the countries and the people of the
Sahel. In this context, I call upon all partners to ensure prompt disbursement of the
funds committed and to support the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel. Investing in sustainable and inclusive development efforts is
the most effective way to address the root causes of conflict, violent extremism and
terrorism.

8/8

19-18569
