S/2017/1034

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 December 2017
Original: English

Letter dated 5 December 2017 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to my letter dated 23 January 2017 (S/2017/78), in
which I informed the President of the Security Council of the progress made by the
Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission, and to his reply dated 26 January
(S/2017/79), in which he took note of my intention to continue the activities of the
United Nations support team to the Mixed Commission, with funding from the
regular budget. In this regard, I would like to inform you of the latest achievements
and activities of the Mixed Commission.
As you know, the United Nations established the Mixed Commission to
facilitate the implementation of the judgment of the International Court of Justice of
10 October 2002 on the Cameroon-Nigeria boundary and territorial dispute. Through
my good offices, and with the support of the Secretariat, I have continued to
facilitate the implementation of the judgment.
The mandate of the Mixed Commission includes supporting the demarcation
of the land boundary and delineation of the maritime boundary, facilitating the
withdrawal and transfer of authority, addressing the situation of affected populations
and making recommendations on confidence-building measures. Achievements to
date in the implementation of the judgment of the Court include the withdrawal of
Nigeria and the transfer of authority to Cameroon in the Lake Chad area (December
2003), along the land boundary (July 2004) and on the Bakassi Peninsula (a process
that began in June 2006 and was completed in August 2008); the delineation of the
maritime boundary (May 2007); the end of the special transitional regime of five
years, established under the Greentree Agreement in June 2006, and the exercise by
Cameroon of its full right of sovereignty over the Bakassi zone (August 2013). The
Mixed Commission also approved the recommendations of the Working Group on
the Maritime Boundary, including the provisions for cross-border cooperation on
hydrocarbon deposits straddling the maritime bound ary (March 2011).
In 2017, the Mixed Commission continued its mandated activities. However,
insecurity in north-eastern Nigeria, mainly resulting from attacks carried out by Boko
Haram and increased criminality, continued to disrupt the work of the Mixed
Commission and impede progress. Tragically, on 31 January, a group of unidentified
armed individuals ambushed a Mixed Commission technical monitoring team working
on border demarcation and pillar construction in the Adamaoua region of Cameroon,
where security risks had been deemed to be low. Five team members were killed,
including a United Nations international consultant. Pillar construction and field
missions were immediately discontinued pending the reinforcement of security
arrangements. The Governments of Cameroon and Nigeria, assisted by the United
Nations support team, have since reviewed and reinforced security protocols for the

17-22142 (E)

121217

*1722142*

S/2017/1034

continuation of fieldwork, leading to the resumption of pillar construction in
December 2017.
Notwithstanding the commitment made by the heads of delegation of
Cameroon and Nigeria to rely on an in-office cartographic methodology to expedite
the demarcation process, progress remains limited since the parties have not been
able to reconcile their competing interpretations of a number of provisions of the
judgment. Consequently, there are several gaps, amounting to 94 km along the land
boundary, that still need to be defined. Despite these shortcomings, the parties
remain committed to an in-office cartographic methodology and have renewed
efforts towards reconciling their positions. Several working sessions were held in
August and September 2017, giving rise to compromise solutions that are in the
process of being approved and ratified by the respective political authorities of the
two countries. The parties have undertaken to review their preliminary proposals at
the highest political levels in the months ahead and are expected to continue
discussions with a view to formalizing their agreement in additional working
sessions, which will continue through early 2018.
To date, the parties have agreed on the demarcation of 2,005 km of an
estimated 2,100 km of land boundary. In May and June 2017, the United Nations
support team held joint working sessions with delegations from both p arties to
reconcile, consolidate and confirm toponyms for the final mapping. That exercise
will continue in a follow-up session, anticipated to be held in the first quarter of
2018, with support and guidance from the Geospatial Information Section of the
Department of Field Support in New York.
Meanwhile, the construction and emplacement of pillars to physically mark the
land boundary have continued. Of the estimated 2,696 boundary pillars that will be
required, a total of 991 have been successfully constructed. In line with the completion
strategy of the Mixed Commission for the period 2015–2017, the construction and
emplacement of 163 pillars was anticipated in lot 4A, which was supposed to
commence in November 2016 and end by mid-2017. Eighty-eight of those pillars had
been constructed prior to the deadly ambush in January 2017, which brought fieldwork
to a standstill. The 75 outstanding pillars in lot 4A are now part of lot 4B, for which
the construction of 335 pillars in three segments along the land boundary is envisaged.
Since pillar construction is financed exclusively through extrabudgetary
voluntary contributions to a trust fund, progress in this area gradually depletes the
trust fund, which must be replenished. Both parties have pledged to commit
$1.5 million to the trust fund. Additional fundraising initiatives have also been
undertaken by my Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel and Chair of
the Mixed Commission, Mohamed Ibn Chambas, which have led to further
commitments from Germany in January 2017 and from China in October.
Supplementary resources are still required to implement joint cross -border
programmes in support of those affected by the demarcation, including for quick impact projects for confidence-building among communities, with a particular focus
on women and youth. The United Nations support team has worked with the United
Nations country team in Nigeria to relaunch confidence -building initiatives aimed at
ensuring the security and welfare of affected populations. Those initiatives include
socioeconomic projects, which have been developed in collaboration with the United
Nations support team and the United Nations country team in Nigeria. A programme
document has been submitted to the Government of Nigeria (National Boundary
Commission) for its endorsement. In Cameroon, projects have focused on food
security and microcredit, access to drinking water, green energy, capacity -building
for women and youth and the protection of civilians in the Bakassi zone and in the
Far North region, where the projects have been modified at the request of the
Government of Cameroon to reflect demographic changes caused by the activities of
2/3

17-22142

S/2017/1034

Boko Haram. The Chair of the Mixed Commission will seek extrabudgetary resources
to implement the confidence-building projects, consistent with the revised United
Nations Development Assistance Frameworks for both countries.
Meanwhile, the United Nations technical teams of the Mixed Commission
continue to work with the support of the Geospatial Information Se ction to produce
maps to be annexed to a boundary statement. Over the past year, the technical teams
have completed the collection of toponyms and anticipate the production of final
maps during the next working session, planned for early 2018.
Overall, it is expected that the field assessment of the remaining areas of the
boundary will be completed by mid-2018. That, in turn, will facilitate progress in
the finalization of the demarcation process, the completion of pillar emplacement
operations and the production of final maps and a boundary statement. Through the
good offices of my Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel, in his
capacity as Chair of the Mixed Commission, the Presidents of Cameroon and Nigeria ,
in May 2016, pledged their commitment to completing the demarcation of their joint
border. Completion of the bulk of the demarcation work is dependent on the
willingness of the two parties to formalize an agreement on all outstanding issues.
The following activities are required to conclude the work of the Mixed
Commission:
(a) Agreement by the two parties on outstanding demarcation areas using an
in-office, desktop evaluation and demarcation methodology;
(b) Facilitation of the construction and emplacement of boundary pillars
financed by the trust fund for demarcation activities;
(c)

Production of final maps and a boundary statement;

(d) Promotion of cross-border cooperation, including maritime cooperation,
and coordinated security monitoring along the land boundary;
(e) Finalization of confidence-building initiatives for local communities
affected by the demarcation;
(f) Implementation of the completion strategy by progressively handing over
the activities of the Mixed Commission to the Joint Bilateral Commission and oth er
subregional structures.
I would like to recall that, until 2003, the Mixed Commission had been funded
entirely from extrabudgetary funds. From 2004 to the present, its activities have
been funded through the United Nations regular budget. The Governments of
Austria, Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, Italy, Norway, Pakistan, Sweden and Uruguay
have provided in-kind contributions for the substantive and technical work of the
Commission (military and legal experts). In addition, logistical support has been
provided by the Governments of Cameroon and Nigeria, and voluntary contributions
to the trust fund for demarcation activities have been made by both countries, as
well by Canada, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
European Union.
As has been the case in recent years, and given the cost-effectiveness of the
operation and the important tasks remaining at this juncture to help to advance the
peaceful implementation of the judgment of the International Court of Justice, it is
my intention to ask for resources from the regular budget for the United Nations
support team to cover the year 2018.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres
17-22142

3/3
