S/PV.8133

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8133rd meeting

Tuesday, 12 December 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kawamura. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli Frieri

Agenda
The situation in Myanmar

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-43749 (E)
*1743749*

S/PV.8133

The situation in Myanmar

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.

Enterprise for Humanitarian Assistance, Resettlement,
and Development in Rakhine as well as the signing of
the memorandum of understanding on returns between
Myanmar and Bangladesh.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Myanmar
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Bangladesh and Myanmar to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs;
and Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: Mr. President, I thank you for the
invitation to brief on recent developments in Myanmar.
I welcome the participation of Ambassador Hau Do
Suan as well as Ambassador Masud Bin Momen. I also
welcome being joined by Ms. Pramila Patten, Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
The estimated number of refugees who have entered
Bangladesh since 25 August now exceeds 626,000. As
the Secretary-General underlined in his 2 September
letter to the Council (S/2017/753), we need collectively
to encourage the adoption of policies to end the vicious
cycle of discrimination, violence and displacement
in Rakhine.
The Council’s 6 November presidential statement
(S/PRST/2017/22), reaffirming the sovereignty,
political independence, territorial integrity and unity of
Myanmar, noted that the Government holds the primary
responsibility to protect its population through the
rule of law and the respect, promotion and protection
of human rights. During my October visit, I explored
with the authorities potential United Nations support in
these key areas.
My visit followed shortly after State Counsellor
Aung San Suu Kyi’s 12 October address responding
to the humanitarian concerns in Rakhine and the
return of refugees from Bangladesh. We welcome
the State Counsellor’s decision to establish the Union
2/24

12/12/2017

We are also encouraged by the announcement that
the new Advisory Commission comprising international
experts and the Committee for Implementation of the
Recommendations on Rakhine State will meet in early
January to finalize action plans to rehabilitate and
develop the region. We hope that plans will swiftly be
followed by action.
The State Counsellor’s visit to Rakhine on
2 November was an important step. We urge all
Myanmar leaders, including in the military, to
condemn incitement to racial hatred and violence. We
encourage them to adopt measures to defuse tensions
between communities and create an environment for
safe and dignified repatriation, including through
interfaith initiatives.
We have highlighted to the authorities that the
capacities, best practices and extensive experience
of the United Nations can help in implementing their
stated intentions in a timely and effective manner.
Although the violence has subsided, new refugees
continue to arrive in Bangladesh, albeit at slower
rates. These refugees arrive exhausted, destitute and
traumatized. The Government of Bangladesh estimates
that more than 36,000 unaccompanied children arrived
with no immediate family support system. During
November, arson in Rakhine state appeared to lessen,
but recent satellite imagery revealed renewed fires and
related destruction in different villages.
Humanitarian access to Rakhine state remains
insufficient. Although Myanmar permitted some
International Committee of the Red Cross and, more
recently, World Food Programme assistance, access
by other United Nations agencies and partners to
northern Rakhine is still highly restricted. Issuance of
travel authorizations has eased in central Rakhine, but
large numbers of staff still lack these permits owing to
cumbersome procedures.
We all are grateful for the continued generosity
of the Government and the people of Bangladesh, and
we call on the international community to continue to
support their efforts. But the origins of and solutions to
the Rohingya crisis rest in Myanmar. Repatriation and
reconciliation policies will fail without accountability
17-43749

12/12/2017

The situation in Myanmar

and non-discriminatory rule-of-law and public-safety
measures to address the fears and distrust among
communities in Rakhine.
On 23 November, Myanmar and Bangladesh
reached a bilateral agreement on the issue of returns. The
agreement recognizes the need for a “comprehensive
and durable solution” through a “safe, dignified and
voluntary return” in accordance with international law.
In this regard, I would like to present some
key considerations.
First, returns must be supported by reconciliation
efforts, and the time frame must allow for this and other
measures to ensure that return is sustainable. Central
to this is the implementation of the Rakhine Advisory
Commission recommendations.
Secondly, returns should be to the original place of
residence or to a safe, secure place near their destination
of choice, as envisaged by the arrangement. It should
not be to camps, however temporary; experience shows
that camps lead to prolonged segregation.
Thirdly, the reference to freedom of movement
in the arrangement is positive, but the qualifier “in
conformity with existing laws and regulations”,
which are currently extremely restrictive, is a serious
limitation. Expanding freedom of movement is essential
to achieving stated commitments on access to basic
services and livelihoods.
Fourthly, eligibility criteria for return must be
applied in the broadest possible manner. The current
requirements, including documentary proof of
residence, would be difficult for many refugees to meet.
Fifthly and finally, experience on voluntary
repatriation movements over the decades underscores
the important role that the United Nations, through the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), can play in all aspects of a return
operation. We encourage the inclusion of UNHCR in
the joint working group aimed at overseeing all aspects
of return.
We appreciate the role of neighbouring countries,
particularly China, in constructively engaging both
Bangladesh and Myanmar to facilitate the bilateral
agreement. During his recent visit to Myanmar,
Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi pointed out the
importance of finding a long-term solution, including
by addressing the chronic underdevelopment in

S/PV. 8133

Rakhine state. Strengthened regional cooperation with
Myanmar will be essential. We welcome Myanmar’s
engagement with the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations for humanitarian assistance, which led to an
initial delivery of 80 tons of relief material for Rakhine.
The recently established Union Enterprise
for Humanitarian Assistance, Resettlement and
Development in Rakhine aims to support cooperation
between the Government and all sectors, including the
United Nations, in the implementation of development
projects. Meetings between the Government, donors
and the United Nations have started. In addition, the
Implementation Committee for the Rakhine Advisory
Commission has begun meeting and identified priority
interventions in specific sectors.
These are welcome developments, but we again
urge tangible action and implementation of these
commitments. Plans alone are not sufficient. We hope
that Myanmar will draw upon the wealth of expertise
that the United Nations can offer.
As Kofi Annan highlighted, the complex challenges
in Rakhine require civilian-military coordination.
Council members have underlined the importance of
effective partnership with the Myanmar authorities,
especially the military. Close neighbours such as China
and Indonesia can help through their military-tomilitary engagement. We appreciate the recognition by
these regional and other Member States of the role of
the United Nations in helping Myanmar address areas
beyond Rakhine, including the peace process, to help
advance the country’s democratic consolidation efforts.
The 2020 national elections will stand as an
important test in the consolidation of the nation’s
democratic institutions.
The effort to achieve peace between the Government
and the various ethnic armed organizations is a
cornerstone of this transition. All eight signatory parties
have shown a sustained commitment to upholding
the October 2015 nationwide ceasefire agreement.
Momentum in the peace process is slowing, however,
with the majority of ethnic armed organizations still
not among the signatories.
Finally, I note that the General Assembly is
expected to adopt the Third Committee draft resolution
on the situation of human rights in Myanmar, which
requests the Secretary-General to appoint a Special
Envoy. We want that initiative to strengthen our

17-437493/24

S/PV.8133

The situation in Myanmar

partnership with Myanmar in close consultation with
Member States in the region and beyond. We believe
we have much to offer in working with Myanmar on a
number of challenges the country faces, in full respect
of Myanmar’s sovereignty.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Patten.
Ms. Patten: I would like to thank the Security
Council, and in particular the presidency of Japan, for
inviting me to brief it on my recent visit to Cox’s Bazar.
The
presidential
statement
on
Myanmar
(S/PRST/2017/22), adopted by the Council on
6 November, underscored the importance of preventing
and responding to sexual violence, and of cooperation
between the Government of Myanmar and my Office
in that regard. I am pleased to inform the Council
that the Government of Myanmar has extended an
invitation to me to visit Nay Pyi Taw and Yangon from
14 to 16 December to meet with the State Counsellor,
the Ministers for Defence and Home Affairs and
representatives of the armed and security forces.
I look forward to that visit and hope it will generate
commitments in line with the measures requested by
the Council in resolution 2106 (2013).
Since the Council established it, in 2009, my
mandate has served as a voice for the voiceless. I come
before the Council today to amplify the voices of the
survivors who so bravely shared their stories with me
because they want the world to know their plight. I
visited Bangladesh from 5 to 13 November, including
several camps and settlements — namely, Kutupalong,
Unchiprang and Leda, as well as the Konapara border
area. I also deployed an inter-agency technical team,
which included representatives of the International
Organization for Migration, UNICEF and the United
Nations Population Fund, to carry out an initial
assessment of the situation.
Over the course of three days, I heard the most
heart-breaking and horrific accounts of sexual
atrocities reportedly committed in cold-blood out of
a lethal hatred for the Rohingya community based
on their ethnicity and religion. The accounts were
consistent and corroborated by international medical
staff and other service-providers operating in the area.
The acts described were by no means isolated incidents:
every woman or girl I spoke with reported having
either endured or witnessed sexual violence. The forms
4/24

12/12/2017

of sexual violence I consistently heard about from
survivors and witnesses included rape, gang-rape by
multiple soldiers, forced public nudity and humiliation,
and sexual slavery in military captivity. One survivor
described being held in captivity by members of the
Myanmar armed forces — the Tatmadaw — for 45 days,
during which she was reportedly raped over and over
again. Several survivors still bore visible scars, bruises,
burns and bite marks, attesting to their ordeal. One
woman showed me how she could no longer see out
of her left eye, which was bitten by a solider during a
vicious sexual assault.
There are indications that this pattern of widespread
and systematic sexual violence has been used as a tool
of dehumanization and collective punishment. Women
and girls recounted how, upon the arrival of soldiers
in their village, they were forced to strip naked and
threatened with rape in front of their husbands and
fathers, while their homes were set ablaze. They related
how, in some cases, village leaders were compelled
to sign documents stating that they had set fire to
their own homes, in order to save the women of their
community from rape.
I met a number of profoundly traumatized women
who related how their daughters were allegedly raped
inside their home and left to perish when the houses were
torched. Some witnesses reported women and girls being
tied to either a rock or a tree before multiple soldiers
literally raped them to death. Many reported having
witnessed family members, friends and neighbours
being slaughtered in front of them. The two words that
echoed across every account I heard were “slaughter”
and “rape”. Most women I spoke with shared details
of how such brutal acts of sexual violence occurred in
the context of persecution, which reportedly began long
before August 2017, as manifested in looting, torture
and the slaughter of civilians — even newborn babies,
who represent the future of the Rohingya community.
Some women recounted how soldiers drowned babies
in the village well. A few women told me how their own
babies were allegedly thrown in the fire as they were
dragged away by soldiers and gang-raped.
Those shocking accounts indicate a pattern of grave
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law committed against Rohingya women and girls
in the context of military operations. The widespread
threat and use of sexual violence served as a driver and
push factor for forced displacement on a massive scale,
and as a calculated tool of terror seemingly aimed at the
17-43749

12/12/2017

The situation in Myanmar

extermination and removal of the Rohingya as a group.
Some rape survivors reported being insulted and told,
“You are not citizens of Myanmar — you must leave”.
All of the women I spoke with said they wanted to
see the perpetrators punished. Without exception, they
all demanded justice. Some expressed a desire to return
home, provided they would be granted citizenship and
equal rights. Others said they had nothing left to return
to but ashes. When discussing repatriation with a group
of survivors, an elderly woman told me: “You will sign
our death sentence if you send us back to Myanmar”.
The face of that elderly woman haunts me as I reflect
on recent developments to implement a process of
repatriation. While I welcome the ongoing efforts of
the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh to find
a solution that would enable the safe, voluntary and
sustainable return of those displaced, it is imperative
that their basic security and rights be guaranteed.
It is also important that we view the current crisis
in its broader historical and political perspective. The
Rohingya community has been trapped for decades
in a vicious cycle of violence, impunity and forced
displacement. There is a serious risk of that cycle
repeating if the underlying conditions do not change. I
therefore urge the international community to support
the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh to reach
a comprehensive agreement that upholds international
standard and sets out the necessary measures to ensure
that returns are truly voluntary decisions, based on
informed consent and take place in safe and dignified
conditions that pave the way for lasting peace.
I am committed to extending the full support of
my Office, which can include technical assistance
in law reform and capacity-building for the national
armed and security forces to foster compliance with
international standards, including zero tolerance for
sexual abuse. Such support can be provided through
my Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, which was mandated by the
Council to help build the capacity of justice and
security-sector institutions.
In addition, I stand ready to mobilize, for the benefit
of the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh, the
inter-agency network that I chair, known as United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict,
which supports efforts to deliver a coordinated,
multi-sectoral response for survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence, including health care and

S/PV. 8133

psychosocial support. At the same time, it is important
to note that United Nations agencies and partners are
facing a dramatic funding shortfall, of approximately
$10 million, to deliver essential gender-based violence
programmes in the immediate term. That funding can
save lives and help survivors heal. For instance, the
women and child-friendly spaces that I saw in the camps
run by United Nations agencies and their partners are a
lifeline for survivors and require sustainable resources.
I urge the Council to do everything in its power
to seek a swift end to the atrocities, ensure that the
alleged perpetrators of sexual and other violence are
brought to justice and create conditions for a safe
and dignified future for the survivors. History will
judge our action or inaction. A Security Council draft
resolution demanding an immediate end to violations
against the civilian population in Rakhine state and
measures to hold the perpetrators accountable would
send an important signal. It is critical that the Council
call for humanitarian agencies to be given immediate,
unhindered access to populations in need. Furthermore,
the Council should consider sending a delegation
to Myanmar and Cox’s Bazar to assess the situation
first-hand.
Repatriation will not be possible without concerted
efforts to hold the perpetrators accountable for
their crimes. To that end, an impartial, independent
mechanism to support investigation would be an
important step. Those who are found to be implicated in
abuses should be removed from positions of command
responsibility and prosecuted.
Finally, I take this opportunity to commend the
Government and the people of Bangladesh who have
opened their borders and homes to the Rohingya
community, which many have called the most
persecuted people on Earth. I extend my appreciation to
Bangladesh for the lives it has saved, and is continuing
to save, by providing relief and refuge. History will
remember the humanity it has shown. Tragically, the
population exodus — and the abuses that are driving
it — continue. I met rape victims who had arrived
in Bangladesh just four days earlier. I saw refugees
huddling under a tarpaulin who had arrived that very
day. Ethnic cleansing must never be allowed to achieve
its goal. The international community must take swift
and serious action to support the Government of
Bangladesh to accommodate this desperate population
and work with the Government of Myanmar to address
violations against civilians, including sexual violence.

17-437495/24

S/PV.8133

The situation in Myanmar

In the face of this humanitarian crisis, which has ripple
effects for regional peace and security, inaction is not
an option.
The President: I thank Ms. Patten for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to begin
by thanking our briefers. In particular, I would like
to say to Special Representative Patten how profound
and incredibly moving her testimony to the Security
Council was. Her concluding words that inaction must
not be allowed to take place are vital for us all. I think
she has brought to life a truly horrifying picture, and
I commend her for that. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman on his update on
the situation one month after the Council adopted an
important presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/22) that
included calls for an end to the violence, a safe returns
process, humanitarian access and for the root causes of
the crisis to be addressed. I am grateful to him for his
continued engagement on the crisis. It is vital that the
United Nations continues to remain engaged.
The stark reminder — if anyone needed one — that
Special Representative Patten has given us is of the
horrors that Rohingya refugees have suffered. It is a
stark reminder that this is first and foremost a human
tragedy, on which the Council must keep its attention.
Over the past month, we have seen some initial
steps in response to the Council’s presidential
statement, which we welcome, in particular the recent
agreement concerning the voluntary repatriation of
refugees signed by the Governments of Myanmar and
Bangladesh on 23 November.
The Government of Myanmar’s continued
commitment to the Annan Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State recommendations and to the development
of Rakhine state through the union enterprise
mechanism are also worth highlighting. We welcome
the announcement of the new Rakhine Advisory
Committee. We support initiatives that promise to
build a better future for all communities in Rakhine,
without discrimination and regardless of religion or
ethnicity. The Commission’s recommendations remain
a particular important blueprint for the future, given
their wide support.
However, there remains much more to be done,
and it is right that the situation remain on our agenda.
6/24

12/12/2017

I want to draw particular attention to the agreement
concerning the voluntary repatriation of refugees.
That is a step in the right direction. However, today’s
conditions in Rakhine state do not yet allow for the
safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees to
their homes, as that the Security Council called for
last month. One thousand to 3,000 people are still
fleeing in fear from Rakhine state to Bangladesh every
week. There are continued reports of inter-communal
tensions and arson attacks, as Under-Secretary-Feltman
informed us. As we have said many times before, the
violence and human rights violations must stop.
While we recognize the desire to move forward
quickly, we can support only returns that are safe,
voluntary and dignified. That will require independent
international monitoring to ensure that conditions are
met. The rights of the Rohingya must be respected
by the Burmese Government, including freedom of
movement and access the basic services and livelihoods.
They must be allowed to return home, and not remain in
prolonged stays in internally displaced persons camps,
and they should be given a pathway to citizenship. The
responsibility for making progress lies primarily with
the Government and the security forces of Myanmar.
The actions that they must take are already set out
in the presidential statement agreed unanimously by
the Council.
Let us recall that, in the presidential statement, the
Council called for the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to be invited to
be a full participant in the returns process. Myanmar
recognizes UNHCR’s expertise, but has so far resisted
giving it the necessary role. In that statement, we called
for transparent investigations into allegations of serious
human rights abuses and violations, not just because
those responsible must be held accountabl but also so
that refugees may have confidence in their eventual
return. So far, all we have seen is a whitewash by
the military. In that statement, we called for full and
unhindered access to Rakhine state for United Nations
agencies, humanitarian partners and the media. But
the Government continues to severely limit access
to Rakhine, making it impossible to deliver vital
humanitarian assistance, or verify the situation on
the ground.
Regrettably, the situation means that we must
continue supporting refugees where they are right now.
The Government of Bangladesh, along with United
Nations agencies and other humanitarian partners,
17-43749

12/12/2017

The situation in Myanmar

continues to play a vital role in providing life-saving
shelter and assistance. Unfortunately, it is likely that
Bangladesh will need to play that role for longer than
any of us would like. Therefore, it is critical that longerterm plans be put in place to protect and provide for
refugees in Bangladesh and internally displaced people
in Rakhine state. It is critical, too, that those plans be
properly funded.
In addition to an annual $210 million programme
for Bangladesh, the United Kingdom has contributed
$79 million to the current United Nations humanitarian
response plan in order to provide life-saving assistance
and protection for the refugees and for Bangladeshi host
communities. However, the plan is still only partially
funded — and, in any case, runs out in February 2018.
We encourage the international community to step up
its contributions.
Before concluding, I should like to turn briefly to
the Secretary-General’s appointment of a special envoy.
It will be an important and sensitive role. We therefore
support the Secretary-General in deliberating over the
appointment carefully. We call on Myanmar to engage
with the special envoy, when he or she is appointed,
openly and in good faith.
I said at the outset that Special Representative
Patten’s briefing was a stark reminder that this is a
human tragedy from which the Council must not turn
away its attention. We cannot change the horrors and
crimes that have already been committed. But that is all
the more reason that the Council must remain engaged,
must remain seized of the situation and must be ready
to take further action if necessary to ensure protection,
justice and progress.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
listened attentively to the briefing by Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman and noted his positive evaluation of
the progress in the situation in Rakhine state and the
efforts of Myanmar and Bangladesh. China also took
note of the briefing by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Patten.
Since the violent attacks in Myanmar’s Rakhine
state, China has made its position clear on many
occasions, expressing condemnation of the violent
attacks and support for Myanmar’s efforts to maintain
stability. As a friendly neighbour of both Myanmar
and Bangladesh, China has provided emergency
humanitarian relief for the appropriate settlement of
displaced persons and, at the same time, worked with

S/PV. 8133

them to push for dialogue and consultations in order to
find a solution.
Not long ago, Chinese Foreign Minister Wang
Yi visited Bangladesh and Myanmar and proposed
a three-stage approach to addressing the problem of
Rakhine state.
The first stage is to cease hostilities on the ground
and restore stability and order so that people can enjoy
calm and do not feel compelled to flee. At present, the
goal of this stage has largely been achieved. Massive
population flows have stopped. It is critical to prevent
a relapse of the situation, especially a recurrence
of conflict.
The second stage is for the international community
to encourage communication between the two countries
so that they can find practical ways to solve problems
through consultations on an equal footing. Now that
the two countries have signed a repatriation agreement,
it is essential to put it into practice and achieve
tangible results.
The third stage is to face squarely the root causes of
the problem and explore ways to address them. Poverty
is the source of turmoil and conflicts. We call on the
international community to increase support to Rakine
state to help it eradicate poverty, pursue development
through poverty reduction and realize stability
through development.
This proposal represents the greatest possible
consensus on all sides and has the full agreement of
both Myanmar and Bangladesh.
The problem in Myanmar’s Rakhine state has a
complex historical, ethnic and religious background.
It cannot be solved overnight, but calls for a gradual
approach. At present, the situation on the ground has
been visibly eased. The vigorous humanitarian relief
operation continues. Myanmar and Bangladesh have
maintained dialogue and consultations, and are in the
process of following up on the repatriation agreement
they have signed. Both countries are engaged in
cooperation with the United Nations and other relevant
organizations. Myanmar is actively implementing the
report of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State.
China appreciate those efforts on the part of Myanmar
and Bangladesh and hopes that the international
community will view the difficulties and challenges
facing the Government of Myanmar objectively, remain
patient and provide support and help.

17-437497/24

S/PV.8133

The situation in Myanmar

The Security Council adopted a presidential
statement on the question of Rakhine state at the
beginning of November (S/PRST/2017/22). Now the
situation in Rakhine state has shown positive changes.
It is the consistent view of China that the question of
a Rakhine state should be addressed appropriately by
Myanmar and Bangladesh through bilateral channels.
Only an agreement accepted by both countries
concerned can be implemented and sustained or win the
necessary understanding and support of various sectors
within the countries. Any solution reached under strong
external pressure may ease the situation temporarily
but will leave negative after effects.
China hopes that the two countries will continue to
implement the relevant measures and that the Council
and the international community will play a positive
and constructive role in that regard. China stands
ready to work with all the parties concerned to play
a constructive [RUN-ON]le in the restoration of order
and the realization of stability and development in
Rakhine state.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Feltman for his briefing, and Ms. Patten for her
leadership and service.
As we confront issues like this one, it is important
that we hear stories, and when we hear the stories, we
have to imagine the faces because; otherwise these are
just numbers or yet more impersonal pieces of data.
But to understand that these are stories, then we have
to take it one step further and ask “What if this was
my family?”
Therefore, to accompany Ms. Patten’s stories,
I want to tell the Security Council about Jenna: she
is a 10-year-old Rohingya refugee and she has lost
everything. In Jenna’s words, “I saw with my own eyes
people killed by the military and chopped into pieces”.
She continues:
“[t]hey burned my house but not only my house:
every house next to my house was burning. We all
ran from our houses and together we fled. Anyone
the military caught was slaughtered. After they were
shot or stabbed, they were cut into many pieces, put
inside plastic bins and thrown in the river.”
Speaking with the reporter, Jenna swallows her
emotions and says one more thing: “They shot him
dead. They killed my father. I am very sad that I lost
my father.”
8/24

12/12/2017

The pain and the suffering of the Rohingya are
unimaginable. Over and over we hear stories like
Jenna’s. The refugees tell us about security forces
destroying their homes, gang raping women, burning
children and killing people in the most twisted ways. It
is for Rohingya children like Jenna, and to learn all that
we can of what happened, that we are here today. We
must speak out for them and reject any attempt to play
down the magnitude of this man-made tragedy. We must
shine a spotlight on these accounts of ethnic cleansing.
The number of people who have fled Burma in just
over three months has now risen to 646,000 people — an
average of more than 40,000 people per week. This is the
fastest displacement of refugees since Rwanda. More
people are dead and displaced inside Burma, yet we still
have not seen any concrete action to hold accountable
those responsible for these atrocities. Instead, we
see an investigation by the Burmese military that
denies all responsibility. This is unacceptable. Burma
must allow an independent, transparent and credible
investigation into what has happened. Allowing full
access for the United Nations fact-finding mission to
gather information and evidence on the ground is vital
to accountability and a solution to the crisis. We cannot
allow more time to pass. There is no denying that these
atrocities, including ethnic cleansing, have taken place.
The United States unequivocally condemns all acts
of violence in Burma, including the horrific violence
conducted by the Burmese security forces, who should
be the ones protecting their own people. What is worse, if
one asks the Rohingya if they want to go home, they are
too scared to go back. Before they can return, Burmese
authorities must create an environment that is safe for
people to return voluntarily to their homes. It is more
than just a process; there must be a cultural change,
which only Burmese leadership can effect. While we
hear promises from the Government of Burma, we
need to see action. We call on Burma to work with the
United Nations and its agencies and allow immediate
and unhindered access to all humanitarian actors so
that they can provide help to those who need it.
We continue to be grateful to the Government
of Bangladesh for hosting such a large number of
refugees. We also encourage Bangladesh to continue
to partner more closely with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugee to address this
challenge and ensure that survivors of sexual violence
receive the support they desperately need. We remain
concerned about the fact that refugees in the camps are
17-43749

12/12/2017

The situation in Myanmar

vulnerable to disease and human trafficking, among
other dangers. We therefore hope that the international
community will step up to support the United Nations
response. Around here, we keep hearing that the
situation in Burma is complex and that it will take time,
but there are steps that we can take right now to help
the Burmese people. We can demand that independent
investigators be allowed to enter the country to help
hold those responsible for atrocities to account. We can
provide help to those who have been brutally attacked
by members of the Burmese security forces and we can
speak out for the human rights of all people in Burma.
Our plea is simple. Let us do what we can without
delay, work diligently to see every refugee home safe
and urgently pursue justice so that all of Burma can be
made whole.

S/PV. 8133

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman and Ms. Pramila Patten, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for their detailed briefings.

the agreement reached on 23 November on the voluntary
repatriation of refugees, must be supported. We hope
that both sides will intensify their efforts to ensure
that this is implemented in practice, especially since
the exodus of Muslim refugees to Bangladesh is still
continuing, although now on a considerably lesser scale.
In these circumstances, it will be important to facilitate
efforts to settle the situation in Rakhine state, focus on
providing practical assistance to the Government of
Myanmar in a spirit of equality and mutual respect and
take full advantage of every opportunity for making
use of United Nations mediation efforts. The attempts
of a number of countries to put more pressure on
Naypyidaw — such as, for instance, in the resolution
adopted on 5 December at the special session of the
Human Rights Council on the situation of the minority
Muslim population (A/HRC/RES/S-27/1) — are clearly
not helping those efforts. In our view, it is essential
to refrain from counterproductive accusations and
condemnations of Myanmar and to avoid politically
and emotionally tinged speculation about the alleged
genocide of Muslims.

For our part, we note that the security situation in
Rakhine state and its environs has stabilized to a degree.
This was evidenced by the announcement on 27 October
that the numbers of military personnel deployed there
as part of a special operation were being reduced. We
note the efforts that the Government of Myanmar has
undertaken in line with the recommendations of Kofi
Annan’s international Advisory Commission. The
process of issuing the Muslim minority with national
identification cards is under way. The affected areas
are receiving humanitarian assistance and access to
those areas for representatives of the diplomatic corps,
United Nations bodies and the media is improving.

In our view, what is needed most of all in order to
agree on a settlement of the situation of mass movements
of people across the Myanmar-Bangladesh border is
goodwill on the part of both States. Unfortunately,
it will be impossible to resolve matters if the two of
them cannot come to a rapprochement on this age-old
problem, whose foundation was laid in the previous
century by a colonial administration, with its arbitrary
drawing of borders and shifting of populations from
one part of its colonial dominions to another. The role
of the international community, including the United
Nations, should be to assist bilateral efforts to surmount
this crisis and its consequences.

Our position on the issue remains the same, which
is that there is no possible alternative to resolving
the complex issues in Rakhine state, which are based
on historical, socioeconomic, cultural and religious
factors, other than by exclusively political means and
establishing a dialogue between the representatives of
all ethnicities and faiths. We call on all parties to refrain
from violence, and we underscore the need to respect
Myanmar’s national sovereignty. In that regard, we
firmly condemn the murders by extremists of Muslims
who were working actively with the authorities to settle
the conflict.

Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for presenting his
report and Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
for her assessment of the violations committed.

The steps being taken to establish a constructive
dialogue between Naypyidaw and Dhaka, particularly

Kazakhstan continues to be deeply concerned
about the plight of the more than 626,000 Rohingya
refugees — more than half of the total estimated
number of Rohingyas living in Rakhine state — fleeing
to Bangladesh. Many Rohingya are also still internally
displaced. Unfortunately, it is impossible to assess their
condition owing to the restrictions on access for United
Nations humanitarian agencies to Rakhine state.
The saddest tragedy is that the vast majority of these

17-437499/24

S/PV.8133

The situation in Myanmar

refugees are women and children, who are the most
vulnerable segment of the population.
The international community’s growing attention
to the situation of the Rohingya was evident in the
Council’s presidential statement of 6 November
(S/PRST/2017/22) as well as in the twenty-seventh
special session of the Human Rights Council, held
on 5 December, on the human rights situation of the
Rohingya Muslim population and other minorities
in Rakhine state. We join others in commending the
Government of Bangladesh for sheltering the refugees
and providing them with temporary housing, medical
care, food and other forms of assistance. We also
acknowledge the contributions that international
organizations and donors have made to mitigate the
current crisis.
My delegation welcomes Myanmar and Bangladesh’s
signing last month of a memorandum of understanding
on the voluntary repatriation of refugees to Myanmar.
We are heartened to note that the two Governments
have established a joint working group to implement
the process. We hope that the group will ensure the
voluntary return of all refugees to their homes in
Myanmar in a timely, safe and dignified manner. We
also encourage the Government of Myanmar to honour
and comply with its agreement to invite the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
relevant international entities to fully engage in the
various stages of return and resettlement of the refugees.
While we welcome the efforts of the Myanmar
Government to stabilize the situation in northern
Rakhine state, it is equally essential for the authorities
to conduct a credible national investigation into the
alleged gross human rights violations against the
Rohingya Muslim community. It should focus in
particular on the allegations of serious sexual and
gender-based violence against women and girls, of
torture and detention and of the burning of houses,
schools, places of worship and other property. The
perpetrators of those heinous acts should be brought to
justice with a view to re-establishing the foundations of
basic trust between all the communities involved and
ensuring that such violence does not recur in future.
At the same time, the recommendations of the
Rakhine Advisory Commission, headed by former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, are extremely valuable.
They highlight the fact that the long and complicated
history of the Rakhine state and its numerous problems
10/24

12/12/2017

cannot be solved hastily. It will be crucial to address
the root causes of conflict, particularly the loophole
represented by Myanmar’s Citizenship Act of 1982,
which rendered the Rohingya community stateless and
deprived them of their rights. Solving the problems
of poverty and underdevelopment, while granting the
Rohingya community equal and unhindered access
to basic services, should be at the core of long-term
sustainable development. In that regard, Kazakhstan
notes Myanmar’s decision to form an advisory body
that includes foreign and local experts to implement
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission.
We therefore call on the Government of Myanmar to
ensure that the funds and programmes of the United
Nations and other partners can be fully operational in
delivering emergency assistance, and to work to relieve
the acute suffering of the victimized population through
recovery and rehabilitation efforts.
Lastly, it will be crucial to support constructive
cooperation with the Government of Myanmar in
an atmosphere conducive to negotiations if we are to
promote sustainable peace, stability and prosperity for
Rakhine state.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, I join others in thanking Mr. Feltman, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing.
I also thank Ms. Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, for
her very moving statement, rallying us all to shoulder
our responsibilities as members of the Security
Council with the primary responsibility of preventing
the repetition of the type of atrocities and acts she
just described.
Four months have passed since the crisis began. It
has been a month since the Security Council adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22 on this matter.
Nevertheless, hundreds of thousands of innocent
victims of the Rohingya minority in Myanmar
continue to suffer from being persecuted, terrorized,
intimidated, forcibly displaced, murdered and raped,
and even their homes are set on fire — all of which has
forced them — panicked and fearful for their lives — to
flee their villages and abandon their homes and land.
That crisis, as well as all the humanitarian, political,
security and social challenges that it entails, continues
to threaten regional peace and security in that part of
the world. The serious threat posed could worsen and
generate additional tensions and heavy burdens for
neighbouring countries, in particular Bangladesh. In
17-43749

12/12/2017

The situation in Myanmar

that regard, we welcome the bilateral agreement recently
reached between the Governments of Myanmar and
Bangladesh concerning the repatriation of refugees.
It is our hope that they will be able to return to their
native land within Myanmar.
Whether as a member of the Security Council or the
Contact Group on the Rohingya Muslims of Myanmar
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, Egypt has
been trying to conceive of an international approach to
dealing with the crisis within the framework of several
basic demands aimed at containing the crisis — which
the Secretary-General has recommended repeatedly.
First, the Government of Myanmar must shoulder
its national responsibilities, namely, stopping military
operations and violent practices so as to safeguard
Rohingya lives, and unconditionally allowing the
complete return of displaced persons and refugees
to their land and homes in Rakhine state, while
permitting the distribution of all forms of humanitarian
assistance to Rakhine state to help victims and other
affected persons.
Secondly, it is crucial to cease hateful narratives,
whether emanating from the Government or Buddhist
extremists, which incite violence and destruction. It is
also important to promote the concept of tolerance for
the other and peaceful coexistence among religions and
minorities without any racial or faith-based distinctions.
Thirdly, the national authority established recently
by the Myanmar Government and charged with
providing humanitarian assistance, facilitating the
repatriation of refugees and development in Rakhine
state should implement completely, comprehensively
and rapidly the recommendations of the final report of
the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, chaired by
Kofi Annan.
Fourthly, it is incumbent upon the Security Council
to follow the crisis closely with a view to encouraging the
Government of Myanmar to cooperate constructively
towards promoting the right to citizenship for and
conferring Myanmar nationality upon the Muslim
Rohingya people, and allowing them to return home.
Fifthly, we condemn all forms of terrorism
perpetrated by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army
regardless of motivation or rationale.
At the national level, the role of the Al-Azhar
Mosque must be note, which has hosted events bringing
together all the various components of Myanmar

S/PV. 8133

society — including Muslims, Buddhists, Hindus,
Christians and others — aimed at promoting the values
of religious tolerance and peaceful coexistence among
all races and nationalities. The most recent event was
a seminar held in January 2017 that brought together
young people representing the various religions
of Myanmar.
Lastly, I reiterate that it is important that the
Security Council establish a clear and functional road
map in order to peacefully resolve the crisis and settle
the issue in a just and definitive manner. The issue of
Rakhine state rests in conferring the right to citizenship
to Rohingyas in a clear way and ensuring their security
and inalienable human rights once and for all. In the
context of the twenty-first century, enlightened by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, it is inconceivable that the murder of part of
the population of Myanmar and its displacement to
neighbouring countries could be considered a way out
of the crisis. It is therefore important to act before it is
too late.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Mr.President, for
convening today’s meeting. I also thank Mr. Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and
Ms. Patten, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, for their
engagement, briefings and appeal to act.
We recognize the commitments made by the
Government of Myanmar since the adoption of the
presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22, on 6 November,
but urgent action is now required to implement those
commitments and achieve real change on the ground. The
support and continued engagement of the international
community and the United Nations system, including
the Security Council, remain important.
The crisis is far from over. Hundreds of people
continue to cross the border into Bangladesh every
day, having brought the number of refugees to well
over 620,000, as we have heard. Reports of ongoing
trafficking in human beings, including children, are
extremely worrisome. The risk of radicalization in the
camps is also a real concern. There are clear implications
for regional peace and stability. It is essential that our
attention not wane.
Sweden’s Foreign Minister, Margot Wallström,
recently visited Bangladesh and Myanmar. While
there, she engaged with the leaders of both countries.
She also met with leaders from the region to hear their

17-4374911/24

S/PV.8133

The situation in Myanmar

perspectives, and used the opportunity to convey the
messages of the Council. From the camps outside Cox’s
Bazar in Bangladesh, Minister Wallström was able to
hear first-hand accounts, not only of the enormity of
the humanitarian crisis but also of the horrific violence
and abuse, including sexual and gender-based violence
against the Rohingyas by Myanmar’s armed forces.
Ms. Patten’s graphic briefing today and numerous
reports, including from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
clearly illustrates the seriousness and horrific nature
of those crimes. The Minister was particularly struck
by the precarious situation of children and young
people caught up in the crisis. Numerous reports
of systematic, widespread and coordinated acts of
violence strongly indicate that crimes against humanity
have been committed. It is important that the facts and
circumstances on the ground be fully established. The
fact-finding mission mandated by the Human Rights
Council is an important resource in that regard, and we
urge the Government of Myanmar to provide it with
full access.
We have fully supported the Secretary-General’s
efforts to resolve the crisis in Rakhine state. After
listening to Under-Secretary-General Feltman’s
comprehensive briefing today, it is clear that the
three areas requiring urgent action identified by the
Secretary-General when he briefed the Council on
28 September (see S/PV.8060) remain relevant and
urgent. Of immediate concern is the need to ensure that
assistance reaches the estimated 865,000 people who
need it inside Rakhine state and elsewhere in Myanmar.
It is unacceptable that humanitarian access in northern
Rakhine is insufficient and still severely limited.
Restoring peace and stability and ensuring full
humanitarian access, as well as addressing the root
causes of the crisis, will require real change in Rakhine
state. Only then will the conditions exist for those who
fled to return in a safe, dignified and voluntary manner.
The people who decide to return should be able to do so
to their places of origin. That requires the establishment
of a credible verification mechanism.
The creation of camps for internally displaced
persons or camp-like conditions is unacceptable.
We take note of the arrangement reached between
the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh
regarding the voluntary repatriation of refugees. Like
others, we feel that the Office of the United Nations
12/24

12/12/2017

High Commissioner for Refugees must be invited
to participate in the joint working group that will
oversee the return so that the group can fully carry
out its mandate and help work towards arrangements
that would enable refugees to exercise their right to
return, in line with international law. I also note UnderSecretary-General Feltman’s recommendations today,
including on the much-needed reconciliation efforts in
northern Rakhine.
The implementation of the recommendations set out
in the report of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine
State is needed without delay. The Commission’s report
provides the road map needed to deal with the root
causes of this long-running crisis, in particular the
systematic discrimination of the Rohingya, including
by addressing the issue of citizenship.
We encourage the Government of Myanmar to
continue to cooperate with Bangladesh and countries
in the region. We urge Myanmar to cooperate fully
with the United Nations and to counter narratives and
rhetoric that seek to undermine the Organization’s
ability to do its work. In addition, as mentioned in
presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22, we continue to
see value in giving consideration to the appointment
of a special adviser, or envoy, to offer assistance to
the Government.
Sweden and the international community stand
ready to support the Government and the people of
Myanmar as the country continues its democratic
transition. Now is the time to rebuild trust between
the communities within Rakhine state and between
Myanmar and its neighbours and the international
community. Doing so can create the conditions for
peace and development that will benefit all the people
of Rakhine state and the people of Myanmar.
We encourage the Government of Myanmar to
seize this opportunity, including by implementing its
commitments. The Security Council should remain
very actively engaged.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Patten for their briefings on the
most recent developments in Myanmar as a followup to presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22, adopted
last month.
The situation in Myanmar’s Rakhine state and the
movement of hundreds of thousands of refugees from
17-43749

12/12/2017

The situation in Myanmar

Myanmar to Bangladesh remain a source of concern.
Unless the situation is resolved, the implications
for the worsening of the humanitarian situation and
for regional peace and stability will continue to be
horrendous. It is critical that the humanitarian crisis
remain humanitarian and not be transformed into a
political one that entails violence — a development of
which we should be aware given that the situation has
begun to deteriorate.
We believe that the presidential statement I
mentioned provides a useful framework for addressing
the situation in Myanmar. The right to a safe, voluntary
and dignified return to their place of origin for those
who fled is one of the issues particularly underscored
in the presidential statement. We note the steps taken
by the Myanmar Government to end the violence and
to ensure the safe and dignified return of refugees
and displaced persons, as well as safe and secure
humanitarian access.
Clearly, much remains to be done to address the
suffering and frustration of the people of Rakhine state.
While recognizing the critical need to investigate the
allegations of sexual violence committed in Rakhine
state, we welcome the planned visit by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Pramila
Patten to Myanmar to undertake consultations with
the Government. We welcome the agreement on
the return of persons displaced from Rakhine state,
signed by Bangladesh and Myanmar on 23 November,
which includes detailed guidelines for the smooth
and voluntary return of those displaced persons. It is
important that it be translated into meaningful action.
Drawing on the experience of our own region, we
attach great importance to the cooperation between
Bangladesh and Myanmar. They hold the key, with
the genuine and effective support of the international
community. We support the efforts of regional
organizations, such as the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), in providing humanitarian aid
to northern Rakhine.
We also take note of the outcome of the ninth
ASEAN-United Nations summit, which underscored
the importance of addressing the root causes of the
crisis by implementing the recommendations of the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State. We also
commend the donors and the international community
for the generous support delivered during the pledging
conference of 23 October, which seeks to enhance

S/PV. 8133

critical humanitarian assistance for the refugees and
host communities in Bangladesh. It is critical that we
continue to pay attention to the crisis and to mobilize
resources for the response in order to enable the
humanitarian community to do more in assisting and
protecting those extremely vulnerable groups.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, allow me to warmly thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and
Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, for
their very enlightening briefings.
The situation of the Rohingyas in Rakhine state
remains a topic of serious concern for France, as our
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, Mr. JeanYves Le Drian, expressed to the Burmese authorities
during his visit to Burma on 20 November. The facts
are known. They have been recalled. Since 25 August,
640,000 Rohingyas have had to flee from Burma
to Bangladesh. Still today, hundreds of Rohingyas
continue to flee to Bangadesh. Hundreds of villages
have been burned. Systematic and organized human
rights violations have been reported by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and other actors on the ground. In that context, I wish
to make three main comments.
The first relates to the implementation of
presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22, adopted just
a month ago. Faced with a situation of — it should
be recalled — ethnic cleansing, the Security Council
mobilized itself and expressed itself in very strong
terms. That text, which is a road map in the light of which
the Security Council is to assess the progress made,
acknowledges the initial steps taken by the Burmese
authorities and sets out very specific demands in order
to try and alleviate the suffering of the Rohingyas.
The agreement reached on 23 November between
Burma and Bangladesh on the issue of the return of
refugees is a first step towards providing for the safe,
dignified and voluntary return of the Rohingya refugees
to Burma once conditions allow. However, significant
progress still needs to be made and, to that end, it is
essential that the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees be included in those discussions and,
in particular, fully participate in the announced joint
working group.
Given the situation, we believe, particularly on the
basis of the criteria established by the United Nations

17-4374913/24

S/PV.8133

The situation in Myanmar

High Commissioner for Refugees, that the conditions
needed for the return of the refugees do not yet exist.
We are following the development of the situation very
closely. In order to establish the conditions conducive
for the return, it is essential that measures be undertaken
in Rakhine to promote reconstruction, reconciliation
and respect for human rights.
Progress in the humanitarian area is also
insufficient. The access granted to the World Food
Programme is the first positive step, which has made it
possible to help those who remained in Rakhine state,
but it is urgent to broaden that access in order to ensure
full, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access to the
populations who need it.
In the realm of human rights the testimonies that
continue to reach us are very disturbing. Violations
continue in full impunity, while neither the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights nor
the fact-finding mission has access to Rakhine state.
Some acts being carried out systematically in Rakhine
state could amount to crimes against humanity. At
the special session of the Human Rights Council on
5 December, High Commissioner Zeid Al-Hussein
cited testimonies about young girls who had been
raped or burned, had their throats cut or been gangraped to death. Incitement to hatred on the basis of
ethnicity is designed, as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General eloquently put it, to dehumanize
communities such as the Rohingya and to continue
to fuel the root causes of violence. We must work
urgently to establish serious measures to enable us to
investigate violations and prosecute the perpetrators in
order to put an end to this atmosphere of impunity. It
will be crucial to shine a bright light on all of these
very serious accusations, including through the Human
Rights Council’s fact-finding mission, which must be
allowed to visit Rakhine state.
Lastly, with regard to implementing the
recommendations of Kofi Annan’s Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, the establishment
of an advisory committee of experts that includes
international eminent persons just announced by
the Government of Myanmar should enable regular
and rigorous monitoring of the measures that have
been undertaken. France encourages the Myanmar
authorities to continue their efforts in that area.
My second comment is on the vulnerability of
refugees and internally displaced persons to various
14/24

12/12/2017

kinds of sexual exploitation and violence. I would
like to once again thank Ms. Pramila Patten warmly
for her presence here today and for her testimony. The
violations she has described are particularly alarming,
and we must do all we can to protect the refugees and
the displaced wherever they are and whenever they
want to return home. We are very concerned about
the information from the International Organization
for Migration on the sexual exploitation and abuse
even of young girls and children, which is completely
unacceptable. We also condemn the early and forced
marriages of young girls, some barely 10 years old, that
are going on as we speak.
My third and last comment relates to the importance
of ensuring that the United Nations, particularly
the Security Council, remains fully prepared to act
on this issue. While we should welcome the initial
measures undertaken by the Burmese authorities,
these commitments must now be translated into
action. In each of the areas mentioned in the Security
Council’s presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/22) of
last month, much progress still remains to be made.
We should therefore make the mandate of the special
adviser or envoy proposed in the presidential statement
and in the resolution adopted a few weeks ago in the
Third Committee fully operational. With appropriate
resources and means, the special adviser could
strengthen follow-up on this issue in the Secretariat and
on efforts to work with the Burmese authorities.
France would like to reiterate its full support to the
Burmese democratic transition and to the efforts of the
Government led by Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi to advance
the rule of law in Burma. Given the major humanitarian
and human rights tragedy in Arakan, we will continue
to insist, particularly in the Security Council, on the
three complementary issues that must be urgently
addressed — ending the violence and discrimination
against the Rohingya, providing full, safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access to the populations in
need, and facilitating the refugees’ voluntary return
when the necessary conditions are established in line
with international standards. France will also continue
its dialogue with the Burmese authorities on the subject
during the visit to Burma of our Minister for Europe
and Foreign Affairs.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Feltman and Special Representative
Patten for their briefings.
17-43749

12/12/2017

The situation in Myanmar

Italy remains committed to supporting Myanmar
in overcoming the crisis in Rakhine state and in its
democratic transition and peace process. In that spirit,
we have worked to contribute constructively to the
Council’s work, in particular through the presidential
statement on the subject (S/PRST/2017/22) adopted
during our presidency of the Council last month, as
well as in the Third Committee and the Human Rights
Council. We moved immediately to respond to the
humanitarian situation and announced a pledge of
€7 million at the recent donors’ conference in Geneva.
I would like to make three main points.
First, despite some apparent easing of tensions
and the efforts of the Government of Myanmar, the
situation in Rakhine state is still of serious concern.
The violence must stop and all civilians, regardless
of their status, ethnicity or religion, must be assured
security and respect for their human rights. All those
in need must receive humanitarian assistance without
discrimination. Once again, we urge the authorities to
ensure full and unhindered access for humanitarian and
human rights actors and the United Nations specialized
agencies. At the same time, the humanitarian situation
of those who have fled to Bangladesh is rapidly
deteriorating. We once again commend Bangladesh
for its solidarity with the refugees and express our
gratitude for the burden it is bearing. The international
community should scale up its assistance before
the conditions worsen in the camps, where a large
percentage of those being sheltered are children with
no access to food, sanitary, health care or other basic
services. Besides this, and beyond the response to the
immediate emergency, it will be crucial to establish a
more comprehensive strategy for assisting the refugees.
Secondly, a safe, dignified and voluntary return
is key to normalization. We are pleased that Myanmar
and Bangladesh have concluded an agreement on
repatriation and look forward to its implementation.
We call on both countries to continue cooperating with
each other and the United Nations, especially the High
Commissioner for Refugees, whose capacity in this
field is unparalleled. The return must be sustainable.
Proper conditions must be put in place in Rakhine
state to allow refugees to return to their places of
origin and rebuild their lives there. Security, freedom
of movement, respect for human rights and access to
services and livelihoods are crucial to that end. We
welcome the steps that the Government has taken in
that regard, including through its establishment of the

S/PV. 8133

Union Enterprise Mechanism and the appointment of
an interministerial committee advisory board. But
there is still much to be done in the short, medium and
longer term. The recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State chaired by Kofi Annan
represent a road map that must be operationalized
through the authorities’ consistent commitment. The
international community stands ready to support
that process.
Thirdly, with regard to reconciliation, intercommunal
and interreligious dialogue is crucial at this stage. We
welcome the initiatives that the Government has taken
so far, and encourage it to ramp up those efforts with a
view to restoring a spirit of understanding and mutual
trust among the various communities. The visit by Pope
Francis was a landmark event. We fully endorse and
echo his plea for justice, human rights and respect for
every ethnic group and identity. In that regard, ensuring
accountability remains fundamental. We continue to
be deeply concerned about reports of grave human
rights violations and abuses in Rakhine state, including
serious allegations of sexual- and gender-based
violence, especially against the Rohingya community.
Those responsible must be identified and brought
to justice. We urge the authorities to make concrete
commitments in that regard. We believe the United
Nations can play an important role in helping them to
make an impartial assessment of the events that have
occurred and reiterate our call to them to cooperate
with the Human Rights Council’s fact-finding
mission. We welcome Special Representative Patten’s
forthcoming visit to Myanmar. While we commend
the authorities’ support for her mandate, we encourage
them to step up their dialogue with her, particularly in
the area of legal reform and capacity-building, as well
as with Ms. Yanghee Lee, the Special Rapporteur on
the situation of human rights in Myanmar.
Thanks to Myanmar’s commitment, promising
steps have been made in the past few weeks, but
additional efforts will be required to address the
situation in Rakhine in a comprehensive and effective
manner as provided for in the presidential statement,
which we look forward to seeing fully implemented. We
encourage Myanmar to strengthen its cooperation with
the United Nations system, which is the best way to back
up the actions of the parties and regional stakeholders,
as well as with a view to seeing the appointment of the
special envoy provided for in the recent resolution of

17-4374915/24

S/PV.8133

The situation in Myanmar

the Third Committee, which the General Assembly will
consider in the next few days.
The international community and the Security
Council should continue to maintain their focus in
order to ensure united and continued support to peace
and reconciliation in Myanmar. As we have done this
year as a member of the Council, Italy will continue to
do its part at the bilateral and multilateral level.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman and Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict
Pramila Patten for their reports on the situation in
Rakhine state in the Republic of the Union of Myanmar.
Bolivia reiterates its vigorous condemnation of
the serious violent situation that has affected several
communities in the Rakhine state, in particular the
Rohingya community.
According to data issued on 1 December by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, since the beginning of the crisis in August
more than 640,000 refugees have been displaced to
Bangladesh. If we add to those the more than 300,000
Rohingyas who became refugees before the crisis, the
current displaced population in that country amounts
to over 1 million people. Unfortunately, this sensitive
situation is exacerbated by the outbreak of diphtheria
in the Rohingya refugee camps in the Cox Bazar
community in Bangladesh, where, according to the
World Health Organization, more than 550 cases and 9
deaths had been reported as of 11 December.
Moreover, we are deeply disturbed by reports of
humiliating and degrading treatment, gender-based
violence, acts of sexual aggression and gang rapes
against Rohingya women and girls allegedly committed
by members of the Myanmar armed forces. In this
regard, we urgently call on the relevant authorities
to begin the necessary investigations to identify the
perpetrators of these reprehensible acts so that they are
brought to justice and impunity is avoided in the face of
these serious violations of human rights.
Bolivia reiterates that the only way to resolve this
crisis is through dialogue, and to that end the parties
must commit to implementing strategies that strengthen
mediation, consultations, good offices, negotiation and
avoid at all cost any confrontation-based rhetoric. In this
regard, we note the signing of the bilateral agreement
16/24

12/12/2017

between Myanmar and Bangladesh on 23 November to
establish guidelines to allow for the return of displaced
Rohingya to their places of origin. We remind the
parties that efforts to facilitate the return of refugees
must abide by the principles of international law and
that returns must be voluntary, safe and carried out
under dignified conditions.
Moreover, we underscore the development by the
Government of Myanmar of public policies in different
areas to alleviate the situation of the Rohingya refugees
and we highlight the willingness shown by the parties
to address the crisis in a crosscutting manner and
look forward to their progress. Similarly, we call on
the Government to continue making its best efforts
to implement the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, which include,
among others, the implementation of strategies that
promote socioeconomic development, citizenship,
freedom of movement, community participation and
representation, intercommunal cohesion and the
safety of all communities. In this context, we note the
establishment of the ministerial-level committee for
the implementation of the recommendations, and the
organization and distribution of tasks to implement
them. We believe that its work and coordination
with different United Nations agencies will be
important in implementing the road map outlined in
the recommendations.
In order for our actions to be effective and
sustainable, we must continue working steadily on
measures to alleviate the situation of the affected
Rohinyga community. To that end, it is important
to allow and guarantee full and unrestricted access
for humanitarian assistance to all peoples who are
displaced, since the only way to respond effectively to
this crisis is to address the problem in all its dimensions.
In this regard, we highlight the willingness of the
Government of Myanmar to work with different United
Nations agencies and we call on them to deepen further
their coordination efforts.
Finally, we recognize the willingness and
cooperation shown by the people and Government of
Bangladesh in addressing this crisis; and we call on the
regional organizations and the international community
in general to continue cooperating to that end.
Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs
Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing. I must confess that I do
17-43749

12/12/2017

The situation in Myanmar

not know if I should thank him for his report, because
it was brutal. He exposed a landscape of cruelty and
violence and sometimes ignorance is bliss when faced
with a reality like the one he presented with so much
strength and passion. In any case, I thank him for
thoroughly shaking us up.
Uruguay has followed with extreme concern the
recent events in the serious crisis generated by the
sectarian violence against the Rohingya minority. As
my delegation has already stated, the gravity of the
situation of the Muslim minority in Myanmar, which
is persecuted and discriminated against, warrants the
immediate attention of the international community
and especially the Security Council, as an organ that
guarantees international peace and security.
For Uruguay, the close link between the successive
human rights violations and the creation of conflicts and
their ability to become threats to international peace
and security is clear. That is why we joined the Human
Rights Caucus initiative, which puts human rights at the
centre of conflict prevention. I would like to emphasize
that, beyond the religious affiliation of the Rohingya
people, we are facing a protection of civilians issue.
Civilians must be protected unconditionally, without
any distinction. Consequently, applicable norms of
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law must be respected.
The crisis that was unleashed on 25 August in
Rakhine state, the origins of which date back several
decades, not only caused an exodus of thousands of
people fleeing violence under difficult humanitarian
and security conditions, but it also caused another
crisis — the fastest growing refugee crisis in the world.
More than half a million Rohingya have crossed into
Bangladesh on foot or in makeshift vessels in less than
four months, and they have lost everything.
Uruguay is committed to promoting, protecting
and respecting human rights. Respect for human
rights is the cardinal rule for maintaining fundamental
freedoms and democratic life in all nations. Yesterday
in this Chamber (see S/PV.8130), we said the same
thing with regard to another item on the agenda of the
Security Council and we reiterate it once again today.
For Uruguay, there are no limits or exclusions as to the
forums in which human rights can be discussed, nor does
Uruguay accept sovereignty or domestic jurisdiction as
an excuse for attempts to prevent the consideration of
the situation of human rights in Member States.

S/PV. 8133

The crisis in Rakhine state can be resolved only
through a human rights-based approach. The human
rights of all people must be respected unconditionally,
as that is the only way to achieve true national
reconciliation. The Government of Myanmar must
address all the deep-rooted causes of the crisis in
Rakhine state, put an end to repression, adopt measures
necessary to ensure accountability and bring to
justice those who have directed and carried out these
deplorable violent acts.We recall that the primary
responsibility of protecting the civilians of Myanmar
falls to its authorities.
We endorse the observations made by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al
Hussein, that the systematic and widespread repression
of the Rohingya minority in Myanmar is characteristic
of genocide. It is therefore necessary to undertake
an international criminal investigation into the
perpetrators of violence against the Rohingyas. Those
responsible for the abhorrent atrocities committed in
Myanmar must be held accountable for serious crimes
and violations of international law committed with
total impunity. All complaints must be investigated
comprehensively, transparently and independently.
In that context, Uruguay calls on the Government
of Myanmar to grant all the necessary guarantees that
the fact-finding mission established by the Human
Rights Council resolution 34/22 can successfully carry
out its duties. At the same time, we urge it to implement
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State, led by former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan.
Finally, Uruguay recognizes Bangladesh for its
generosity in providing security, food and shelter
to hundreds of thousands of refugees, of whom an
estimated 60 per cent are children. We also commend
the work of various humanitarian actors in providing
assistance to victims who have left everything behind
and have nothing but their suffering and trauma,
in the hope that some day they will be able to enjoy
their fundamental rights, which are inherent in all
human beings.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I sincerely thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, for their
illuminating briefings. My delegation also takes this

17-4374917/24

S/PV.8133

The situation in Myanmar

12/12/2017

opportunity to commend all the humanitarian agencies,
whether of the United Nations or its partners, for the
measures they have already taken to help the afflicted
people in Rakhine state.

underlying causes of the conflict, combat incitement to
hatred and violence against the Rohingyas, resolve the
painful issue of citizenship, and promote development
and economic and social inclusion in Rakhine state.

Since last summer, the situation in Rakhine state
in Myanmar has been one of the worst displacement
crises the world has witnessed in recent decades. As
the Under-Secretary-General said, 626,000 people have
crossed the border into Bangladesh to seek refuge. The
humanitarian challenge is therefore significant both
in Myanmar, where the Rohingya in Rakhine state
need emergency assistance, and in Bangladesh, where
living conditions, in particular in refugee camps, are
especially alarming, unhygienic and vulnerable to
outbreaks of disease, such as cholera.

In sum and by way of conclusion, my delegation
wishes once again to emphasize the need for an
immediate cessation of violence and discrimination
against the Rohingya people; accountability to ensure
that refugees will not be persecuted or discriminated
against upon their return; the timely provision of
humanitarian access to Rakhine state and Bangladesh;
and sustained commitment on the part of the United
Nations, the Security Council in particular, with a
view to finding a speedy and viable solution. Such
commitment must support the laudable efforts made by
organizations and the countries of the region, including
Bangladesh, which we thank for its hospitality, and
China, for its diplomatic efforts.

Despite the efforts made, the road ahead remains
long. Out of all of the displaced people, only 120,000
have received food assistance. We also note that
neither the High Commissioner for Human Rights
nor the fact-finding mission have been able to gain
access to Rakhine state, making any assessment of
the situation and needs on the ground impossible. My
delegation therefore recalls the obligation of parties
under international humanitarian law and human
rights law to ensure immediate and safe access of the
populations to swift humanitarian assistance, including
medical assistance, without restrictions or conditions.
We further underscore the need to ensure the access of
investigation teams to alleged cases of rights violations
in an effort to ensure that justice prevails.
Obviously, we welcome the dialogue undertaken
between the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh,
which resulted in the signing of the 23 November
agreement on the return of refugees. However, we must
say that after carefully listening to the very poignant
statement delivered by Ms. Patten, it is imperative to
protect civilians, especially women and children, from
physical violence, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions adopted by the Council.
Moreover, while we welcome the decision made
by the Government of Myanmar to implement the
recommendations in the report of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, led by former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, we urge it to ensure,
as quickly as possible and in close cooperation with
the Office of the High Commissioner on Refugees,
the safe and sustainable return of refugees. We also
urge the Government of Burma to firmly address the
18/24

Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): We are grateful to the
briefers for their detailed and, indeed, very sobering
insights. We remain deeply concerned about the
violence in Rakhine state and reports of serious human
rights violations and abuses, including those of a
gender-based nature.
It is known that the recent, highly disturbing
developments were triggered by the deadly attacks
of the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army against the
security forces committed in August, but Ukraine
reiterates that the targeting of any civilian population
is totally unacceptable. We urge the Myanmar military
to show restraint and ensure the immediate protection
of all civilians in Rakhine state. We also call on the
Myanmar authorities to ensure the swift establishment
of the rule of law and to bring to justice those responsible
for committing atrocities.
Given the fact that over 626,000 refugees have fled to
Bangladesh to escape violence, we welcome the signing
of the 23 November agreement on the return of displaced
persons from Rakhine state between the Governments
of Myanmar and Bangladesh. That document should
serve the aim of creating proper conditions for the
voluntary, safe and dignified return of refugees to their
places of origin and providing non-discriminatory
access to basic services and justice in Rakhine state.
We express once again our support for the Government
of Bangladesh in its efforts to provide shelter and aid to
all those in need. We also strongly encourage enhanced
17-43749

12/12/2017

The situation in Myanmar

S/PV. 8133

partnership and cooperation between the two countries
in addressing common challenges.

Hlaing to take punitive measures against the alleged
human rights abuses, based on credible investigations.

Ukraine is seriously concerned by the continuously
worsening humanitarian situation of refugees and
internally displaced persons, and stresses the need for
full and unhindered humanitarian access for the United
Nations and for international and non-governmental
aid agencies across Rakhine state. We recognize
that the situation there is an extremely complicated,
sensitive and challenging issue that cannot be
solved in the short run, but we are confident that the
implementation of the recommendations of the report
of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State will
help to address complex challenges and achieve peace,
stability and development in the region. We welcome
the initial steps taken by the Myanmar Government
in that regard, including the establishment of the
ministerial-level committee for the implementation of
the recommendations on Rakhine state. Ukraine calls
on the authorities to fulfil those recommendations to
the maximum extent possible and within a reasonable
time frame.

The Government of Japan highly commends
the dedicated efforts of Bangladesh to continuously
respond to current humanitarian needs. Indeed, Japan’s
Foreign Minister Kōno visited a displaced persons
camp in Cox’s Bazar on 19 November. Japan has
decided to extend assistance of $18.6 million through
international organizations for such high-priority needs
as food for displaced persons. We welcome the recent
efforts of the Government of Myanmar to improve
humanitarian access, including for the World Food
Programme. We encourage the Government to further
grant humanitarian access.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Patten, for their
comprehensive briefings.
Japan is deeply concerned about the human rights
and humanitarian conditions on the ground, as well as
the alleged killings of civilians and the displacement
of over 620,000 people to Bangladesh. Japan’s Prime
Minister Abe met with Myanmar’s State Counsellor
Aung San Suu Kyi on 14 November and expressed
his serious concerns over the situation in Rakhine
state, as well as his expectation of the restoration of
security in accordance with the law, the restoration of
humanitarian access, and the safe and voluntary return
of displaced persons.
Regarding the allegations of serious human rights
violations, it is necessary to take action against all
perpetrators, regardless of their place of origin or
political position. On 20 November, the State Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Japan, Mr. Nakane, met with Senior
General Min Aung Hlaing, the Commander-in-Chief
of Defence Services of Myanmar, following the
investigation that was carried out by the armed forces.
State Minister Nakane urged Senior General Min Aung

We welcome the arrangement signed on
23 November by Myanmar and Bangladesh for the
return of displaced persons who had fled Rakhine
state to Bangladesh. We hope that the return process
will be implemented steadily, in accordance with
the arrangement, and that their safe, voluntary and
dignified return will be achieved. We also welcome
the establishment by the Government of Myanmar of
the Union Enterprise Mechanism for Humanitarian
Assistance, Resettlement and Development in Rakhine,
and its efforts to facilitate humanitarian assistance,
as well as the return of displaced persons and the
restoration of peace to the affected communities. Japan
is ready to further support Bangladesh and Myanmar
in moving those efforts forward in order to improve the
situation on the ground.
The international community should continue to
closely follow the situation in Rakhine state and support
the efforts of the Government of Myanmar in seeking
long-term solutions, including the implementation of
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, chaired by Kofi Annan, to address the
root causes of this issue.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Myanmar.
Mr. Suan (Myanmar): My delegation thanks UnderSecretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing this
afternoon on developments in Rakhine state since the
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22 on
6 November. Mr. Feltman has reflected in his briefing
the efforts of the Government of Myanmar in response

17-4374919/24

S/PV.8133

The situation in Myanmar

to the challenges the country is facing with regard to
Rakhine state. We appreciate the constructive approach
to our engagement adopted by the Secretary-General.
We will continue to cooperate with the United Nations
in our efforts to alleviate the current humanitarian
problems and to achieve our objective of a sustainable
solution to the protracted issue of Rakhine state.
My delegation also welcomes the presence in the
Council today of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten. The Government of Myanmar
has accommodated the proposed visit to Myanmar by
Ms. Patten from 14 to 17 December, in demonstration of
our genuine desire to work with the United Nations and
our faith in the United Nations system. I am confident
that the first official visit of the Special Representative
to Myanmar will produce positive results that will pave
the way for further cooperation between Myanmar and
the United Nations, and in particular with her Office.
With regard to the alleged sexual violence, the
Government of Myanmar has made its position clear
that it will not condone any human rights abuse. If there
is concrete evidence, we are ready to take action against
the transgressor, in accordance with the law, no matter
who or what he is.
The Government of Myanmar has spared no
effort to address the humanitarian, security and
socioeconomic issues that have emerged following the
terror attacks of 25 August by the Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army against security posts in the Maungdaw
district. At the same time, the Government is striving to
achieve sustainable peace, harmony and socioeconomic
development for all communities in the state. Let me
briefly highlight some salient facts on the status of
what the Government of Myanmar has done so far.
With regard to the cessation of violence, there have
been no major clashes with the terrorists reported since
5 September. Moreover, most troops have withdrawn
from the Buthidaung-Maungdaw region. Public security
and the maintenance of law and order have been taken
over by the Myanmar police force. In order to establish
the rule of law and sustain peace and security, the
police force in Rakhine will be strengthened. The
Government of Japan has accepted the request of
Myanmar to provide community-policing training to
Myanmar police personnel in Rakhine state.
With regard to humanitarian assistance, the Red
Cross Movement is operating in Rakhine state to
20/24

12/12/2017

address the urgent need for humanitarian assistance
in affected areas, following the violence that broke
out on 25 August. As of 26 November, the Red Cross
Movement had reached out to over 29,000 households
in Rakhine state. Apart from emergency items, the
Movement is also providing health-care services to
the affected communities. Mobile clinics and health
facilities have been deployed. Thousands of people
have also been provided with cash assistance. The
Association of Southeast Asian Nations Coordinating
Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster
Management is also working with the Government
of Myanmar and the Red Cross Movement to deliver
humanitarian assistance. The Thai and Philippines Red
Cross will soon be joining the Red Cross Movement in
aid delivery.
The Union Government, in collaboration with the
Rakhine state authorities, is trying to find ways and
means for the United Nations agencies and international
organizations to resume their activities in the region.
In the meantime, the World Food Programme (WFP)
is delivering food assistance to Rathedaung township,
including the five remaining Muslim villages. In
late October, the WFP was granted permission to
restart its food distribution in the Maungdaw and
Buthidaung townships. Moreover, the World Health
Organization is also providing medical support that is
being channelled through the Ministry of Health and
Sports. A youth humanitarian coordination group has
been formed with youth volunteers from across the
country in order to efficiently distribute humanitarian
aid to all of the affected communities.
Regarding repatriation, on 23 November Myanmar
and Bangladesh signed an agreement on an arrangement
for the voluntary, safe and dignified return of
displaced persons from Rakhine state. According to
the arrangement, a joint working group will be formed
within three weeks of the signing. We have now
agreed to meet in Dhaka on 19 December in order to
finalize the terms of reference and establish the joint
working group. After the formation of the joint working
group, the repatriation process will start within two
months from the date of signing the agreement on the
repatriation arrangement.
Two reception centres, at Taung Pyo Lat Wel and
Nga Khu Ya, near the border, and a drop-in centre have
already been set up. The reception centres will provide
basic services, such as health, water and sanitation,
gender-inclusive security and safety, education and
17-43749

12/12/2017

The situation in Myanmar

transportation to people’s respective places of origin.
Application forms for returnees have been sent
to Bangladesh. The returnees will be temporarily
accomodated in those reception centres, but they will
be resettled in their places of origin or places that are
close by. At the request of the Hindu community in
Myanmar, the Government has asked the Bangladeshi
Government to ensure the early repatriation of more
than 500 Hindu refugees. However, Bangladesh has
indicated its intention to include them in the first batch
of returnees, together with other Muslims.
Regarding the implementation of the recommendation
of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State,
the Government of Myanmar has embraced the
recommendations of the Commission as a road
map to addressing the root causes of the problems
within Rakhine state and achieving sustainable
peace and development for all. The Government is
committed to implementing the recommendations
made by the Advisory Commission, as well as
other recommendations made by the Maungdaw
Region Investigation Commission. To that end, the
ministerial-level committee for implementation of the
recommendations on Rakhine state was formed on
12 September. The ministries concerned have already
started the implementation process in various areas.
The progress of the implementation process is to be
released to the public every four months.
Today, I am pleased to inform members of the
Council that an advisory board to the committee for
implementation of the recommendation on Rakhine
state was formed on 8 December. The advisory board
comprises five well-respected international members
and five members from Myanmar. The advisory board
will give necessary, independent advisory opinions in
order to permit the Committee to effectively implement
the recommendations, in consonance with the situation
on the ground.
The Union Enterprise Mechanism for Humanitarian
Assistance, Resettlement, and Development in Rakhine
was launched in October as a national initiative to
address the issue of Rakhine state following the August
terrorist attacks. The three main tasks of the Uninon
Enterprise, for both the short and the long terms, are
repatriation and the effective provision of humanitarian
aid, the coordination of resettlement and rehabilitation
efforts, and socioeconomic development and durable
peace. The work of the Union Enterprise complements
the work of the committee on the implementation of

S/PV. 8133

the recommendations on Rakhine state. It is working
closely with the private sector and civil society. It
also collaborates with Government organizations at
the union and regional levels. The Union Enterprise
is undertaking infrastructure development and
construction in preparation for the repatriation
process. It is also assisting in the distribution of
humanitarian assistance.
For the long-term development of the region,
the Union Enterprise is encouraging and inviting
investment in order to create jobs and generate income,
thereby upgrading the livelihoods of the people. As
a result, the Maungdaw special economic zone was
recently established in order to boost cross-border
trade with Bangladesh. We welcome international
partners, donor agencies and United Nations entities to
participate in that process.
The Security Council adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/22 on Myanmar on 6 November. Just
barely over a week later, the Third Committee adopted
an almost identical draft resolution, entitled “Situation
of human rights in Myanmar” (A/C.3/72/L.48).
On 5 December, almost exactly a month after the
presidential statement was adopted, the special session
of the Human Rights Council in Geneva adopted by
a vote resolution S-27/1, entitled “Situation of human
rights of Rohingya Muslims and other minorities
in Myanmar”.
We have stated in unequivocal terms our objection
to the discriminatory and selective application of
overlapping actions against my country in the name of
human rights under various United Nations mechanisms.
The pattern of exerting undue political pressure and
coercive measures will not achieve any positive results.
Moreover, the expressions “ethnic cleansing” and
“crimes against humanity” should not be used lightly
without concrete evidence and a conclusive legal
judgment. We have serious doubts about the attitude of
some members of the Council that repeatedly refuse to
even call my country by its proper name. Such arrogant
behaviour, coupled with a hostile mentality, will not
contribute to constructive cooperation.
Notwithstanding all of that, as a responsible State
Member of the United Nations, Myanmar has never
failed to maintain its relationship with the United
Nations. We always choose the path of engagement
and cooperation, based on mutual understanding and
mutual respect. My delegation is working closely and

17-4374921/24

S/PV.8133

The situation in Myanmar

in good faith with the members of the Council and the
Secretariat to establish a constructive partnership in our
common quest for peace, reconciliation and sustainable
development in Rakhine state. We will continue to do
so in the spirit of cooperation.
On behalf of the Government of Myanmar, I would
like to express our sincere appreciations to the members
of the Council that have demonstrated an understanding
of the complex challenges that we are facing today. We
believe that mutual understanding and constructive
cooperation will only bring about positive results.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the Council
for giving Bangladesh the opportunity to make a
statement. We thank the Under-Secretary-General and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict for their respective
briefings and recommendations.
Presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22 of 6 November
urged Bangladesh to continue to provide shelter and
humanitarian assistance to those who continue to
flee violence in Myanmar’s Rakhine state until they
can return voluntarily and in conditions of safety and
dignity to their homes in Myanmar, with due regard
for the principle of non-refoulement. We made a pledge
to the Council that we would continue to honour our
commitment to that effect.
To date, Bangladesh continues to receive fresh
arrivals of Rohingya, with a daily average of 100-400
people. According to the latest update of the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group operating on the ground, the total
number of arrivals in Bangladesh has reached 646,000
since 25 August. That number continues to rise. Last
week in the General Assembly, we talked about the
humanitarian situation (see A/72/PV.69). The dire
situation of displaced people is perhaps evident from the
hundreds of thousands of children who had to receive
measles and rubella vaccination and were administered
life-saving nutritional packages. Our authorities are in
a race against time to prevent a cholera outbreak and the
spread of diphtheria, which had long been eliminated
in Bangladesh.
Many of the fresh arrivals are taking place due
to alleged coercion to accept national verification
documents that designate the Rohingya as Bengalis.
We remain concerned over recurrent reports of
22/24

12/12/2017

arson in Rohingya localities in northern and central
Rakhine state, which belie the claims of normalcy and
stabilization in the area. We urge the United Nations
and its partners to keep a close watch on the volatile
situation in central Rakhine state so as to prevent further
possible outbreaks of violence against the Rohingya,
who are mostly confined to internally displaced person
camps in the area.
As has been mentioned, in pursuance of our
bilateral engagement, on 23 November Bangladesh
and Myanmar signed an arrangement on the return of
displaced persons from Rakhine state. We consider
that document to be a critical first step towards the
possibility of ensuring the voluntary repatriation of all
the forcibly displaced people who entered Bangladesh
in the aftermath of the widespread violence in Rakhine
state in October 2016 and August this year. As per the
arrangement, we are currently working with Myanmar
on setting up a joint working group, with clear and
specific terms of reference, towards initiating the
process of repatriation in the third week of January
2018. The Myanmar authorities have agreed to conclude
the repatriation process within a reasonable time, with
the assurance that the returnees will be settled in
temporary shelters for a brief period of time.
The arrangement also states that the returnees
should be rehabilitated in their original place of abode
or in places close by. It further states that Myanmar will
issue national verification documents to the returnees
upon their return. That should, however, be dealt
with separately from the verification to be conducted
to facilitate their return in the first place. We believe
that the Myanmar authorities have taken due note of
the various concerns raised by different quarters with
regard to all those provisions. We take this opportunity
to reiterate some of those concerns from our perspective,
as a party to the bilateral arrangement.
First, the provision for concluding repatriation
within a reasonable time must not be taken as a license
to prolong the process over an indefinite period. Our
concerns in that regard are further reinforced by the
initial plans for return and rehabilitation that were
unveiled last week by the Union Enterprise Mechanism
for Humanitarian Assistance, Resettlement and
Development in Rakhine, and also shared by the State
media in Myanmar. Given the number of facilities being
created for the reception of returnees and their capacity
to manage caseloads per week, it would take decades
17-43749

12/12/2017

The situation in Myanmar

to conclude the repatriation of nearly 650,000 people.
That would be an untenable situation, to say the least.
Secondly, not only is the number of houses
reportedly being rebuilt or constructed by the Union
Enterprise in particular townships insignificant
compared to actual needs, but the Union also has a
very small portion of those earmarked for the majorityMuslim population in those areas. There is scope for
drawing various inferences from those small numbers
about the actual possibility of repatriating the entire
forcibly displaced population. However, in the interest
of good-faith engagement, we wish to refrain from
drawing such conclusions at this point.
There have also been widespread concerns over
the possibility of maintaining the status quo with
temporary shelters, as seen in central Rakhine state.
The Union Enterprise does not appear to have clear
contingency plans to address such concerns, including
on the scope for involving relevant United Nations
agencies and other partners in the rehabilitation and
reintegration process.
Thirdly, the imposition of national verification that
denies the Rohingya of their historically grounded selfidentity has been one of the main reasons for the recent
violence and atrocities in Rakhine state. According to
reports, the Myanmar authorities continue to pursue
divisive policies to convince certain sections of the
Muslims to accept national verification documents that
designate them as Bengalis. Such policies run counter
to the recommendation of the Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State, chaired by Mr. Kofi Annan, and
need to be pragmatically reviewed by the Myanmar
authorities in order to put an end to the State policy of
treating the Rohingya as illegal immigrants and, hence,
non-citizens.
Fourthly, the verification to be conducted prior
to return must factor in the total dehumanization,
dispossession and disenfranchisement of the Rohingya,
and all the more so because they fled their homes
without any documents or evidence in support of their
residency in Rakhine state. It would be expected of
the Myanmar authorities to apply clear criteria to and
modalities for verification of the Rohingya and other
communities without undue discrimination. We also
remain concerned over the lack of efforts to address the
hate speech that continues to be propagated by certain
segments of the local population in Rakhine state
and elsewhere.

S/PV. 8133

These concerns make it evident that the signing
of a bilateral arrangement for repatriation does not
guarantee that the displaced persons will be able
to sustainably return within a reasonable time in
conditions of safety and security. As a matter of fact,
the bilateral repatriation arrangement is rather limited
in its scope and is not perhaps expected to address the
root causes of a protracted crisis that has led to what
has been termed a “text book case of ethnic cleansing”.
Even if the arrangement were complied with in good
faith, it would not necessarily ensure that the returnees
would find the situation conducive to their stay in the
medium-to-long term. Bangladesh continues to make
efforts to ensure the participation of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in the repatriation, rehabilitation and
reintegration process.
In response to Myanmar’s commitment to implementing
the Kofi Annan Commission’s recommendations, we
continue to see the creation of various commissions and
committees, with multiple subcommittees and various
responsibilities. It remains to be seen how the Myanmar
authorities will manage to navigate the labyrinth of those
commissions, committees and their recommendations
to deliver meaningful and tangible results so as to
make a real difference on the ground in Rakhine state.
Humanitarian agencies are yet to be granted unfettered
and sustained access to all the affected populations in
order to independently assess their needs and provide
comprehensive assistance and protection. Despite
the limited access granted to non-international staff
of the World Food Programme, other international
humanitarian actors, including UNHCR, which has
staff based in Maungdaw and Sittwe, face restrictions
in their movements. Once again, such restrictions do
not speak of positive developments on the ground and
cannot be addressed through bilateral efforts.
The Secretary General’s Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict observed in her briefing
that all the women and girls she had interacted with in
Bangladesh demanded justice for the inhumane torture
and brutalities that they had been subjected to. The
United Nations fact-finding mission continues to be
denied access by Myanmar, even after it put forward
a constructive proposal for gathering a group of
interlocutors from concerned entities of the Government
to engage with them in a transparent manner. Against
that backdrop, the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, in his statement in the Human Rights Council

17-4374923/24

S/PV.8133

The situation in Myanmar

on 5 December, suggested the possibility of setting up
an independent and impartial investigation mechanism
by the General Assembly, complementary to the work
of the fact-finding mission.
In tandem with the presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/22, at its current session the Third
Committee adopted draft resolution A./C.3/72/L.48,
mandating the Secretary-General to appoint a special
envoy on the overall situation in Myanmar. In view of
the broader scope of the special envoy’s mandate, we
believe that the Council would be in a position to gain
a first-hand impression and an analytical perspective
concerning realities on the ground in Myanmar,
particularly in Rakhine state, from such a political
mission. It will ne critical to ensure that the Myanmar
authorities engage with the special envoy in good faith.
As we have previously said in the Council,
whatever momentum we see in our bilateral engagement
with Myanmar has been the result of widespread
international outcry and engagement over the latest
violence and atrocities committed in Rakhine state. We
urge the Council to act as the custodian of the bilateral
process, and, if we may add, of the rights and protection
of the Rohingya as the most persecuted people on earth.
The latest arrangement signed between Bangladesh
and Myanmar has made it clear that there is only so much
we can do for the Rohingya, whose voices and concerns

24/24

12/12/2017

must not be lost in the bilateral process. It is critical
that the Council remain seized with the Rohingya issue
at regular intervals in the months to come. We align
ourselves with the Special Representative in our call to
consider the adoption of a Security Council resolution.
We also reiterate our invitation to the Council to visit
Bangladesh and, if possible, Myanmar, to witness the
grave situation.
I wish to conclude by repeating the powerful words
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights:
“Refusal by international as well as local actors
to even name the Rohingyas as Rohingyas — to
recognize them as a community and respect their right
to self-identification — is yet another humiliation,
and it creates a shameful paradox: they are denied
a name while being targeted for being who they
are. The Rohingya have been physically attacked,
oppressed, deprived of nationality and rights.
How much do people have to endure before their
suffering is acknowledged and their identity and
rights are recognized by their Government and by
the world?”
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

17-43749
