United Nations

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6411

th meeting
Tuesday, 26 October 2010, 3.25 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rugunda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uganda)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lutterotti
Mr. Durmić
Mr. Vargas
Mr. Pan Jingyu
Mr. Bonne
Mrs. Onanga
Mr. Teruuchi
Mr. Ramadan
Mr. De Léon Huerta
Mr. Edokpa
Ms. Eloeva
Ms. Dinç
Mr. Green
Mr. Grant

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2010/498)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-60385 (E)

*1060385*

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.25 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than five minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. I shall now invite the State Secretary for
Foreign Affairs of Sweden, His Excellency Mr. Frank
Belfrage, to take the floor.
Mr. Belfrage (Sweden): I would like to start by
thanking the Republic of Uganda for ensuring that the
10-year anniversary of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) has been given a very prominent part of
this month’s Security Council agenda. And I would
also like to align Sweden with the statement of the
European Union to be delivered later today.
During the ministerial meeting on Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) — a call to action — a
month ago, Governments from all corners of the world
demonstrated their support and their conviction that
women have a central role to play in achieving durable
peace in conflict regions. So far, some 20 countries
have adopted national action plans on resolution 1325
(2000), and we were happy to note the intention of
many more countries to adopt and implement such
plans. We heard inspiring examples of transnational
cooperation in sharing experience and knowledge with
those whose plans are still in progress. Many of us also
emphasized the importance of including civil society
and women’s groups in such processes and other work.
Four years ago, Sweden presented its first
national action plan on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Today we are in the process of
implementing our second national action plan, for the
period 2009-2012. It permeates our security and
development policies and makes resolution 1325 (2000)
a special focus in our contribution to crisis
management, in our humanitarian assistance and in our
development cooperation with countries in conflict and
post-conflict situations. A concrete example is the
upcoming appointment of a special ambassador-atlarge in Sweden for the work of implementing
resolution 1325 (2000).
Other concrete examples from the field include
the Sudan, where Sweden is contributing some
45 million Swedish kronor — around €4.5 million —
via the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) to a variety of organizations promoting
women’s role and participation. Sweden also

2

contributes to UNIFEM in Afghanistan, with some 62
million Swedish kronor — just above €6 million —
including for support for the Afghan national action
plan for women. Additional contributions are directed
to the Swedish Committee for Afghanistan and its
programmes for girls. We have also been active in
strengthening the gender perspective in European
Union (EU) crisis management policy and operations,
for example by sending gender advisers/focal points to
EU missions in Kosovo, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Georgia.
We welcome the Security Council’s request to the
Secretary-General to provide a single coherent
framework based on the set of indicators aimed at
tracking the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
It is time, we feel, to make sure that we, the Member
States, can be held accountable for our commitments.
Sweden welcomes the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN
Women), and we congratulate its first Executive
Director, Ms. Michelle Bachelet. Sweden will support
her efforts in a substantial manner, both financially and
politically.
Civil society and the participation of women’s
groups play an important role. Women’s groups help
empower women so that the voices of women in
conflict areas are heard and can influence the work to
achieve peace. They conduct research on women’s role
in conflict, they alert us to tragedies, they report to us
on progress and they provide expertise. Sweden is
grateful for the valuable work of such groups and
acknowledges the need for wider cooperation with civil
society at all levels. We would encourage UN Women
to show the leadership necessary to facilitate the wide
inclusion of women’s organizations in the work of the
United Nations in our collective ambition to achieve
durable peace and equitable and sustainable global
development.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/498)
shows once again that enhancing women’s
participation is an efficient method for achieving
security and development for local communities as a
whole. And, given the importance of having women in
leading positions, we would strongly encourage the
appointment of more women Special Representatives
and deputy heads of mission. We welcome the targeted
efforts to train and deploy more female mediators. We
welcome the efforts of the senior Police Adviser of the

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

Department of Peacekeeping Operations, including her
determination to increase the number of female police
officers in peace keeping operations, since this also
responds to operational needs on the ground. Sweden is
committed to continuing to sustain at least the same
proportion of female police officers in peacekeeping
operations as in its National Police Service.
Finally, I would also like to emphasize the work
being done by Ms. Margot Wallström, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and her Office. The Special
Representative’s work is of outstanding importance,
and the results in the next few years will be an
important indicator of the international community’s
ability to address the structural violence that is directed
towards women.
The President: I now invite Her Excellency
Mrs. Aloysia Inyumba, Senator of the Republic of
Rwanda, to take the floor.
Ms. Inyumba (Rwanda): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting and for
giving my delegation the opportunity to participate in
this debate, as we mark the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000). I also welcome the report of
the Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2010/498) and endorse the recommendations in that
report. The Rwandan delegation aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the Minister of International
Cooperation of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
The Rwandan Government officially launched, on
May 17th this year, a national action plan on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) for the period 2009-2012. The development of
this action plan started with a baseline study which
highlighted tremendous contribution that Rwandan
women have made to peace, security, justice and
reconciliation since the genocide of 1994, together
with current challenges facing women in conflict
management. This process was carried out in a very
participatory way. Our country has a national steering
committee chaired by the Ministry of Gender and
Family Promotion, with the participation of the
Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Defence and Security,
the private sector, civil society and United Nations
agencies. I would say that the process in my country
has been very participatory and very engaged.

10-60385

Our action plan has a number of major
components. The first is our commitment to the
prevention of violence and conflict. Our national
programme commits us to dissemination of national
and international laws dealing with women, the
revision of all discriminatory laws and the
identification of all existing discriminatory practices
and adoption of strategies to address these challenges.
We have also begun the ratification of international
laws and conventions, and we are in fact in the process
of domesticating those laws.
Also in our action plan we have a specific chapter
on the protection and rehabilitation of victims. We
have started to establish gender-based violence centres
at the grass-roots level throughout the country, and we
initiated a law on prevention and punishment of
gender-based violence, which was passed in 2009. It
includes penalties and substantive mechanisms to
empower the national police, the Ministry of Defence
and other security agencies to contribute to
stabilization and to ensuring that women are protected
in conflict. In Rwanda we also have gender desks in all
departments. Specifically, we emphasize training for
all personnel involved with the issue of gender-based
violence in our country. We have also initiated an
action plan and an awareness and training programme
especially for our peacekeeping forces that go to
Darfur. Other than the general mandate that they have
as part of a peacekeeping mission, they also have a
special objective of ensuring that women and refugees
in the Sudan are protected.
Last week, my country deployed a delegation of
90 women police officers to the Sudan as
reinforcements for their brothers there and ensure that
they promote best practices, from which Rwandan
women have also benefited. It is in the context of the
high-level International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region that we have today begun in my country an
international conference, chaired by our President, on
the role of security organs as part of the celebration of
the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000).
In line with our action plan and with the
reinforcement of women’s participation in decisionmaking organs relating to peace and security, I am
proud to say that we have advanced in terms of
women’s participation, with a high level of
representation of women in parliament — 56 per cent.
This extends into the lower echelons such as local
government, the judiciary and the private sector. The

3

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

action plan in our country also promotes
peacebuilding, especially bearing in mind that, with
our experience in conflict management in a postgenocide situation, we have a lot to offer the region.
We remain firmly committed, and we will
continue to play an important role at the national,
subregional and global level in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). We recently established a
successful structure called the Women’s Forum of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
whose sole mandate is to ensure that resolution 1325
(2000) is fully embraced in the region and that all
women from the 11 countries of the Great Lakes region
benefit from it and share their experiences in the
region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
appreciates the opportunity to participate in and mark
the anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) and thanks those involved, particularly Uganda,
for organizing this debate.
Throughout those 10 years of conflict, peace,
destruction, reconstruction and change, women and
girls have been the most affected, although I think we
would also say that in those 10 years there have also
been some significant advances. Some women and girls
have benefited from greater involvement in peace
processes, greater representation in key decisionmaking positions and a stronger focus on the
prevention of violence. There have been major
institutional achievements. For example, New Zealand
strongly supported the establishment of UN Women,
with Michelle Bachelet at its head, and we look to that
organization to demonstrate leadership, including on
this issue.
The past 10 years have also demonstrated that
much still needs to be done. Rape is still used as a tool
of war, as was recently and horrifically demonstrated
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Women are
still excluded from or not adequately represented in
peace processes, their rights are curtailed and, all too
often, they lack or are denied access to humanitarian
and development assistance. Full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) is needed to address those
deficiencies.

4

New Zealand agrees with the Secretary-General’s
conclusion that the main factor impeding full
implementation is the lack of a clearly framed, single,
coordinated approach, complemented by meaningful
indicators to track progress. There are many concrete
ways to develop such a framework. In addition to those
already mentioned by the Minister of International
Cooperation of Canada on behalf of the Friends of
Women, Peace and Security, I will highlight just two
that New Zealand considers particularly important.
First, because implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) is difficult to measure, we call on the Council to
endorse and utilize the indicators outlined in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/498). Some still
require development, but that is best achieved through
implementation, tracking and continued close
engagement with civil society. And, by themselves, the
indicators are not enough; the information they yield
must then be analysed and incorporated into the
Council’s work. Given its expertise, UN Women will
be well placed to lead this analysis, but it must also be
able to interact regularly and directly with the Security
Council.
Secondly, while there have been excellent policy
developments on resolution 1325 (2000), they have
rarely been translated into action on the ground. To
ensure more action, the Security Council could better
incorporate 1325 issues into its daily work, for
example, when it discusses country situations,
peacekeeping mandates or sanctions, or when it holds
Arria Formula meetings. Further, an effective
leadership system within the Council could be
developed to ensure that 1325 issues are regularly
integrated into the Council’s work. Given the churn of
non-permanent members, that responsibility could be
jointly shared by a permanent and a non-permanent
Council member. Better integration of 1325 issues does
not just feel or sound good: it makes practical sense.
Involving women in peace processes, stopping sexual
and gender-based violence and guaranteeing the
protection of women’s rights will better ensure a
lasting peace, which will, in turn, improve the
Council’s ability to maintain international peace and
security.
Member States also have responsibilities for the
implementation of 1325 (2000) nationally and within
their regions. Women constitute up to 30 per cent of
New Zealand’s contribution to United Nations and
United Nations-mandated peace missions — among the

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

highest rates in the world. The New Zealand Defence
Force pursues a diversity strategy that values the full
integration of women, including at senior levels.
New Zealand’s region is the Pacific, where
women are playing critical roles in brokering and
maintaining peace in places such as Bougainville,
Solomon Islands, Fiji and Timor-Leste. Despite their
important role, however, women remain marginalized
from
formal
negotiations,
are
seriously
underrepresented
in
national
decision-making
processes and are still vulnerable to domestic violence.
As well as raising awareness of resolution 1325 (2000)
in the Pacific, New Zealand’s aid programme identifies
women and girls as a priority group for attention,
supports initiatives to mitigate the exposure of women
and girls to violence and specifically includes the need
to support the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Elsewhere, New Zealand’s Provincial
Reconstruction Team in Bamyan, Afghanistan, has
several initiatives to ensure the full participation of
women in our Provincial Reconstruction Team and in
the Afghan National Security Forces which the Team
supports. Likewise, in Timor-Leste, New Zealand is
working with the National Police Force on projects to
address high rates of gender-based violence.
But, like others, New Zealand can still do more,
and it agrees that commitments are required to ensure
the advancement of the 1325 agenda. We therefore
commit to developing a national plan of action on
resolution 1325 (2000). We commit to mainstreaming
issues faced by women with disabilities in our
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We commit
to increasing the number of women in the higher ranks
of our Defence Force and becoming more effective in
retaining women in the Force throughout their careers.
And we commit to working with others in the
Pacific — countries and civil society — to ensure that
resolution 1325 (2000) is better implemented.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I would like to
commend Uganda, as President of the Security
Council, on the initiative to commemorate the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). Allow me also,
Sir, to very warmly greet President Michelle Bachelet,
to congratulate her on her appointment to head UN
Women and to assure her of Portugal’s full support in
her demanding tasks.
Portugal naturally shares the views that will be
expressed by the representative of the European Union
later regarding the implementation of the resolution,
but let me underline some aspects of particular
significance to my country.
As so many before me have said today, resolution
1325 (2000) is a landmark in recognizing the urgent
need to mainstream a gender perspective in the
prevention, management and resolution of armed
conflicts and in all stages of peacebuilding processes.
Portugal believes that important progress has been
accomplished in the implementation of the resolution
and the other important resolutions that have followed.
However, we all recognize that significant
challenges still remain. On the one hand, women are
still underrepresented at all levels of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts and are poorly represented in
formal peace negotiations. On the other hand, violation
of the human rights of women is still a dominant
feature of conflict, and sexual violence is too often
widespread in both conflict and in post-conflict
situations.

We call on others to also make similar concrete
commitments, including on the needs of women with
disabilities: commitments which, when combined with
a more effective approach by the Council, will ensure
full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

It is our shared understanding that women are
indispensable actors of change and development.
Therefore, it is fundamental to overcome the traditional
view of those actors as mere vulnerable victims in need
of protection and to implement measures that guarantee
that their perspective is taken into account at all stages
of peacebuilding processes by the international and
local actors involved. Indeed, women have a crucial
role to play in rebuilding war-torn societies and in
promoting social cohesion.

That, in turn, will mean that, as Governments
come and go and as conflicts break out and abate,
women and girls are protected and can fully participate
in the promotion and maintenance of peace and
security.

In that context, we should seize this opportunity
to reaffirm our commitment to ensuring women’s
effective participation in peace and security and to
translate that commitment into enhanced action. This
open debate of the Security Council and the many side

10-60385

5

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

events that are taking place this week are an excellent
opportunity to review the progress achieved in
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), to recognize
our main achievements but also our shortcomings, and
to discuss how we can boost its impact on the ground.

As I have stressed before, Portugal remains
available to engage with the United Nations and other
international actors in sharing experiences and good
practices that allow us to move forward in this decisive
area.

Portugal will certainly continue to pursue the
objectives set out in the resolution and to increase its
own accountability. We stand ready to contribute to
that process in the forthcoming months in the Security
Council. In that area, as in many others, the
international community has to move in a concerted
way with an integrated approach.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.

Portugal strongly believes that national action
plans constitute an important mechanism to accelerate
progress in implementing resolution 1325 (2000). A
year ago, we adopted a national action plan that
encompasses our commitment to its implementation
and corresponds to the consolidation of a gender
perspective in national politics. Under that action plan,
we have established five main strategic objectives,
translated into 30 specific objectives, for which
implementation,
monitoring
and
evaluation
mechanisms have been identified and developed.
The first of the five main objectives is to increase
women’s participation and to mainstream gender
equality in all phases of peacebuilding processes and at
all levels of decision-making. The second is to promote
capacity-building for those involved in peacebuilding
and development aid efforts with regard to gender
equality and gender-based violence, as well as other
aspects covered by resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008).
The third objective is to promote and protect
women’s human rights in conflict areas and in postconflict scenarios, taking into consideration the need,
on the one hand, to prevent and eliminate all genderbased violence perpetrated against women and girls
and, on the other, to promote the empowerment of
women, both politically and economically, and their
participation in all post-conflict activities.
The fourth objective is to invest in and
disseminate knowledge on issues concerning women
and peace and security, including training and
awareness-raising actions among decision makers and
the broader public. The final objective is to promote
the active participation of civil society in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and in the
national action plan.

6

Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me first of all thank
you, Mr. President, for giving today’s subject such a
prominent and fitting place on the Security Council’s
agenda this month.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union
later in the debate.
As a member of the Group of Friends of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), Germany attaches
great importance indeed to the issue of women and
peace and security. We therefore commend the
Secretary-General for his very comprehensive and
substantial report (S/2010/498), especially his clear
and
action-oriented
recommendations
on
the
implementation of the resolution. We fully share his
analysis with regard to the gaps that still exist and the
need to introduce indicators and an adequate
monitoring mechanism. That will enable us not only to
measure progress, but also to ensure that all aspects of
resolution 1325 (2000) are adequately addressed.
The protection of women and their participation
in all parts of society are two sides of the same coin.
Resolution 1325 (2000) clearly stipulates that women
must be seen as active players whose contributions in
all aspects of peacebuilding and peacekeeping
processes are absolutely essential for the reconstruction
of societies and in achieving sustainable peace and
development.
Empowering women is important in security
sector reform, as well as in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes. Germany
therefore also welcomes the action plan contained in
the Secretary-General’s report on resolution 1889
(2009) (S/2010/466), including the call for increased
financing for gender equality and women’s
empowerment in countries emerging from conflict.
It is time to move towards more concrete action.
What can Member States and the United Nations as a
whole do?

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

Starting with my own country, the German
Government
will
shortly
present
its
third
implementation report on resolution 1325 (2000) to
Parliament. While striving for the full and timely
implementation of the entire resolution, looking ahead,
priority will be given to, first, increased participation
of women in national, regional and international
institutions and mechanisms, particularly in higher
positions; secondly, to financial and technical support
for
United
Nations
gender-awareness-raising
campaigns; thirdly, a gender perspective during and
after the negotiation of peace agreements; and fourthly,
the special needs of women combatants in
demobilization and reintegration processes.
To achieve progress in those areas, Germany will
set up a list of national and international priority
initiatives. We will also continue to support
international organizations and non-governmental
organizations in promoting women’s empowerment.
We are of the opinion that partnerships between
Member States and the United Nations are crucial. The
United Nations police standardized training curriculum
on investigating and preventing sexual and genderbased violence, organized by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and funded by my country, is
but one example. In several seminars, women police
officers from all parts of the world can come together,
share their experiences and work out a concept of how
to better prevent abhorrent crimes of that nature from
happening in the future. Besides actions being
undertaken by Member States, the United Nations as a
whole has an important role to play in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
As in other areas, delivering as one should form
the leitmotiv for United Nations action. All relevant
United Nations entities should work together closely in
order to guarantee that the available resources are
effectively channelled and measured against the
indicators proposed in the Secretary-General’s report.
The setting up of an efficient monitoring system that
measures progress achieved for women on the ground
is also essential. In this context, Germany welcomes
the creation of the new gender entity UN Women,
which should play a leading role in this regard. The
new Under-Secretary-General, Ms. Bachelet, whom we
warmly congratulate, has our fullest support for the
challenging task lying ahead of her.

10-60385

I am confident that with the realization of all the
commitments made today, we can and, we hope, will
achieve real progress in meeting the challenges ahead
of us.
The President: I call on the representative of
Chile.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security and the
statement that will be made by the representative of
Costa Rica on behalf of the Human Security Network.
The year 2010 is a year for taking stock of
progress in the human rights of women and in gender
equality. We are commemorating the fifteenth
anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on
Women, held in Beijing in 1995, and its Platform for
Action, as well as the tenth anniversary of the
Millennium Declaration (General Assembly resolution
55/2) and of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security. In our hemisphere, the Organization
of American States is marking the Inter-American Year
of Women, under that banner “Women and power:
towards a world of equality”.
My Government attaches great importance to this
issue and to the difficult situation created by modern
conflicts, in which women and children are most
affected by the degradation of their living conditions
and fundamental rights. We are therefore particularly
grateful to you, Sir, for having convened this debate at
an opportune moment for evaluating progress and
dealing with pending issues. Among those is the
implementation of this important instrument, which
Chile has always supported together with its
complementary resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009)
and 1889 (2009). In our view, this implementation will
be effective only if we undertake to ensure that this
decade is focused on action and accountability in the
areas of prevention, participation and protection.
Accordingly, we welcome the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/498) and its annex
containing indicators for a preliminary road map,
which we will have to carefully improve after
consultations with Member States and on the basis of
information they provide. In this connection, we
believe that the questionnaire-based consultations
conducted by the United Nations Development Fund
for Women — part of UN Women — represent an

7

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

important innovation in the matter of accountability.
Our country is in a position to issue a national report
on this matter next year, on the understanding that our
country’s commitment will strengthen support for the
report.
Women’s participation in peace negotiations has
been limited to less than 10 per cent. We therefore
strongly advocate the inclusion of women in the
negotiation processes and the compilation of reliable
statistics on the subject, in line with the indicators
proposed by the Secretary-General, as well as women’s
organizational processes and the training of women as
negotiators using, inter alia, mechanisms available in
the system and cooperation initiatives for the training
of women in this area. We also emphasize the need for
greater gender mainstreaming in the system, in
accordance with Economic and Social Council
resolution 2009/12, entitled “Mainstreaming a gender
perspective into all policies and programmes in the
United Nations system”, which Chile facilitated. This
should be accompanied by a mainstreaming of
resolution 1325 (2000) nationally and internationally.
As stated by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Chile at the ministerial event entitled “A 1325 Call to
Action”, held here at Headquarters in September,
Chile’s ongoing foreign policy commitment to
peacekeeping operations has resulted in the
introduction into its national policy of the formulation
of new approaches such as that in resolution 1325
(2000), emphasizing the participation of women in
peace and security efforts. Our commitment is reflected
in the adoption of a national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It is the
only such measure adopted in our region, and it
concentrates on three major areas.
First, in the area of foreign affairs, although the
Foreign Ministry clearly bears primary responsibility
for the implementation of this plan, we are taking the
initiative of adopting a cross-cutting approach,
incorporating it into our domestic policy. For example,
domestically we are adopting gender-sensitive policies
in staff recruitment, and externally we have shown our
commitment to international humanitarian law through
support for the adoption of the Ottawa Convention and
the Convention on Cluster Munitions.
Secondly, concerning the role of our defence
institutions, these institutions participated actively
through working groups in the drafting of the plan.

8

Most of the commitments made in this area are now
being fulfilled. The review of the curricula of the
various educational establishments, the compilation of
gender-disaggregated statistics and the inclusion of
more women in peacekeeping operations are examples
of activities included in the plan and that reflect the
contribution of the defence sector.
The action plan’s third focus is civil society. One
of the key aspects of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) was the inclusion of civil society in the
public process of launching this initiative — not as a
mere spectator or recipient of the final result, but as an
active party. Furthermore, the plan resulted in the
acceptance of the proposal to create an observatory of
mixed membership, made up of public agencies and
civil society bodies, with the task of participating in
the process of accountability subsequent to the
publication of the plan. We therefore believe that an
element of vital importance in the implementation
process will be the compilation of statistics to measure
how well the mechanism is working. In our view,
although there are few measurable examples, speedy
action must be taken to allow quantitative and
qualitative evaluation of the results of women’s
participation in the processes.
On the subject of regional challenges, we believe
that, with over 6,000 men and women of the armed
forces of Latin America and the Caribbean currently
participating in peacekeeping operations around the
world, the time has come to involve the majority of
countries of the region in the challenge of
implementing this resolution. In this scenario, we see
new
possibilities
for
South-South
triangular
cooperation.
In this the inaugural year of UN Women, led by
former President of Chile Michelle Bachelet; five years
after the 2005 World Summit; 10 years after the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000); 15 years after
Beijing; over 30 years since the adoption of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women; and 35 years after the
first World Conference on Women in Mexico City,
Chile reiterates its strong commitment to women’s
human rights and their full and equal integration into
society.
The President: I give
representative of Honduras.

the

floor

to

the

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

Ms. Flores (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is grateful for the opportunity to participate
in this open debate of the Security Council on the
contribution of women to international peace and
security. We acknowledge the visionary work of the
Council and its members, aimed at enhancing the
principles of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
empowerment of women. We are pleased with the new
gender entity, UN Women, under the leadership of a
distinguished stateswoman, Michelle Bachelet. The
Secretary-General has also shown an excellent example
in incorporating women into the upper management of
the Organization, and I reiterate our commitment to
cooperation and support for all.
For reasons that have been extensively studied
and debated through the ages, women and children
have always been the vast majority of the innocent
victims of violence and armed conflict. The irony
remains that these victims, the most vulnerable and
most affected, emerge from their precarious condition
of fragility to provide great consolation in times of
anguish, to be healers of suffering and to help mitigate
the torments caused by ruthless violence in all its
manifestations.
Due to the very nature of their being, women,
from birth, learn to be peacemakers and negotiators in
conflicts. This is the task that they carry out entirely
naturally within the bosom of their families, and by
virtue of their innate abilities as catalysts of
agreements in the intimacy of their homes and in the
most complex situations. We have seen them acting as
mediators in hostilities, as bridges to overcome
differences and as intermediaries in serious disputes.
Women listen with their feelings. Through the
healing of the heart and the balm of emotion, they can
reach the soul to cure wounds, where medicine
stumbles and science fails. Sometimes relief comes
more from soothing the affliction than from treatment
of an actual physical injury, just as a mother puts her
child to sleep with the mellifluous whisper of her voice
and the soft caresses of her love, women soothe pain
with only the breath of their serene words and their
tranquil presence.
There is no doubt that in armed conflict valiant,
exceptional and extraordinary attitudes produce heroes.
But just as there are heroic acts forged in the heat of
battle, there are also those forged in the battle for life,
in times of peace, exemplary conduct that contributes

10-60385

to peace. Undoubtedly to those heroic feats of war we
can attach well-known names, like medals for honour
and bravery, but there are also many names of those
unknown people who perform epic deeds in peacetime,
which, owing solely to their numbers, remain shrouded
in the deepest silence.
I come from one of those small nations, as the
poet has said, where our history could be written in a
teardrop, and I can vouch for this second type of
heroism. For example, those self-sacrificing mothers in
my homeland, bearing the cross of poverty on their
shoulders, with no companionship other than their
solitude and the burden of their responsibilities,
support and educate their children, so that they can
achieve their impossible dreams. They are heroines of
peace. There are those dedicated women who, defying
prejudice and defeating the inertia of inequality,
climbed the mountain peak. They are heroines of
peace.
When, in Central America, where I come from,
we passed through the bloody polarization of the
1980s, the women who enlisted in any of these civilian
trenches to aid the destitute, to care for refugees or take
part in the reconstruction of their homeland were,
unquestionably, heroines of peace. When, in my
country, we suffered the impact of a brutal natural
disaster that shattered the geography of our country
into hundreds of pieces, like a jigsaw puzzle, all of
those compatriots and those women who came from
other parts of the world as members of volunteer
missions, to help in that moment of misfortune, to
repair lives, to breathe encouragement to the griefstricken — they were all heroines of peace.
The immigrants who, desperate and hopeless,
leave their beloved homeland, risking everything, even
their lives, to reach a destination that offers a way to
provide for their kin — and who, ironically, with their
remittances, help sustain the sickly economy of the
country from which they fled — they are heroines of
peace. There is no greater contribution than acts of
solidarity, large and small, that brighten the darkness,
that make coexistence easier and lighten the heavy
burden of life. That woman, who is real, who exists
everywhere, and whom we do not see, because we have
become accustomed to her silent, daily, constant and
untiring presence; that stranger who, without
monument or tribute, builds peace every day, because
the cry of suffering, the agony of tribulation, has
neither nationality nor borders.

9

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

I close with the deepest recognition of every
heroic act, but with a feeling of great admiration for all
the heroes and heroines of peace.

UN Women as a vital step in achieving the full
mainstreaming of women and gender issues in this
area.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.

Denmark remains as committed as ever to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). We were the
very first country to adopt an action plan for its
implementation, and we are currently implementing
our second national action plan for 2008 through 2013.
This plan places an even stronger emphasis on using
women’s untapped potential, on involving women
actively and on an equal basis in peacebuilding
processes and decision-making at all levels, and with a
focus on visibility at the country level.

Mr. Staur (Denmark): Allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting,
thereby ensuring that all key actors are engaged in the
vital debate on how to achieve full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and its followup resolutions.
The two recent reports from the SecretaryGeneral on women and peace and security
(S/2010/498) and on women’s participation in
peacebuilding (S/2010/466) point to some of the main
prerequisites
for
ensuring
that
peacemaking,
peacebuilding and long-term planning after conflict
become sustainable through the full participation of
women. The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
has for been inadequate over the past 10 years, but
these two excellent reports, which we fully support,
have made a big step forward by providing sound
analysis and concrete recommendations that are ready
to be implemented.
The remaining piece in the puzzle would seem to
be a single comprehensive framework for the United
Nations system, with clarification of the roles and
responsibilities of the various actors and with clear and
measurable goals, targets and indicators. Obviously,
the newly developed indicators presented in the
Secretary-General’s report should guide not only the
work of the United Nations but also that of Member
States, regional organizations and civil society, all of
whom have equally important roles to play when it
comes to advancing this landmark resolution.
Denmark encourages the efforts aimed at further
consolidating the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture and enhancing system-wide strategies. We
welcome the establishment of UN Women and the
appointment of Ms. Michelle Bachelet as the first
leader of that entity. UN Women must play a key role
in leading the agenda on women and peace and
security, while ensuring close and effective cooperation
with all relevant United Nations actors, such as the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Support Office, as
well as funds and programmes. We see the creation of

10

As part of our international outreach, Denmark
and the United States will co-host an international
conference on the role of women in global security in
Copenhagen later this week. The conference will
gather political, military, business and civil society
leaders and experts to share best practices and discuss
how to expand and effectuate women’s key roles in
peacemaking, peacekeeping and in security-related
activities. The goal of the conference is to help us all
explore new paths to enhancing and improving
women’s vital role in the critical political, military and
economic processes that lead to sustainable peace and
security.
The conference will build on concrete know-how
from a number of countries that are experiencing or
have experienced conflict, including Afghanistan,
Liberia and your own country, Mr. President, Uganda.
One concrete example of how we have chosen to
improve the conditions of women in a conflict zone is
our ongoing work in support of women’s networks and
organizations in Afghanistan. The right of women to
justice, a strengthened rule of law and a strengthened
civil society at the provincial level are all fundamental
tools in combating the negative impacts that armed
conflict has had on women in Afghanistan. The
women’s networks have built the basis on which
women can play an active and constructive part in
addressing the peace, reconciliation and reintegration
process in the country.
Finally, on the eve of the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), we must not give up on the
accomplishments we have made so far. Rather, we
must strive to ensure that the women and peace and
security agenda finally becomes central to the peace
and security debate.

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): I thank the
delegation and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Uganda for convening this special, emotional and very
substantive meeting of the Security Council. Look at
how many Ministers we have here today — even more
than one might have predicted or expected! I already
consider today’s discussion to be a success because of
the participants, especially the high-level participants.
At the outset, I wish to express our warmest
congratulations to the Under-Secretary-General for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women,
Ms. Michelle Bachelet. We are confident that, under
her leadership, attention to women’s issues will take a
quantum leap forward.
The year 2010 marks the tenth anniversary of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), which is a
landmark legal and political framework that
acknowledges the importance of making women’s
participation and gender perspectives an integral part
of peace negotiations, humanitarian planning,
peacekeeping operations, post-conflict peacebuilding
and governance. The successful launch of the Open
Days on Women, Peace and Security under the
auspices of the United Nations in June 2010 in several
countries, followed by the Global Open Day on
Women, Peace and Security at United Nations
Headquarters last week, as well as numerous other
forums, events and activities, brought to light and
dramatically
carried
forward
our
many
accomplishments and the need to move forward from
the resolution to action. This is the moment for critical
assessment and for delineating a road map of action for
the way ahead.
My delegation is committed to realizing the
vision of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions adopted in support of it. We commend the
United Nations, Member States and civil society, and
particularly women themselves, for being the driving
force for the inclusion of a gender perspective in
dealing with peace and security issues and for working
as partners with the United Nations.
While individual success stories are inspiring,
women as a whole remain marginalized in round tables
on mediation, with their needs and voices remaining
unheard. UNIFEM reports that in 24 peace processes
over the past two decades, women comprised less than

10-60385

8 per cent of negotiating teams and made up only 3 per
cent of the signatories of peace agreements. These are
very small ratios, considering that women constitute
50 per cent of the world’s population.
Kazakhstan fully endorses the report of the
Secretary-General on women’s participation in
peacebuilding (S/2010/466), with its steadfast
commitment to accelerating progress toward increasing
the number of women in peace negotiations. We
wholeheartedly support his recommendation to ensure
that at least 15 per cent of United Nations funds for
peacebuilding be dedicated to projects that address the
specific needs of women and girls, advance gender
equality and empower women.
We call not just for adequate financing but also
for judicious fiscal management to ensure resources for
gender training and for supporting non-governmental
organizations and local groups. It is vital that those
groups work with us on issues of food security,
nutrition, health and HIV/AIDS, reproductive health,
education, rehabilitation, repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration, as they deal with women affected by war.
It is unfortunate that, even in my part of the world,
women who carry the burden of the tragedies of
conflict continue to need special attention.
Of major concern for us is the challenge
presented by the very high incidence of sexual violence
in conflict and post-conflict reconstruction phases. Of
the 300 peace agreements signed since the end of the
Cold War, only 18 of them included any mention of
sexual and gender violence. My delegation therefore
strongly supports the request made by Ms. Margot
Wallström, Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict, to obtain additional funding for her
operational work, which would result in bridging the
gap in data collection on sexual violence in the chaos
of war and in the subsequent development of
systematic and rigorous response strategies.
Kazakhstan also welcomes the drafting of a
comprehensive set of indicators aimed at tracking
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
underscores with appreciation the intensive work of the
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women, Ms. Rachel
Mayanja, and her office in developing a more
methodical monitoring system and especially in
condemning rape as a tactic of terror and war.

11

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

My country has great expectations for the future
contribution of UN Women, a newly established entity
of the United Nations family, which will be able to take
the lead in revitalizing ongoing efforts to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), bring about greater United
Nations system-wide coherence and improved
interrelatedness among key United Nations and
regional human rights instruments, especially those
focusing on women and children, which have a direct
bearing on resolution 1325 (2000).
My delegation recommends strengthening the
mandate of UN Women so that it can serve as the lead
agency in implementing efforts made pursuant to
resolutions on women and peace and security. It will
have to collaborate with agencies dealing with
humanitarian, development, human rights and aid to
development issues, as well as the defence forces of
concerned countries. It will also have to engage the
participation of women activists, war victims and other
groups, including women refugees, asylum seekers and
migrants, in order to shape programmes and services.
Kazakhstan also pays great attention to the
measures recommended by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) that seek to increase
the proportion of women sent by troop-contributing
countries and raise the number of women police
officers deployed in peacekeeping operations to 20 per
cent by 2014. My delegation endorses having DPKO
set concrete benchmarks for the participation of
women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities
from the highest decision-making level to field
operations on the ground and in communities, through
far-reaching campaigns to raise awareness about
women’s rights.
My delegation welcomes the development of
national action plans by several Member States, as
proposed by the Secretary-General, to include women
in peace and security measures, and expresses concern
at the lack of such plans by countries most affected by
war. We urge Member States to formulate their own
plans by incorporating the best practices and lessons
learned from other countries.
To conclude, as we go forward, let us work with
determination to strengthen women’s participation and
influence in conflict prevention, social justice,
coexistence and peacebuilding efforts in situations of
closed political systems and in conflict-affected States.
Resolution 1325 (2000) is structured on the three main

12

pillars of participation, protection and prevention, and
is a most powerful tool for women’s organization,
mobilization and action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): At the outset, let me
thank the presidency of Uganda for organizing this
very important open debate of the Security Council.
Our appreciation is also due to the SecretaryGeneral, the Under-Secretaries-General, the President
of the Economic and Social Council, the representative
of the Civil Society Advisory Group on Women, Peace
and Security, and other ministers and representatives of
several Member States who spoke earlier today,
offering their visionary guidance, commitment and
directives for women’s empowerment in the context of
peace and security.
We also offer our heartiest congratulations and a
very warm welcome to Ms. Michelle Bachelet on her
appointment as Executive Director of the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women and Under-Secretary-General
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women.
We assure her of our fullest support.
Ten years ago, the Security Council adopted the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security. Bangladesh, a member of the Council at
that time and one of the core sponsors of the
resolution, was closely associated with the adoption of
this historic document, which endeavours to ensure
women’s rights and roles in peace and security. The
provisions of the document apply not only to States,
but also to actors involved in post-conflict peace
processes. We take a modicum of pride for what we did
a decade ago.
We are, however, disappointed to note that
violence against women and girls is ongoing, as
delineated in various reports. As has been noted,
women and girls suffer most as victims of conflict,
while in the peace process they are mostly deprived of
the dividends. Women and girls are often viewed as
bearers of cultural identities. Thus, they become prime
targets. Therefore, the onus lies on us to ensure that the
oppression of women and girls, particularly based on
gender, is stopped forever.
We are well aware that poverty, the struggle for
scarce resources, and socio-economic injustices lie at

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

the heart of conflicts, and all of them sadly create
breeding grounds for such social blights, including
violence against women and girls. The repercussions
not only impact on the safety and security of women
and girls, but also exacerbate political and economic
situations, as well as the security of nations. Therefore,
protecting women’s rights is not an option, but an
obligation that requires coordinated action from all of
us.
We recognize that empowering women will lead
to their taking command of resources and assuming
adequate leadership capabilities for the efficient
management of those resources. Therefore, we
emphasize the fulfilment of the economic needs of
women and the necessity of their engagement
internationally at all levels and in all forms of decisionmaking processes.
While the former could be achieved by ensuring
women’s access to and participation in incomegenerating and entrepreneurial activities such as microcredit, education, vocational training and public health,
the latter could be ensured through the recruitment of
women, particularly to senior-level positions of the
United Nations, including in the posts of Assistant
Secretaries-General, Under-Secretaries-General and
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General. In
order to obtain a clearer understanding of the needs of
southern women, we have to ensure that women from
the global South get due recognition in the
consideration of such recruitment. For proper
coordination with the field, the fair representation of
troop- and police-contributing countries must be
ensured, as decided previously by the General
Assembly and the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations.
From our national perspective, I deem it a
privilege to make a few remarks about gender
mainstreaming in Bangladesh. It is now universally
known that women occupy the top political leadership
in our country. The Constitution of Bangladesh
guarantees the equality of men and women within the
broad framework of non-discrimination on the grounds
of religion, race and gender. The Government has
adopted a national policy for women’s advancement
and a national plan of action. A women’s development
implementation committee, headed by the Minister for
Women’s and Children Affairs, monitors the
implementation of policies for women’s empowerment.
The result is highly positive. To cite just one example,

10-60385

the enrolment of girls in both primary and secondary
schools exceeds that of boys, helped by waivers of
tuition and the provision of stipends for girls in
secondary schools.
The Government has enacted laws for protecting
women against domestic violence and is currently
implementing a number of projects for developing the
capabilities of women. Many affirmative actions have
been taken that help women in distress and old age. In
order to involve women in decision-making processes,
the Government has adopted a quota system for women
in our national Parliament and in the recruitment of our
civil service officers, alongside direct elections and
open competition.
In the maintenance of international peace and
security, we take pride in our modest contribution of
troops and police to United Nations peacekeeping
missions. The recruitment of women to police forces
and the military amply demonstrates our commitment
to women’s empowerment in both the national and the
international arenas. We are pleased that we were able
to deploy a full contingent of an all-female formed
police unit to the friendly country Haiti following the
devastating earthquake there.
I am pleased to recount that our all-male troop
contingents are fully briefed on gender issues. We hope
that sufficient further training will be arranged to
reinforce their understanding of these issues. We are
aware that we need to mainstream a gender perspective
into all conflict prevention activities and strategies,
develop effective gender-sensitive early warning
mechanisms and institutions, and strengthen efforts to
prevent violence against women, including various
forms of gender-based violence.
In conclusion, I would reiterate that we in
Bangladesh have been making our best efforts to
ensure women’s empowerment and participation in all
spheres of life. We realize that much more needs to be
done. We are willing to replicate in our national policy
any good practices that we come across globally, and
are similarly ready to share our relevant experience
with others.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): At the outset, let me
join others in commending you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate on the occasion of the

13

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). We warmly
welcome the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/498) and the recommendations contained
therein as an important step in moving the women,
peace and security agenda from rhetoric to action. We
also align ourselves with the statement delivered by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

Working Group on Women, Peace and Security. These
points highlight how the Security Council can integrate
relevant content of resolution 1325 (2000) in its daily
work, in particular on country-specific issues. We hope
that this can make a small contribution to the more
general goal of effectively integrating the substance of
the Council’s thematic work in its operational
decisions.

When the Security Council adopted the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) on 31 October 2000, it
acknowledged the negative impact of armed conflict on
women and highlighted their decisive role in conflict
prevention and in consolidating peace.

In addition, we have partnered with Switzerland
to support the PeaceWomen project to publish the
Women, Peace and Security Handbook. The handbook
provides language derived from best practices and is
meant to assist the Security Council in incorporating
relevant substance of resolution 1325 (2000) when
designing mandates for missions on the ground.

Ten years later, however, the plight of women and
girls in armed conflicts continues unabated. The
implementation of the women, peace and security
agenda remains slow and uneven at best. Recent
incidents in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
confirmed once again that sexual violence is used as a
method of warfare to achieve military and strategic
ends. Women are still excluded from decision-making
processes in peace negotiations and post-conflict
reconstruction.
Women continue to be seriously underrepresented
as special representatives of the Secretary-General. We
therefore welcome the Secretary-General’s action plan
for women’s participation in peacebuilding. We do
regret, however, that the Council was not able to
expressly welcome that forward-looking report
(S/2010/466).
It is our firm belief that the advancement of the
women and peace and security agenda is intrinsically
linked to the way the Security Council receives and
analyses information on implementation. Of course, it
also depends on the commitment of Member States to
take concrete action. We therefore commend the
Council for endorsing the 26 indicators against which
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) will be
measured. We believe that information collected
through the indicators should, where appropriate, also
be disaggregated by disability in order to address the
lack of data in that respect.
We reiterate our support for the call to action of
the ministerial event of 25 September 2010, which
encouraged Member States to commit themselves to
concrete, time-bound and measurable actions. To
underscore this commitment, we have contributed to
the financing of the monthly action points of the NGO

14

Furthermore, we will continue our financial
support for the Trust Fund for Victims of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), which adopts a
gender-based perspective across all programming and
has a specific focus on victims of sexual and gender
violence. We hope that the Fund will get more support
from States as a result of their national efforts to
implement resolution 1325 (2000).
Resolution 1325 (2000) and its follow-up
resolution 1820 (2008) call for decisive action against
sexual violence in times of armed conflict. The explicit
inclusion of sexual violence in the provisions dealing
with war crimes and crimes against humanity was one
most significant advances in international law reflected
in the Rome Statute of the ICC. Today, the Court is
dealing with a number of situations where sexual
violence is rampant, including in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Court therefore has
jurisdiction over any crimes within the remit of its
Statute committed in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo since 1 July 2002. In fact, the Court will soon
begin trying Callixte Mbarushimana, a Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda militia leader
arrested on 11 October this year, who is indicted on
charges of sexual violence, among other things.
The work of the Court is therefore of direct
relevance to the 1325 agenda, as the Security Council
anticipated when referencing the Rome Statute in
resolution 1325 (2000) ten years ago. It is therefore
astonishing that the role of international criminal
justice in general and the ICC in particular are entirely
absent from the latest report on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). This is not the report’s only

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

defect, but is perhaps the most serious one. Fighting
impunity is clearly a central part of our efforts to
eradicate sexual violence. It must therefore be an
integral part of any future efforts in this body and of
the reports submitted for its consideration.

to peace and security. These include analysis of the
variables influencing women’s participation in military,
police and international missions and targeted
information and recruitment campaigns, to name but
two.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.

Thirdly, gender equality and the promotion of the
situation of women and girls continue to be among the
priorities of Estonia’s development cooperation and
humanitarian activities. In Afghanistan, for instance,
our projects have been aimed at supporting women’s
access to health care and education.

Mrs. Intelmann (Estonia): The Security Council
debate today and the numerous initiatives related to
resolution 1325 (2000) all over the world confirm that
women are no longer an invisible or irrelevant aspect
of armed conflicts. Women have the right to be
protected in conflicts and can and should be able to
contribute to peace processes. However, despite the
progress made since 2000, these principles still need to
be better translated into reality at the global, regional
and national levels.
Estonia is committed to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and its follow-up resolutions,
and my delegation would like to align itself with the
comments and commitments to be made on behalf of
the European Union and with the statement made
earlier by the Minister of International Cooperation of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends.
I have the pleasure to note that last week Estonia
adopted its national plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Over the next four years, the
plan will help systematize and enhance our activities
both at the national level and in regional and
international organizations.
Estonia, as a Member of the United Nations and a
number of regional organizations, continues to expand
its contribution to international peace and security. We
continue to participate in international civilian and
military operations and to contribute to development
cooperation and humanitarian assistance. The action
plan that I just mentioned contains commitments with
regard to the inclusion of the gender perspective in
these activities.
First, it includes steps to increase gender-related
expertise, as well as general awareness and support for
the inclusion of a gender perspective in crisis
management at all levels through enhanced training.
Secondly, the plan includes measures to expand
the possibilities for women’s participation in
international civilian and military missions and for
increasing the share of women occupying posts related

10-60385

Finally, Estonia continues to actively support the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the
European Union, NATO and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
Estonia’s action plan is a common commitment
taken by a broad range of stakeholders, including
governmental
institutions
and
civil
society
organizations. Its implementation will be monitored
jointly on the basis of a set of indicators.
Estonia welcomes the steps to increase coherence
and accountability in implementing resolution 1325
(2000), including taking forward the set of indicators
to track its implementation, and calls for their swift
operationalization. We further welcome the call for the
development of a strategic framework to guide United
Nations implementation of the resolution in the next
decade, which would include concrete targets and
indicators to ensure the consistency and systematic
evaluation of this process. The establishment of a
working group to review the progress made would,
alongside a set of global indicators, also contribute to
more thorough analysis and the definition of further
goals with regard to women and peace and security.
Estonia strongly condemns grave violations of the
rights of women and girls, including targeted sexual
violence, and supports measures to combat impunity
for these crimes. We support the call to include sexual
violence as a priority element in resolutions mandating
Security Council sanctions committees, which should
include sexual violence as a criterion for the
designation of individuals for targeted measures.
Finally, let me note our appreciation of the work
of Ms Margot Wallström, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and offer my congratulations to the new UnderSecretary-General in charge of UN Women,

15

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

Ms. Michelle Bachelet, whose leadership in this role
will be of crucial importance to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
I would also like to refer to the vital role of the
Civil Society Advisory Group in facilitating the
discussions on the further implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), as well as the work of the Group of
Friends led by Canada.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): We
thank you, Sir, for having convened this debate. The
participation of a number of ministers shows the
importance that Member States and the Security
Council attach to the topic of women and peace and
security. We also welcome the presence of UnderSecretary-General Michelle Bachelet.
Switzerland associates itself with the joint
statement of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security, delivered by the representative of
Canada, and the joint statement of the Human Security
Network, delivered by the representative of Costa Rica.
When entering the building this morning,
participants passed by our exhibit “No Women — No
Peace” in the entrance hall. You saw the curtain with
the portraits of the 1,000 women nominated for the
Nobel Peace Prize in 2005, looking down at the rickety
peace table on the opposite side of the hall. I hope that,
10 years from now, these women will not be looking at
that table, but sitting around it, as active and respected
negotiating partners in all peace processes.
You are perhaps surprised, Sir, that I am wearing
a scarf today. As chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, I travelled to
Bujumbura a few weeks ago, and I had the opportunity
to meet with women’s organizations there. During the
elections, they had decided to wear a white shawl like
this in public to show their desire for peace. That
initiative had a significant impact in successfully
limiting the violence during the election phase. Today,
I would like to carry the voices of these women into
this Chamber, commending them for their courage and
determination. In fact, I had promised them that I
would wear this scarf at my first appearance before the
Security Council, and I am going to keep that promise.
As the Council can see, the word “amahoro” is still

16

here, which means, if I am not mistaken, “peace” in
Kirundi.
But civil society is not the only one with the
capacity and responsibility to create peace. It is also up
to the Security Council, as the parent of resolution
1325 (2000). The Council must use of all the
instruments at its disposal.
We welcome the establishment, in that regard, of
a set of global indicators, which the Council will
endorse today. This represents important progress in
ensuring follow-up to resolution 1325 (2000).
However, the application of these indicators calls for
political leadership by the Council. Switzerland
therefore supports the idea of a “1325 lead country”
and the creation of a single comprehensive framework
to support the implementation of the resolution. UN
Women could contribute to this goal by creating a 1325
office within its institution.
We hope that Margot Wallström, who was
appointed under resolution 1888 (2009), will play a
significant role as an interlocutor for conversations
between the United Nations system and the Security
Council. We also hope that she will provide the
Council with detailed information on instances of
sexual violence. The recent events in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remind us of the urgent need to
put an end to the cruel practice of using rape as a
method of warfare.
Resolution 1820 (2008) affirmed the Council’s
intention to consider targeted sanctions against parties
to armed conflict who commit rape. In addition, we
have international criminal justice instruments at our
disposal, in particular the International Criminal Court,
to ensure that such crimes do not go unpunished.
However, it should be kept in mind that States bear the
primary responsibility to prevent such crimes and to
bring perpetrators to justice.
The representative of Liechtenstein just
mentioned the monthly action points of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security, which
we support together with them. In addition, we are
offering the Council a handbook, prepared by
PeaceWomen, highlighting the various obligations that
derive from the resolution, with many best practice
examples as guidance. Here is the handbook, it is
available, and I urge participants to use it.

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

As Member States, we are also called upon to
systematically apply a gender perspective in our
political processes. Switzerland adopted a national
action plan early on, which has proved to be a useful
instrument. Our second and revised national action
plan will come into force within the next few days.
When participants leave the building today, I
encourage them to take another look at the exhibit in
the entrance hall. Walking on the red carpet, they will
see which countries have adopted national action plans
to date. And they will notice that there is still plenty of
space for many more.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Walter
Füllemann, Permanent Observer and head of the
delegation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross to the United Nations.
Mr. Füllemann (International Committee of the
Red Cross): I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for giving the opportunity to the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to address the
Security Council today.
The ICRC, as an independent and neutral
humanitarian organization that is independent from the
United Nations, recognizes the importance of the
Security Council’s efforts to address the situation of
women in the context of peace and security.
Women and girls are frequently placed at the
epicentre of conflicts, endangered not only because of
their proximity to the fighting, but also because they
are deliberately being targeted, as a method of warfare.
Since the adoption, 10 years ago, of resolution 1325
(2000) on women, peace and security, women’s issues
have been very much at the forefront of the
international agenda.
For its part, the ICRC decided some 10 years ago
to emphasize, across all its programmes and
operational activities, the particular respect and
protection accorded to women and girls by
international humanitarian law. Women separated from
their family are often left without financial and
emotional support. Displaced women, having been
forced to flee their home, may have to assume extra
responsibilities and find themselves at greater risk of
sexual violence and abuse. Moreover, their access to
safe drinking water, food or health care is often
hampered.

10-60385

To strengthen its response in promoting the
protection of women, the ICRC has developed a
multidimensional approach to identify and address the
specific vulnerabilities of women and girls in armed
conflict and other situations of violence. This approach
recognizes, first and foremost, that women are not
totally vulnerable and display remarkable strength and
courage in wartime, often finding ingenious ways of
coping with the difficulties they face.
When considering the needs of women during
conflict, prevention is essential. While it is imperative
that the international community react to sexual
violence as to any other crime, it is also essential that
Member States resolutely engage in preventing sexual
violence. Through the promotion of international
humanitarian law, the ICRC presses all parties to an
armed conflict to respect the categorical prohibition of
all forms of violence against women.
Activities in the communities are often carried
out together with local Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies, especially activities aimed at breaking the
taboos surrounding this issue and sensitizing local
communities so that survivors of sexual violence are
not stigmatized.
Through instruction and training programmes on
international humanitarian law for armed forces and
armed groups, the ICRC emphasizes the prohibition of
rape and other forms of sexual violence and advocates
its inclusion in the internal regulations and manuals of
armed forces and groups.
The ICRC strongly encourages Member States to
include in their national legislation provisions to
ensure better respect for women and girls at all times,
particularly in times of war and other situations of
violence. Such measures have an impact on both
prevention and accountability.
The key message of the ICRC today is simple:
the existing rules of international humanitarian law
must be respected. Where they are not, those
responsible for violations must be held to account. The
ICRC welcomes the importance the Security Council
attaches to full respect for international humanitarian
law. Indeed, better respect for the existing rules of
international humanitarian law would ensure much
better protection for women and girls in armed conflict
and other situations of violence.

17

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

To conclude, the ICRC reiterates its commitment
to the spirit of resolution 1325 (2000), and, more
importantly, the ICRC will continue to promote, in its
own work, the respect that international humanitarian
law guarantees for women and girls.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Monaco.
Mrs. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): The
Principality of Monaco attaches the greatest
importance to the protection of innocent civilian
victims of conflict. Among them, women and children
are clearly the most vulnerable. The fact that, over the
past decade, women and children have become the
targets of unspeakable violence is unacceptable. Thus,
the Security Council’s recognition of this scourge when
it adopted resolution 1325 (2000), on 31 October 2000,
was a major turning point in mobilizing the
international community.
We underscore the essential contribution of civil
society, which has made possible significant progress
and helped us to define women’s participation as an
essential element of peacebuilding processes and
recovery efforts in affected countries.
Although the role of women in development no
longer needs to be proven, it is equally crucial to
ensuring lasting peace, social cohesion and political
legitimacy. Women’s contributions are not an end in
themselves; they are also crucial elements in achieving
peacebuilding priorities. In that regard, in order to
ensure the rule of law, there must be support for the
establishment
and
strengthening
of
national
institutions.
Resolution 1325 (2000) also underscores the need
to scrupulously respect the provisions of international
humanitarian law and human rights instruments. It is
imperative that atrocities not go unpunished, especially
those in which rape is used as a weapon of war.
We note with interest the establishment of a
comprehensive framework dedicated to the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and to
holding all parties concerned accountable. Taking into
account the indicators included in the annex to the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/498) should
allow us to measure progress and highlight areas
deserving of our attention. In that regard, we welcome
the efforts and initiatives of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, in particular in the areas of

18

training and increasing the participation of women in
peacekeeping operations and police forces.
My delegation unreservedly supports the
determination and commends the courage and resolve
of Ms. Margot Wallström, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and of Under-Secretary-General Michelle Bachelet,
Executive Director of the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, in
coordinating our efforts on behalf of women. We hope
that the political will we have generated will continue
to assert itself.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.
Mr. Pálsson (Iceland): Ten years ago, the
recognition of gender equality as a security issue by
the Security Council was a watershed event, both for
women and for the Organization. Through the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
Council acknowledged not only the needs and concerns
of women in connection with peace processes, but
underlined the participation of women as an important
prerequisite for sustainable peace. A decade later, the
record reflects some positive developments, as
highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/498). However, truth be told, progress has
been slow and ultimately disappointing.
Only a handful of countries have adopted national
action plans to implement resolution 1325 (2000). In
the meantime, armed conflicts still devastate the lives
of women and girls in many parts of the world. Women
are often subjected to terrifying gender-based sexual
violence, which most of the time goes unpunished.
Women are also regularly marginalized in
peacemaking. This is hardly a satisfactory state of
affairs. Therefore, we must now focus on action,
implementation and accountability so that, 10 years
from now, we can look back with a sense of
achievement and say that we have made a difference.
There is a vital need for a system for monitoring
the status of the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Therefore, Iceland urges the Security Council
to adopt the indicators put forward in the SecretaryGeneral’s report so that United Nations organizations,
Member States and civil society are able to measure
the impact on the ground and men and women around
the world can reap the benefits.

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

At the same time, UN Women should play an
important role in overseeing the monitoring and
implementation of the indicators, as well other issues
related to resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions. Allow me to reiterate my Government’s
commitment to supporting UN Women and to
congratulate
the
new
Under-Secretary-General,
Michelle Bachelet, on her recent appointment. Iceland
also welcomes the appointment of Margot Wallström as
the first Special Representative of the Secretary
General to fight the spread of sexual violence in
conflict situations. We stand ready to support the
Special Representative in her important work.
Advancing the aims and working towards the
strengthening of resolution 1325 (2000) is a priority for
Iceland. All Icelandic diplomatic missions are required
to support the aims of resolution 1325 (2000) in their
work. Iceland is working actively to advance resolution
1325 (2000) within NATO and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, in addition to our
work at the United Nations.
Iceland’s national action plan has been in place
for almost three years. Preparations are under way to
revise the plan, with a view to adapting it next year.
This will be done through a participatory and
transparent process involving political leaders at the
highest level, all relevant Government agencies and
civil society. The plan will contain specific goals, clear
indicators and a transparent monitoring mechanism. It
will also take fully into account pertinent Security
Council resolutions on women and peace and security.
My Government has also undertaken projects to
highlight, strengthen and implement resolution 1325
(2000). Particular effort has been focused on women’s
empowerment.
Our
gender
equality
training
programme is an international undertaking run in
cooperation with the University of Iceland. Its explicit
purpose is to promote gender equality and women’s
empowerment through education and training. It is our
hope that the programme, which is now in its second
year and includes fellows from Afghanistan and
Palestine, will in due course be recognized as an
official United Nations University programme, making
it the fourth such programme located in Iceland.
In addition, Iceland has emphasized the
importance of gender perspectives in international
climate talks, for we are confident that the increased
participation of women will help the international

10-60385

community foster a more sustainable response to the
scourge of climate change.
Ten years on, it is time for the international
community to get serious about the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). While women are often
depicted as victims of armed conflict — and rightly
so — it is important to bear in mind that they are more
often than not an integral part of the solution. Let us
make the coming decade a decade that counts and a
time when we no longer tolerate impunity for crimes,
women’s needs and rights are respected, and women
and men are equal partners in forging lasting peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of Uganda for
convening this important high-level meeting to mark
the tenth anniversary of the historic resolution 1325
(2000). We thank the Secretary-General for his report
contained in document S/2010/498, on women and
peace and security, as well as his report contained in
document S/2010/466, on women’s participation in
peacebuilding, which he presented to the Council a few
days ago.
We congratulate Ms. Michelle Bachelet on her
appointment as Executive Director of the newly
established United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women (UN Women), and
we welcome her participation in today’s meeting of the
Council. We assure her of our full cooperation in the
execution of her important mandate.
Following the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we have noted with appreciation the Security
Council’s increased commitment to women’s role in
peace and security, which has been illustrated not only
in its active participation, but also in its role as key
promoter in the United Nations system in advancing
the women and peace and security agenda. We are
heartened to see greater awareness at both the national
and international levels, resulting in an unprecedented
number of activities carried out in highly diverse forms
and in a wide range of areas by all stakeholders to
promote women’s role and rights in relation to peace
and security.
Most visible at the international level is the better
coordinated work within the United Nations system —
particularly among the Special Adviser on Gender

19

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

Issues, the Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), the United
Nations Development Programme and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs — in
mainstreaming gender in peace and security, and in
addressing issues that may impact women’s
participation
in
peace
processes,
including
humanitarian and socio-economic issues.
We particularly commend the adoption early this
year of the three-year Joint Strategy on Gender and
Mediation initiated by the Department of Political
Affairs and UNIFEM, and the proposed seven-point
action plan, which contains actions needed to enhance
women’s participation in peacebuilding — a
fundamental factor to prevent war and empower
women. In this connection, we sincerely hope that the
newly established UN Women, once it has completed
its transitional arrangements, will become a stronger
entity and take the lead in the women and peace and
security agenda. At the national level, among other
things, the national action plans being designed,
adopted and put in place represent a meaningful
contribution. We hope that adequate resources will be
made available to ensure the full implementation of
these plans.
Against such a backdrop, it is worrisome to learn
from the Secretary-General’s report that
“10 years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), significant achievements are difficult to
identify or quantify. The conditions and
opportunities that women and girls face in
situations of armed conflict continue to be
abhorrent and effective methods for monitoring
impact are lacking.” (S/2010/498, para. 3)
My delegation is of the view that much more
remains to be done to better protect women and girls
from all forms of violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations, further empower them and increase their
participation in all stages of peace processes. The fact
that women have constituted less than 8 per cent of
negotiators in United Nations-mediated peace
processes and less than 3 per cent of peace agreement
signatories since 1992; that only 16 per cent of peace
agreements between 1990 and 2010 contained
references to women; and that less than 3 per cent of

20

post-conflict spending is dedicated to women is
unacceptable.
Women, being not merely victims, but rather
agents of change, should be able to involve themselves
more in peace talks to better reflect their priorities in
the text of peace agreements. Moreover, having
emerged from many destructive wars, we in Viet Nam
are convinced that women can play an active role in
peacebuilding and reconstruction if and when they are
empowered economically, financially, politically and
institutionally, and when their special needs, including
health and education, are properly addressed. With this
in mind, we hope that the seven commitments listed in
the Secretary-General’s report contained in document
S/2010/466 can be fully honoured so as to ensure
women’s equal involvement as participants and
beneficiaries in local development, employment
creation, income generation, front-line service delivery,
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes in post-conflict situations.
My delegation appreciates the monumental work
done by United Nations entities, in consultation with
Member States and civil societies, in building the set of
indicators annexed to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/498). We share the view that the indicators can
provide a helpful tool kit for the United Nations system
and those countries that wish to use them on a
voluntary basis. At the same time, we believe that
certain indicators need more careful consideration in
order for the whole set to be balanced and of an
encouraging rather than an imposing character, and
hence more effective.
As a nation deeply committed to women’s
emancipation and empowerment, Viet Nam has always
supported the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), and our contribution to the drafting and
adoption of resolution 1889 (2009) by the Security
Council in October 2009 is just one example of this. In
the same vein, we seriously take this review of the
10-year implementation of RESOLUTION 1325 (2000)
as a chance to reinforce our determination to work
harder with the international community, the United
Nations system first and foremost, towards a world of
genuine equity and equality for women.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg commends the Ugandan presidency of the

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

Council for having organized this open debate to mark
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) — the first resolution of the Council
specifically to address the impact of war on women
and their role in peacemaking.
Women and girls are often the first victims of
conflict, and they have specific needs after conflict
ends that must be taken into account if the conflict is to
be brought to a lasting end. It is also critical that
women be more involved from the outset in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts at all levels in
order to ensure their better participation in
development efforts and to increase the likelihood that
peace will last.
The seven-point action plan presented by the
Secretary-General in his recent report on women’s
participation in peacebuilding (S/2010/466) is an
excellent tool in that respect. If implemented, it will
serve as a valuable contribution to the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). The important debate of
13 October on post-conflict peacebuilding (see
S/PV.6396) afforded the Security Council an
opportunity to consider that report for the first time,
and we hope that it will rapidly result in concrete
follow-up to the proposed plan of action.
As the representative of the European Union will
underscore in his statement, with which Luxembourg
fully associates itself, 10 years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) we regret to note that the
progress achieved in its implementation and in the
implementation of its follow-up resolution remains
unsatisfactory. I should like to commend the very
candid analysis contained in the Secretary-General’s
most recent report, in which he concludes that one of
the main obstacles to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) is the lack of a harmonized and
coordinated approach in the context of a clear
framework with concrete and specific objectives and a
set of results indicators. We encourage the SecretaryGeneral to pursue his intention to reforge the systemwide plan of action as a strategic planning tool. A
significant role in that task must fall to the new United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women.
Luxembourg supports the recommendations
elaborated by the Secretary-General in his report.
Increased efforts are necessary at all levels, including
the national level, to ensure the full implementation of

10-60385

resolution 1325 (2000). Within the framework of its
national gender equality plan, Luxembourg is
committed to systematic support for initiatives aimed
at incorporating the gender perspective into the work
of international and regional organizations, and to
ensuring that it is taken into account in conflict and
post-conflict situations. My country also strives to
ensure the systematic taking into account of the gender
perspective in its cooperation projects and
humanitarian action to better achieve the Millennium
Development Goals. We fully support the peace
initiatives undertaken by local women’s groups and the
work of non-governmental organizations to ensure the
equal participation of men and women in post-conflict
situations.
Our national plan of action also provides for an
increase in the percentage of women and men, be they
civilian or military, who are specifically trained in
gender issues to participate in peacekeeping operations.
Allow me to cite a specific example of our support.
The “Women and war” project, an initiative of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, has enabled
us to elaborate guidelines for a multidisciplinary
approach to the prevention of and fight against sexual
violence.
Ten years ago, resolution 1325 (2000) requested
all parties to armed conflict to take specific steps to
protect women and girls against acts of gender-based
violence, especially rape and other forms of sexual
abuse. It also emphasized that all States bear the
responsibility to put an end to impunity and to bring to
justice those who have been accused of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes, including all
forms of sexual and other violence against women and
girls. The acts of mass rape that were committed this
summer in North Kivu demonstrated in the most brutal
way that we are very far from having put an end to the
use of sexual violence as a tool of war.
In September, my Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs told the General Assembly
(see A/65/PV.14) that such brazen violations of human
rights must be tolerated no longer. Impunity must end,
and the fight against impunity cannot remain an
abstract objective, but must become an effective and
concrete reality whose success we must all work
towards together.
I would like to encourage the Security Council to
step up its efforts in the fight against impunity and to

21

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

impose targeted sanctions against all parties
responsible for grave violations of human rights and
women rights, including perpetrators of sexual
violence.
My delegation warmly welcomes the Council’s
decision to recommend the use of the indicators drafted
by the Secretary-General, and encourages all
stakeholders to operationalize them as rapidly as
possible. Such a clear, ongoing and comprehensive
follow-up mechanism will assist Member States, the
United Nations system and the Security Council to
assess the progress achieved and to strengthen the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
However, on a note of slight disappointment, we
would have liked to see the Council at the same time
set up a working group to evaluate progress achieved
based on the annual reports of the Secretary-General
and to formulate recommendations for the Council on
the best possible way to fill the gaps and to meet the
challenges in order to accelerate such implementation.
Before I conclude, allow me to pay tribute to the
essential role played by both civil society and women’s
organizations in the creation and implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Without their commitment and
contributions, the issue of women, peace and security
would never have enjoyed the attention it merits and
must without question continue to enjoy in the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jamaica.
Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): I wish on behalf of the
Government of Jamaica to thank you, Sir, for
convening this open debate on women’s equal
participation and full involvement in all efforts for the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security.
Resolution 1325 (2000), unanimously adopted by
the Security Council 10 years, ago brought to light one
of history’s best-kept secrets: the disproportionate and
unique impact of armed conflict on women and girls.
Recognized as a historic and unprecedented document,
the impetus for its adoption was strong. That led to, for
the first time, the Security Council devoting an entire
meeting to a debate on women’s experiences in conflict
and post-conflict situations and their contributions to
peace.
Ten years on, as we celebrate the anniversary of
that watershed event, significant achievements are
difficult to identify. It remains a matter of serious

22

concern that women have become caught in the centre
of violent conflicts and often become the direct and
deliberate victims of the most egregious abuses
committed by parties to armed conflicts. We must
therefore strengthen our resolve to eliminating the
disproportionate effects of war on civilians,
particularly women and children.
Over the years, the Council’s presidential
statements have called on Member States, the United
Nations system and civil society to commit to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), including
through the development of strategies and action plans,
the establishment of monitoring and accountability
mechanisms at the international and national levels,
and ensuring the full and equal participation of women
in all peace processes. But some of us have not yet
heeded this call.
My delegation recognizes the important work that
the United Nations has undertaken in increasing the
representation and participation of women at high
levels within the United Nations system. The most
recent instances of this were the appointments of the
Under-Secretary-General for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women and Executive Director of the
new gender entity, UN Women, and of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Let me once again reiterate
Jamaica’s heartiest congratulations to both women and
assure them of our continued support in fulfilment of
their mandates.
Nevertheless, we believe that much more needs to
be done, and in this we call upon Member States to
play an integral role in ensuring the appointment of
qualified women at high levels.
My delegation is aware that resolution 1325
(2000) does not exist in a vacuum. Many resolutions,
including 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009), which focus
on sexual violence in situations of armed conflict, were
created on the momentum generated by resolution 1325
(2000). Treaties, conventions, statements and reports
also preceded it, and thus formed its foundation and an
integral part of the women, peace and security policy
framework.
Although they have been late in coming, my
delegation is pleased to note that on this the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), there are now
signs of increased commitment and action by the
Security Council to ensure that the goals of the

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

resolution are fully implemented. The Security
Council’s expressed intention to take action on a
comprehensive set of indicators on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) is a very encouraging
development. These indicators would represent a clear
step forward for improving accountability and the
implementation of the groundbreaking resolution.
As we all know, resolution 1325 (2000) reaffirms
the important role of women in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts, and also in peacebuilding. We
acknowledge that, in some parts of the world, women
have become increasingly effective participants at the
peace table and have continued to assist in creating an
enabling environment for conflict prevention,
peacekeeping,
peacebuilding
and
post-conflict
reconstruction. However, progress in these areas has
not been consistent.
Jamaica has played its part in ensuring the
participation of women in peace and security over the
years through its increased presence in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We have also been
encouraging the recruitment of women police officers
to peacekeeping missions, being keenly aware of the
impact that their experience and service have had on
the United Nations and host country’s recognition of
the role of women in peace and security. Our women
peacekeepers, despite serving in some of the most
difficult, high-threat environments and inhospitable
places and faced with diseases and violence, have
nonetheless been having a positive impact on the lives
of women and girls in conflict situations.
Our women peacekeepers have increasingly acted
as role models in the various local environments,
inspiring by their very example women and girls in the
often male-dominated societies where they serve,
demonstrating to communities that peace is
inextricably linked to equality between men and
women, and persuading disadvantaged women and
girls that they can indeed achieve. Our women
peacekeepers continue to be dedicated to the tasks to
which they have been assigned. They have made
tangible differences in the lives of many, while
showing the world the caring and committed face of
the United Nations.
It is clear that peacekeeping long ago evolved
from its traditional role of silencing the guns, and has
been redefined increasingly as an avenue for fostering

10-60385

a culture of sustainable peace in countries devastated
by conflicts.
Today, Jamaica recommits itself to ensuring that
this vital work will continue, through active
participation as long as it is needed. We reaffirm our
collective commitment to building a world free from
the scourge of war. The persistence of violence against
women in situations of armed conflict detracts from the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals,
whose targets in many ways are intertwined with the
goals of resolution 1325 (2000).
Today’s celebration is therefore a reminder that
the high cost of peacekeeping and of reconstruction in
post-conflict situations weighs heavily in favour of
prevention and peacebuilding measures to address the
root causes of deadly conflicts. Women have proven
instrumental in building bridges rather than walls.
Women are entitled to an active rote in rebuilding their
societies. Their ability to influence the direction of
change and to create a more just social, economic and
political order should not be overlooked. Gender
equality therefore is an essential precursor to
democratic governance and inclusive and sustainable
human development.
Finally, the United Nations Population Fund State
of World Population 2010 report — “From Conflict
and Crisis to Renewal: Generations of Change” —
speaks of the three Rs, resilience, renewal and
redefining roles between boys and girls and men and
women. It further shows how communities and civil
society are healing old wounds and moving forward.
We concur that more still needs to be done to ensure
that women have access to services and have a voice in
peace deals or reconstruction plans. But we believe that
recovery from conflict and disaster presents a unique
opportunity to rectify inequalities, ensure equal
protection under the law and create space for positive
change.
Thus, by ensuring that all aspects of resolution
1325 (2000) are implemented, we will give women the
chance to use their voice and their advocacy in
ensuring sustainable peace for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): At the outset,
Mr. President, allow me to express our sincere
appreciation for your initiative to convene this

23

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

ministerial meeting of the Security Council on this
important occasion. Our appreciation also goes to the
Secretary-General
for
his
important
report
(S/2010/498) on the steps and measures taken to
implement resolution 1325 (2000). We also appreciate
the role played by the United Nations machinery,
including both the Security Council and the General
Assembly, and all United Nations Member States that
are taking effective steps in that regard. We express our
appreciation for the briefings we heard at the beginning
of the Council’s meeting today.
This year we are commemorating 10 years since
the adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), on women, peace and security, which reflected,
and still reflects, the responsibility of the international
community to ensure, protect and advance women’s
rights in conflict and post-conflict situations and in
peace processes.
Egypt has always been supportive of resolution
1325 (2000) and its full implementation. It has long
played a historic role in ensuring the protection of
women in armed conflict situations. Egypt was even
among a number of States that contributed to the
formulation of the Declaration on the Protection of
Women and Children in Emergency and Armed
Conflict, which was adopted by the General Assembly
as resolution 3318 (XXIX) as early as 14 December
1974. That important Declaration, which has gone
unnoticed in Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
and all subsequent relevant Security Council
resolutions and statements, condemned and prohibited
all attacks and bombings on civilian populations,
particularly women and children, thus planting the
early seeds of dealing effectively with women’s issues
through the subsequent Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) and beyond.
A strong and sustained campaign is led by our
first lady, through the Suzanne Mubarak Women’s
International Peace Movement, to support and foster
international and regional action to overcome the
dangers to which women are exposed in situations of
armed conflict and post-conflict situations and to
ensure gender equality and the empowerment of
women. The Movement has organized a series of
regional and international seminars and workshops,
with the support of United Nations entities, in order to
effectively implement national action plans to
implement resolution 1325 (2000), with a special focus
on promoting a culture of peace and enhancing

24

women’s role in peacemaking, peacekeeping and postconflict peacebuilding. Among these significant
activities, an international forum entitled “Towards
enforcing Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)”
was held in Cairo in 2006, where very practical
recommendations were approved. Egypt will continue
to support Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and
will host an international conference on the
implementation of the resolution in November this
year. This parallels our national efforts and our efforts
as Chair of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) to pay
greater attention to the advancement of women and
gender equality and to solidifying and enhancing UN
Women. This was evident in the establishing of the
NAM First Ladies Summit, which started its activities
in 2009 during the NAM summit at Sharm el-Sheikh,
and which held another meeting in Rome early this
year to deal with the participation of women on issues
of food security.
The Secretary-General’s report, prepared at the
request of the Security Council, contains a set of
proposed indicators to track the implementation of the
resolution. These indicators, which we believe the
Council should approve, should apply only to the
situation of women in conflict and post-conflict
situations within the scope of application of resolution
1325 (2000). Generalizing these indicators and
attempting to impose them as a common basis for
reporting by States Members of the Organization,
United Nations agencies and institutions would require
thorough consideration and approval by the General
Assembly as well. Moreover, Egypt strongly believes
that any attempt to extend the scope of application of
the proposed indicators beyond conflict and postconflict situations, or any attempt to provide a wider
definition of conflict and post-conflict situations would
be a clear encroachment by the Security Council on the
competence of the General Assembly and would
negatively affect the mandate, competence and
effectiveness of UN Women, the entity that we all
struggled to create to deal effectively with the
promotion and protection of all women around the
world through ensuring gender equality and
empowerment of women. It would also cause clear
duplication in the work and activities by legally
binding international instruments such as the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and other significant
documents and instruments, including the Programme
of Action of the United Nations International

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

Conference on Population and Development, held in
Cairo in 1994, the 1995 Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and many other documents.
Egypt trusts that the Security Council supports its
activities as much as it supports resolution 1325 (2000),
and we look forward to continued dialogue between the
Security Council and the General Assembly, in a spirit
of cooperation and coordination that would ensure the
full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), along with
the enhancement of the role of UN Women and other
bodies working to support women’s activities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Limeres (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina wishes to associate itself with the statement
made by the Minister of International Cooperation of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security.
At the outset, Mr. President, I would like to
congratulate you on your initiative to convene this
open debate. Argentina’s participation in peacekeeping
and humanitarian assistance missions is among the
pillars of its foreign policy. For that reason, as we
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), the Argentine Republic wishes
to underscore its firm commitment to the role of
women in peace and security.
Argentina played a dynamic role in the
negotiation and adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council in
1999 and 2000. The resolution brings together two
objectives that are part of our national policy with
regard to gender and defence: the promotion and
protection of the human rights of women, and the
inclusion of women in peacekeeping operations.
Resolution 1325 (2000), then, reaffirms the
important role that women play in the prevention and
solution of conflicts and in peacebuilding,
underscoring the importance of women’s participating
on equal footing with men and of their full
participation in all initiatives aimed at maintaining and
fostering peace and security.
In that connection we wish to highlight the
policies carried out by our Government in the defence
sector. In recent years the Ministry of Defence —
under the leadership of a woman, Dr. Nilda Garré —
has undertaken a profound process of mainstreaming a

10-60385

gender perspective. That began by granting a voice to
female members of our armed forces, which allowed us
to diagnose their situation and led to reform that
included the repeal of discriminatory resolutions in that
sector. That process culminated with the National Plan
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the
defence sector.
In 2007 Argentina was selected by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to
undertake a pilot programme in the region to
disseminate the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). In that framework, the Argentine Foreign
Ministry convened an inter-ministerial group on gender
and peacekeeping. In 2008 the Foreign Ministry
organized, with the support of DPKO and UNIFEM,
the first regional workshop for developing a gender
policy in peacekeeping operations and humanitarian
assistance. That workshop was a valuable contribution
that prompted a debate among the countries of our
region and the mainstreaming of a gender perspective
in public policies in all sectors.
To continue making progress towards the
objectives set out in resolution 1325 (2000), we wish to
take this opportunity to reaffirm some of the
commitments taken on by Argentina.
First is the implementation of quantitative and
qualitative tools to measure and to know in numerical
terms — but also strategically — what the situation is
with regard to participation of women in peacekeeping
operations. On that point it is worth emphasizing that
we are planning to publish in March 2011 the results of
the surveys undertaken with the contingent deployed in
Haiti. It gathers their experience in gender matters
prior to deployment and looks at their experience with
the effective implementation of a gender perspective
during the mission.
Another point is continuing to develop a data
base that gathers statistics on the voluntary
participation of women in peacekeeping operations,
including the number of women deployed and their
roles in the missions, inter alia.
Further, we will move forward with programmes
of training on issues of gender and human rights for
contingents that are soon to be deployed. That will
include developing curricula that consider the gender
perspective in conflict resolution and peacebuilding, by
integrating both women in the contingents and women
in the local population.

25

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

Finally, in the Argentine National Centre for Joint
Training for Peacekeeping Operations, the annual
curriculum will include an international seminar on
gender and peacekeeping operations, an initiative has
no precedent at the international level.
I wish to stress the importance that Argentina
affords to the systematization of international
information on the matter so as to ensure the effective
implementation of this standard, which is a valuable
guide for ensuring respect for the human rights of
women in conflict situations and makes visible the
important contribution of the inclusion of the gender
perspective in peacebuilding processes.
To conclude, my delegation wishes to take this
opportunity to once again commend Ms. Michelle
Bachelet on her being named to the helm of the new
gender entity, UN Women. We wish her the greatest
success in her work, and we are convinced that the
problems of women and peace and security will gain
visibility and will make firm progress under her
leadership.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. De Klerk (Netherlands): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate and
for the opportunity to participate in it.
My delegation would like to make a few remarks
in addition to the European Union statement yet to be
delivered.
The importance of women’s participation in
conflict
prevention,
conflict
resolution
and
reconstruction is clearly addressed in the landmark
Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008). Resolution 1325 (2000) has become one of the
best-known resolutions the Security Council has
adopted. It should become one of the most widely
implemented resolutions.
Basically, we need to talk to women, to obtain a
better understanding and resolution of a conflict. We
must protect women, to keep them and their families
safe from violence and to keep their communities
stable. And we must involve women, to build back a
more secure and economically viable society.
On 4 December 2007 the Netherlands adopted the
Dutch National 1325 Action Plan, relying on a broad
support base. The signatories — including the Ministries

26

of Foreign Affairs, Defence and the Interior, civil
society organizations and knowledge institutions — took
it upon themselves to jointly make a difference within
the field of women, peace and security. As a result of
our integrated approach, where diplomacy, defence and
development are mutually reinforcing, gender has been
fully incorporated in the assessment framework for
Dutch contributions to peacekeeping operations.
Together, we invested €23 million in 2009 to support
women’s organizations in fragile States, to promote
female leadership and political participation, and to
increase gender capacity.
An active role for women is essential in
interventions aimed at ending conflicts and increasing
security, stability and human security globally. But is
not enough. We need the partnership of men: male
leaders who speak up about the atrocities of sexual
violence, male commanders that instruct their
uniformed services on how to protect civilians. The
Netherlands and Australia will support a United
Nations training module on sexual violence geared
towards peacekeepers. We will furthermore support a
human rights training package geared towards the
Congolese national army. In 2011 we will also continue
our joint Foreign Affairs/Defence training on women,
peace and security for our own staff.
Our second commitment is the Dutch support to
the originally Canadian Justice Rapid Response
initiative to bring perpetrators to justice. This
multilateral standby facility gives United Nations
entities and Member States access to a roster of rapidly
deployable criminal justice professionals. They will
perform human rights and international criminal justice
investigations, undertake special political and
fact-finding missions and form commissions of inquiry,
as well as security sector reform assessments. Criminal
investigations and forensic inquiries are of great
importance to ending impunity and preventing heinous
crimes committed against women in armed conflict.
The Netherlands currently has five people at the
disposal of the roster of rapidly deployable criminal
justice professionals.
The Dutch Government has summed up its efforts
and results to date in a booklet that will be launched
next month, entitled “The Dutch Dos on Women, Peace
and Security”. Ten years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we can say that more
perpetrators of sexual violence are being brought to
justice in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, more

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

women are taking part in decision-making processes in
the Sudan, and more Afghan women are demanding
support in exchange for their votes. These are results
we can take pride in. But let us not fool ourselves —
there is still a long way to go before the spirit of
resolution 1325 (2000) has fully permeated the work of
the United Nations, its Member States and civil society.
And that is why the Netherlands pleads for
strengthened accountability mechanisms for the
implementation of our commitments expressed here
today. We also believe that defining clear roles and
responsibilities for Member States and within the
United Nations system would be conducive to stepping
up our efforts to reach the goals of resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions.
We are on the eve of a new decade of promoting
women, peace and security. We now have a shared
responsibility to implement our joint commitments.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Gutiérrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Sir, for having convened this open debate on
resolution 1325 (2000) and the role of women as it
relates to peace and security. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for having introduced his report (S/2010/498),
and the others who have spoken today.
I welcome the presence among us of President
Michelle Bachelet, Executive Director of UN Women
and a very distinguished representative of Latin
America.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was a crucial milestone,
which we must duly underscore because it was with the
adoption of that resolution that this topic took its place
on the agenda of the Security Council and was
therefore no longer to be considered a matter of
secondary importance. Instead, it took on a crucial and
relevant role in efforts towards international peace and
security.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was the starting point for
subsequent developments in the Security Council
related to this topic, aimed at ensuring the participation
of women in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and the fight
against sexual violence against women and girls. For
this reason, that resolution, together with resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009), has
provided the international community with a

10-60385

framework for addressing the needs of women in
conflict and post-conflict situations.
Ten years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we reiterate that the participation of women
must be an integral part of peacemaking, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts. This is the view of my
country, which currently has a number of female
military observers. However, we wish to broaden the
participation of women, and Peru is therefore training
female personnel, who we hope will be ready for
deployment in the second half of 2011.
As indicated by the Secretary-General in his
report on women’s participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466), women are decisive agents in the three
pillars of lasting peace: economic recovery, social
cohesion and political legitimacy. In that regard, we
agree with the Secretary-General that the participation
of women in peace processes allows for the integration
of a gender perspective in post-conflict planning,
which is essential to ensuring the participation of
women in long-term peacebuilding.
On numerous occasions in this Chamber, we have
heard truly moving testimony from women victims of
sexual violence. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict has
stated that this type of violence is a tactic of war and as
such can be planned for and predicted. We cannot
allow it in any way to be considered an inevitable
consequence of armed conflict.
However, I must say, that recent events have
unfortunately shown us that the capacity to respond to
such acts must be greatly strengthened. As my country
has stated on other occasions, a crucial consideration in
addressing this problem is having information that
would allow us to take preventive measures and to
respond swiftly to such situations. We must explore
mechanisms that allow for reliable information
exchange on acts of sexual violence in order to take
measures aimed at reducing and fighting this scourge.
It is the view of my delegation that the capacity for
such information exchange among United Nations
agencies, the various committees of the Security
Council and the Working Group on Children in Armed
Conflict should be substantially strengthened.
Furthermore, it is important for military personnel
deployed on the ground to undergo training and
awareness-raising to enable them to respond
appropriately to situations of sexual violence.

27

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

We must also bear in mind that, as the SecretaryGeneral recalled, the security of women and girls is not
guaranteed once a conflict has come to an end. We
must therefore ensure that there is a focus in
post-conflict phases on the strengthening of the rule of
law that ensures respect for their rights and access to
justice. Fighting impunity for gender-based violence is
essential in the peacebuilding process, as noted by the
Peacebuilding Commission Working Group on Lessons
Learned.
With regard to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) throughout the United Nations system, the
Secretary-General, in a spirit of great transparency, has
recognized that the 2008-2009 Action Plan illuminated
the fragmentation in implementation initiatives, which
requires a comprehensive strategy to ensure that efforts
do not go to waste.
The indicators that have been presented form, in
this respect, the basis for a comprehensive
consideration of the progress made by the United
Nations system and Member States in the priority areas
of prevention, participation, protection, relief and
recovery. These clearly reflect the complementary
nature of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009) and 1889 (2009). We also agree with the
Secretary-General that UN Women could serve as the
coordinating body for the follow-up on these
indicators.
As stated in the Secretary-General’s report,
resolution 1325 (2000) has played an important role in
facilitating the participation of non-governmental
organizations, including women’s organizations, in
promoting women’s participation in peace processes.
In this regard, we should like to thank the Permanent
Missions of Austria, Mexico and the United Kingdom
for having convened an Arria Formula meeting on
19 October, which allowed us to learn more about the
work being carried out by various organizations on the
ground and to gain a better understanding of the scope
and challenges of resolution 1325 (2000).
Ten years after the adoption of the resolution, we
believe that the Security Council should consider a
number of the recommendations put forth by the
Secretary-General, in particular the possibility of
establishing a set of objectives, goals and indicators for
the next 10 years, or of creating a working group to
follow up on the resolution.

28

We have made progress in recognizing the
importance of the participation of women in peace and
security. However, there are many challenges that we
have yet to tackle, given that this is a matter of
changing the lives of women and girls, who have the
right to live free from fear and violence, enjoying
respect and equal opportunities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Sial (Pakistan): My delegation wishes to join
others in congratulating the Ugandan presidency for
convening this important open debate on women and
peace and security as we mark the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Pakistan
believes that it is an important occasion to assess the
progress made by the United Nations in addressing the
situation of women in conflict and post-conflict
situations.
As we gather to commemorate the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
the situation of women and girls in conflict situations
remains far from satisfactory. The report of the
Secretary-General on the occasion of the tenth
anniversary notes that
“Despite an apparent firm foundation and
promise, 10 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), significant achievements are
difficult to identify or quantify. The conditions
and opportunities that women and girls face in
situations of armed conflict continue to be
abhorrent” (S/2010/498, para. 3).
Resolution 1325 (2000), in addition to other
issues, also underscored the desirability of expanding
the role and contribution of women in United Nations
field-based operations. The Secretary-General has
observed in his report that significant progress in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) has been
made in the peacekeeping arena. However, more needs
to be done.
As the largest troop-contributing country,
Pakistan fully recognizes the important role of women
in peacekeeping operations. We are proud of our
women who have served as police officers, doctors and
nurses in difficult and dangerous operations in Africa
and the Balkans. Currently, we have 58 women
deployed in five peacekeeping missions, including 38
in the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

in Darfur. We are willing to deploy even more police
women in Darfur subject to the completion of their
deployment formalities.
We fully support the mainstreaming of the gender
perspective in peacekeeping operations and believe that
the appointment of gender advisers in the field and at
Headquarters has served a useful purpose. We are
supportive of all steps that increase the participation of
women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities.
Pakistan is equally conscious of the importance
of the gender sensitization of peacekeeping troops and
is complying with this important aspect by
incorporating the two United Nations standard generic
training modules in its training doctrine. We are
therefore fully supportive of the efforts of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in developing
training materials that could be used in the
predeployment and induction training of personnel.
We believe that peacekeeping missions must also
be provided with adequate resources for the discharge
of their mandates. It is unrealistic to expect that they
would be able to fulfil their complex mandates without
the availability of required resources.
The protection of civilians, including women and
girls, will remain one of the important mandated tasks
and objectives of peacekeeping. However, it is
important not to lose sight of the fact that only a
peaceful and secure environment can ensure protection
of civilians and that such conditions can be maintained
only by capable and resourceful national authorities.
The gender perspective in peacekeeping must be
dovetailed with a comprehensive peacebuilding
endeavour, factoring in particular requirements of
women in post-conflict zone. For long-term peace,
economic recovery and social cohesion, women’s
access to health, education and entrepreneurship is
essential. In this context, the Secretary General’s report
on
women’s
participation
in
peacebuilding
(S/2010/466) candidly puts forth a seven-point action
plan. Women’s participation in the mediation and
policy formulation of various peacebuilding efforts
targeted at particular requirements for women can be a
force multiplier. However, such action plans should run
in harmony with overall peacebuilding strategies, with
due regard to broad institutional contexts and strict
professionalism.

10-60385

We believe that while the Security Council has
come a long way in integrating the issue of women,
peace and security into its actions, it needs to
demonstrate greater political will while ensuring
accountability in the implementation of the resolution.
The President: I
representative of Israel.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Waxman (Israel): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for convening this important meeting. I would also
like to thank Under-Secretaries-General Michelle
Bachelet and Alain Le Roy; Mr. Hamidon Ali,
President of the Economic and Social Council; and
Ms. Thelma Awori for their presentations, and to
recognize the presence of many ministers and
Government officials who have travelled great
distances to this meeting. The statement made from
afar by the Secretary-General is testament to his
commitment to this issue.
The Council’s adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
10 years ago was a watershed event in the protection of
women and girls in conflict. The international
community was and should remain proud of this
accomplishment. The resolution helped to galvanize
Member States’ resolve to tackle this issue. In recent
years, the Council has adopted several additional
resolutions also focused on the intersection of gender
and conflict — namely, resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009) and 1889 (2009) — and the United Nations has
issued a number of reports and studies on the issue.
Now, the inclusion of a gender-based perspective is
becoming commonplace in peacekeeping missions and
their mandates, peacebuilding efforts, and United
Nations country teams. In this regard, efforts to
increase the number of women in missions’ senior
leadership and deployed as mission personnel are
notable.
However, recent events, such as the violations
that took place in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in Guinea, starkly highlight the wide gap
that remains between the noble aspirations and the
level of protection some women receive on the ground.
Israel welcomes the development this year of
indicators for progress in implementing resolution
1325 (2000). The wide-ranging measurements are the
most significant step forward to date in our attempt to
determine where the international community and
States have been successful, and where we fall short. If
these indicators are to be truly useful, however, the

29

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

information they generate must be used to address
shortcomings in a concerted and candid manner in
order to ensure that the goals of the resolution are met.

upholds this landmark achievement at home, and
stands ready to join hands with any nation, anywhere,
to help realize this goal.

The United Nations has a number of effective
tools at its disposal to help push forward this objective.
The Security Council, for example, could designate
consistent leadership within the Council on this issue
and consider methods to maintain its engagement in a
more comprehensive manner. In addition, the
Secretary-General could, in appropriate situations,
make greater use of the team of experts to deploy to
areas of concern, as allowed for in resolution 1888
(2009). These experts could assist States in
strengthening the rule of law, including building
judicial capacity and security sector reform. Such
efforts would go a long way towards achieving justice
for victims and discouraging future abuse.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.

To ensure the meaningful inclusion of women in
peacemaking
processes
and
post-conflict
reconstruction, some societies will have to experience
a seismic shift in gender attitudes on the ground.
Although resolution 1325 (2000) and its related
resolutions concern gender-based violence and the
transition to a post-conflict society, these issues are
inextricably linked to the situation of women’s rights
as a whole. States that ignore this simple fact may be
disappointed with the long-term results of their efforts.
But if States accept this reality and strive to address it,
they are likely to enhance their stability and even
economic recovery in the aftermath of conflict.
Member States bear a large part of the
responsibility for implementing the provisions of 1325
(2000). In the spirit of the resolution, Israel has
amended its Women’s Equal Rights Law to mandate
the inclusion of women in any group appointed to
peacebuilding negotiations or working towards conflict
resolution. Israel also seeks to assist other countries in
their implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Through its international cooperation agency,
MASHAV, my Government organizes programmes in
women’s leadership and capacity-building for women’s
non-governmental organizations. We believe that the
skills learned in these programmes can make a real
difference on the ground in post-conflict recovery.
Resolution 1325 (2000) is a milestone on the long
road to the protection of women in conflict. We should
collectively renew our commitment to its provisions.
Israel, for its part, rededicates itself to ensuring that it

30

Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia): At the outset, I express
my thanks to the presidency of Uganda for having
convened this important meeting and my appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his insightful report on
this topic (S/2010/498).
My delegation is particularly pleased to
participate in this debate on the occasion of the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), a landmark
resolution of which Tunisia, as a non-permanent
member in 2000, was among the initiators, along with
Bangladesh, Namibia, Canada, Jamaica and Mali.
Today likewise, my country attaches great importance
to this topic and wishes to underscore its strong
commitment to the protection of women in conflict and
post-conflict situations, as well as to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in all its
aspects.
Tunisia’s interest in this subject arises from its
long-standing commitment to advancing gender
equality and women’s empowerment, a strategic choice
made by my country upon gaining its independence in
1956 and which has become an integral part of its
national development policy. The advanced status
enjoyed today by Tunisian women, who hold 30 per
cent of decision-making and responsibility positions, is
one of the most prominent results of that choice. My
country firmly believes that peace, development and
democracy cannot be achieved and cannot be sustained
without the active involvement of women in public life
and in decision-making.
The tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) is a propitious occasion to take
stock of progress and identify the shortcomings. This
resolution laid out the normative framework that has
guided United Nations work on gender-mainstreaming
policies across a broad spectrum of functions and
projects in which the United Nations is engaged.
It should be recognized that today there is greater
awareness of sexual violence in conflict, as well as an
increased focus on addressing it. It has become widely
accepted that women have a critically important
contribution to make regarding how peace can be

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

achieved and maintained, and therefore women’s views
are more and more taken into account in the planning
and execution of peace processes, peacekeeping
operations and post-conflict recovery.

resolution 1325 (2000) through the development of
national action plans. Capacity-building and adequate
funding to implement these plans remain a challenge
that need to be addressed.

The appointments of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict and the Under-Secretary-General for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women and
Executive Director of the new gender entity, UN
Women, to whom we reiterate our full support, are the
most recent achievements in this regard.

My delegation is pleased to state in this regard
that Tunisia is about to finalize and adopt its national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). This plan will, among other things, encourage
women’s training in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
so as to provide qualified personnel who could be
deployed in field-based United Nations operations. It
will also enhance predeployment training, with
particular focus on the special measures to protect
women and girls from gender-based violence. It will
also endeavour to contribute to international efforts
aimed at raising greater awareness about these issues
through the convening of special regional events.
Tunisia hosted a regional seminar on this topic in
September, which allowed participants from the
Western Mediterranean countries to exchange views
and national experiences regarding the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).

However, despite 10 years of efforts, significant
achievements are yet difficult to identify on the
ground, to use the Secretary-General’s own words.
Commitments to the protection of women and girls
have fallen short of the pledges made. Women remain
deliberate targets of gender-based violence, in
particular sexual violence, in many conflict and postconflict areas, especially in Africa, as was the case
recently. These shameful crimes are a reminder that we
remain far from meeting the goals set in resolution
1325 (2000).
Moreover, women still have little access to
decision-making positions. Their participation in peace
and security processes remains far below desired
levels, and the gender composition of peacekeeping
missions is still unbalanced. In short, major gaps in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) remain to be
addressed.
The tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
is also an occasion to reinvigorate our efforts at the
international and national levels. We share the view of
the Secretary-General that our efforts need to be
channelled through a single coherent and coordinated
approach, guided by a clear framework with concrete
and specific goals and targets.
It should be recognized, however, that national
ownership of the resolution is the key approach to
ensuring its effective implementation. The prime
responsibility to combat the use of rape as a tool of war
rests with Member States, as does the responsibility to
increase the participation of women in peace
operations and peace talks, to protect and promote the
rights of women and girls, and to integrate the gender
perspective in different policy areas.
Member States can make a particularly important
contribution to ensuring the full implementation of

10-60385

Tunisia will further develop the implementation
of this resolution as part of its comprehensive approach
to gender equality and women’s empowerment because
we believe that empowering women is a moral
imperative. It is also a sound policy and one of the
greatest investments that we can make.
In conclusion, the tenth anniversary, which
coincides with the launching of the African Women’s
Decade, provides an opportunity to reaffirm the spirit
and core message of resolution 1325 (2000) that
sustainable peace is achievable only with the full and
effective participation of women. We must seize this
opportunity to refocus international attention on the
aims of the resolution and to galvanize all concerned
parties to turn good intentions into concrete action and
a tangible reality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Ms. Silveira (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to join the numerous delegations that have
taken the floor in congratulating you, Sir, for having
convened this debate and in expressing most heartfelt
thanks to all those, especially the women, who work
every day to promote peace and security in all corners
of the world.

31

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
great advances have been made on the women and
peace and security agenda, in terms of both breadth and
depth, in such a way that today it occupies an
important place in the range of legal instruments,
policies and concrete activities of this Organization in
conflict and post-conflict situations.
Despite this progress, women and girls
undoubtedly continue to be the most vulnerable and
most excluded in such situations. Reports from various
conflict and post-conflict zones on physical and moral
violence against women are a permanent reminder of
the enormous gap that exists between our words and
agreements in this forum and the reality of life on the
ground.
However, and while it is impossible to measure it,
we are convinced that the gradual and cross-cutting
adaptation of the United Nations since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) to address the vulnerability and
exclusion of women has averted many ills and
promoted the gender perspective in many processes
where otherwise this would not have been the case.
I should like to underscore a number of points
that we believe are worthy of further efforts, such as
the need to pay greater attention to the reintegration of
victims whose rights have been seriously violated, in
particular in cases of sexual abuse or exploitation; the
need to continue fighting against impunity for those
responsible for such violations; and the need to take
better into account the economic and social dimensions
of women’s participation in post-conflict situations,
with particular emphasis on access to education and
employment. In that regard, we understand that the
establishment of indicators such as those put forward
by the Secretary-General will make a crucial
contribution to monitoring and evaluating the
effectiveness of our actions.
Uruguay believes that the women and peace and
security agenda is a fundamental part of a larger
agenda that inextricably links the situation of children
in armed conflict and, of course, the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. It is therefore essential to
make progress in the most coordinated manner possible
in order to achieve synergies, avoid duplication of
effort and take advantage in the most effective way of
the instruments available to the Organization on the
ground.

32

Clearly, peacekeeping operations are one of those
tools, and a very relevant one. Over the past 11 years,
such operations have gradually incorporated civilian
protection mandates, giving special attention to women
and children. Progress has been significant. However,
periodic attacks against civilians, including in mission
deployment areas, demonstrate the Organization’s
limitations in meeting the expectations of both local
populations and the international community.
Measures that could overcome many of those
limitations include clear and predictable strategies
tailored to each mission; better coordination with the
various actors on the ground, especially with host
countries, which have the primary responsibility for
protection; and greater material resources, which are
absolutely essential.
We continue to be committed to development and
to the implementation of the agenda for the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, paying particular
attention on women and children, both through our
work at Headquarters and through our Blue Helmets on
the ground. We also reiterate the importance of
achieving the broadest possible support for that
agenda. The high level of participation in today’s
debate is clear evidence of that.
The intrinsic complementarity that exists between
participation and protection is probably the main
concept at the heart of resolution 1325 (2000), on
which so much has been built and developed. It is
therefore crucial to continue to promote greater
participation by women in the various forums and areas
linked to peace processes. In that regard, I should like
to conclude by making special mention of the
appointment of Ms. Michelle Bachelet at the helm of
UN Women. We are certain that with her leadership,
that new entity will play a central role in all areas
linked with the women and peace and security agenda
at the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Solomon Islands.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): Let me thank your
delegation, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
on the follow-up action on resolution 1325 (2000). My
delegation also wishes to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on women and peace and security
(S/2010/498).

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

Before I contribute to this debate in my national
capacity, I would like to associate myself with the
statement to be made by the representative of Papua
New Guinea on behalf of the Pacific small island
developing States.
The role of women as actors in the search for
peaceful settlements of today’s conflicts is an
indispensable requirement for sustainable peace and
development for developing countries, in particular
countries such as mine, which is one of the 18 among
the 49 least developed countries that are emerging from
conflict.
During our ethnic conflict, a group of women
from multi-ethnic backgrounds gathered under their
own initiative to approach and speak to militants on
both sides. As mothers, they used their respective
cultural norms to draw militants’ attention to the social
and human consequences of their actions. In so doing,
they gained their trust and confidence in order to
provide essential items across conflict lines. Mine is a
country of more than half a million people who speak
some 87 different languages.
For the past seven years, Solomon Islands has
been assisted by the Regional Assistance Mission to
Solomon Islands (RAMSI). The Mission is made up of
Pacific neighbours, led by Australia and strongly
supported by New Zealand. RAMSI has provided us
space and support to promote and implement resolution
1325 (2000) nationally and throughout the
Government. In that respect, Solomon Islands has
restructured its State security institution. For the first
time in our young history, we have more women in our
police force. The police force has also established a
unit to deal with post-conflict sexual and gender-based
violence, in coordination with other line ministries and
staffed with officers trained in gender sensitivity and
human rights.
On the issue of mainstreaming gender funding
within the Government system, that is a work in
progress. I am pleased to say that baseline data have
been established, allowing small women’s machinery
in the country to develop strategies to enhance gender
capacity within the national system.
Having said that, the challenge ahead is huge.
The social-system structures, institutions and values of
Solomon Islands are centred on our natural resources.
Eighty per cent of Solomon Islands land is customarily
owned and undocumented. Traditional land operates

10-60385

under three land-tenure systems: matrilineal, patrilineal
and chiefly.
To localize resolution 1325 (2000) in small island
developing States, we must look at the challenges
women face on a daily basis, in particular the impact of
climate change, which is now a threat multiplier.
Climate change has induced population relocations and
is uprooting populations from low-lying islands to
higher ones. People leave their ancestral land and move
into other land-tenure systems. If not well managed,
that will create another time bomb, as land allocated to
relocated populations is fixed and suffers from overuse
for agricultural production. It is a matter of time before
we see displaced populations entering customary lands,
which will trigger future hot spots of conflict.
The frequency of natural disasters has created
food insecurity for women and has, to some extent,
disempowered them, as their land is swallowed up by
the rising sea. Water insecurity is forcing mothers to
make difficult choices, including having to spend more
time seeking food to put on the table and neglecting
children and not sending them to school. Equipping
Solomon Islands women with technologies for storing
traditional crops will better prepare them to manage the
frequent disasters they face.
On the issue of governance, Solomon Islands
adopted a political system — the Westminster system —
that does not recognize the traditional decision-making
role of women in tribal societies. Women’s traditional
role gets subsumed in the modern decision makingprocess, which further weakens the power base of
women in their traditional setting.
I am pleased to say that Solomon Islands has not
shied away from looking at the issue of gender
representation in our national Parliament. An ambitious
plan for temporary measures to advance women’s
participation was launched last year. However, it did
not receive enough support and needed more
consultation. We hope that it will receive attention over
time. The initiative did generate a tsunami of interest,
and we have an ongoing conversation on it. I merely
mention that because women in our part of the globe
live and operate in two worlds, the traditional and the
modern world.
Solomon Islands has adopted various conflictprevention mechanisms in an effort to prevent the
country from sliding back into conflict. The South
African model of a truth and reconciliation commission

33

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

is operating, allowing victims to seek justice and
offenders forgiveness. The Government is looking at
the notion of complementing that with a forgiveness
bill to bring about a process for former militants who
seek reconciliation with society.
The challenges faced by my country in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) include the
establishment of a gender early warning system.
However, it was project-driven, and the initiative
slowed when the project ended. It is important that,
whatever gender-related activities are carried out, it is
done on a sustainable way and established within
existing gender institutions, in particular faith-based
women’s groups that are rural-based, communityfocused and meet frequently.
Secondly, there needs to be a shift in approach by
the United Nations in supporting the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), away from a one-size-fits-all
approach
of
over-regionalizing
issues
while
disregarding the varying levels of development within
Pacific small island developing States and countryspecific development needs. In that respect, over the
years, Solomon Islands has continued to call for
upgrading the United Nations presence in our country,
as we are currently managed from a regional office
abroad.
Thirdly, it is important that the multilateral
system work for small countries. Too often, we see that
we are too small for the global system to work for us.
In conclusion, Solomon Islands joins others in
welcoming the operationalization of UN Women, looks
forward to working with the new gender entity and
reaffirms its commitment to resolution 1325 (2000).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador.
Mr. García González (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to express my delegation’s thanks
for your timely initiative, Mr. President, to convene
this open Security Council debate to commemorate the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security. This
initiative under Uganda’s presidency this month
accurately reflects the relevance of this question for
developing countries. I take this opportunity to
welcome the presence of Under-Secretary-General
Michelle Bachelet here today and reiterate our
congratulations for her appointment as the head of UN

34

Women. We wish her every success in her work and
assure her of our cooperation in fulfilling her mandate.
The Government of El Salvador acknowledges
and values the progress made thus far, both by the
international community as a whole and by Member
States in particular, in reaffirming the important role of
women in conflict prevention and resolution and in
peacebuilding. These efforts also reaffirm the need for
women to participate on an equal footing and to be
fully involved in all initiatives aimed at maintaining
and promoting peace and security, as well as the
importance of increasing their participation in
decision-making processes for conflict prevention and
resolution.
El Salvador welcomes the evolution of this
historic resolution and the subsequent adoption by the
Council of resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1882 (2009) on
the prevention and response to sexual violence in
conflicts and resolution 1888 (2009) on the
participation of women in peacebuilding. We see those
resolutions as crucial elements for confronting the
challenges and obstacles to the full participation of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts as
well as in public life after conflict.
El Salvador acknowledges and welcomes the
important contribution made by the Peacebuilding
Commission to efforts to promote and strengthen the
participation of women in peacebuilding following
conflict. We also welcome the efforts made on a daily
basis by civil society organizations, especially
women’s movements, aimed at incorporating the
gender perspective in peacekeeping operations. We
hope for an increase in women’s representation at all
levels of institutional decision-making, as well as in
national, regional and international mechanisms, to
prevent, manage and resolve conflicts through a
renewed effort aimed at encouraging concrete action
that promotes a more strategic and systematic approach
to this important question.
El Salvador, as a troop-contributing country, is
making a significant contribution, relatively speaking,
to peacekeeping operations in terms of members of its
armed forces and the national civil police force. At the
same time, we are also endeavouring to promote the
gender perspective and the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) within those national
institutions.

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

In addition, through the El Salvador Institute for
the Advancement of Women, we are promoting a
strategic re-alignment, as of 1 June 2009, to bring
about a society with full gender equality by reducing
the gender gap and by combating all forms of violence
against women. In that regard, we have drawn up and
are implementing the second national policy for
women, which includes the priorities of the five-year
development plan and the lessons learned from the
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action in the framework of our previous
national policy for women.
To conclude, allow me to share the following
thoughts with Council members. In our view, the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
presents a valuable opportunity to establish a bridge
between the Security Council and the General
Assembly in terms of the participation and inclusion of
women in conflict prevention and resolution and in
peacebuilding. It is now time for comprehensive
cooperation between these main bodies of the United
Nations on this question, for the benefit of women,
girls and all the peoples of the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
others in expressing our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate marking
a decade of our efforts with regard to implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for providing us with his important report
(S/2010/498). The participation of several ministers,
high-level officials and distinguished speakers in this
debate clearly reflects the global commitment to
enhancing the role of women at all stages of peace and
conflict resolution processes.
Our debate comes at a timely juncture, with the
recent establishment of UN Women and appointment of
Ms. Bachelet, who joined us today for the debate, as its
first Under-Secretary-General.
Let me reaffirm Indonesia’s support for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security. That resolution was the
culmination of the growing realization of women’s
diverse roles in and contribution to conflict resolution
and building peace. It has been an important
complement to the range of international frameworks
on women, including the Beijing Platform for Action,

10-60385

which addresses, among other things, women and
armed conflict as one of the areas for action.
The resolution has galvanized efforts by Member
States, the United Nations system and civil society
organizations, thus making it one of the most translated
resolutions of the Security Council.
For the ten years following its adoption, the
Security Council’s attention towards women’s
participation in peace processes and the elimination of
sexual violence in armed conflict has been unwavering.
The adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009)
and 1889 (2009), as well as the appointment of Margot
Wallström as the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict testify to the Council’s deep
commitment.
Furthermore, Indonesia also takes note of the
activities by the United Nations system to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) through the System-wide
Action Plan, which covers the five pillars of the
resolution. Commendable efforts have been made
through the Plan. However, as reflected in the
Secretary-General’s report, despite the increasing
number and intensity of activities to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), progress has remained slow,
fragmented and without clear direction, lacking timebound goals and targets. The recently established UN
Women will, we hope, therefore contribute to
enhancing coherence and coordination in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Noting that the resolution has galvanized
important efforts at all levels on women, peace and
security, it is important for the Council to continue
making efforts to ensure its effective implementation.
The international community has every interest in
ensuring the full involvement of women in all stages of
the peace process, peacekeeping and peacebuilding:
women as peacemakers, women as peacekeepers and
women as peacebuilders.
In an era when opportunities and knowledge
abound, we find that women’s potential contributions
to conflict resolution processes have not been
adequately harnessed. That represents an enormous
deficit in our common efforts. Excluding or omitting
women’s participation in conflict resolution processes
weakens efforts to increase representation by major
stakeholders to achieve sustainable peace based on
inclusion of all perspectives. Thus, widening the
opportunity for women’s participation at various stages

35

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

of peace and conflict resolution processes demands our
continued full support.
The Council’s adoption of the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2010/22) today marks an important
step to enhance the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Looking forward, the Council has recognized
the need to implement resolution 1325 (2000) more
consistently. One of the areas underlined is the need for
timely and systematic reporting on women and peace
and security issues.
The Secretary-General’s recommendation to track
the implementation of the resolution based on a set of
indicators was discussed in a previous debate in April
(see S/PV.6302). We take note of the consultations held
by the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women with all geographic groups to
develop the indicators. Bearing in mind the SecretaryGeneral’s notation that the indicators will be
operational in two years, we encourage continued
consultations with all Member States on their practical
application. It is important to take into account the
specificities of relevant countries. In order to ensure
the United Nations readiness to apply the indicators in
the future, efforts must be made to develop working
methods within the United Nations system.
To conclude, let me reiterate that the
responsibility to implement relevant Security Council
resolutions with a view to enhancing women’s
participation in peace processes, including the
protection of women, rests primarily with the
respective
Governments.
Therefore,
achieving
sustainable progress in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) requires national ownership,
along with adequate capacity and resources. It is also
imperative to take into consideration the specific needs
and conditions of each respective country. For this
reason, the support of the international community,
including civil society networks, continues to be
important to achieving this noble goal.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this very necessary discussion. As we all
know, women are particularly vulnerable to the effects
of conflict, but can be very powerful in ending it.
Durable peace requires the specific needs of women
and girls to be addressed. We must recognize women as
potent agents of peace. This tenth anniversary of

36

resolution 1325 (2000) obviously provides an
opportunity to review what we have done well over the
past decade, to look ahead and, more importantly, to
see what more can be done, must be done and how it
can be done better.
We have achieved much over the past 10 years,
but nowhere near enough. Over 20 countries have
finalized national action plans on women, peace and
security. Many more, including Australia, are currently
developing plans. We should not underestimate the
importance of those plans. They encapsulate political
will. They set out concrete steps that countries will
take to translate the ideals of resolution 1325 (2000)
into action. They are, in fact, a meaningful and
practical way to achieve progress on the ground.
We have seen some improvements in the capacity
of women at the local level to engage in peace
processes that affect them. For its part, Australia
continues to be active in this field. In our own
immediate region, we have supported women who are
themselves
mobilizing
in
Solomon
Islands,
Bougainville, Fiji, Tonga and elsewhere to end conflict
and foster peace and reconciliation in their own
communities. The narrative a few moments ago from
the Permanent Representative of Solomon Islands is
encouraging testimony to what can be done, but of
course equally a stark statement of how hard the actual
task is. Australia certainly will continue to work with
United Nations partners, civil society and national
Governments to ensure that women in the Asia-Pacific
region and elsewhere play a central role in
peacemaking.
The past year witnessed a rapid rise in the
collective will to address sexual violence in conflict,
although such violence continues abhorrently.
Resolution 1888 (2009) did break important new
ground. We welcome the appointment of Margot
Wallström as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Her
views on how the United Nations system could
improve its handling of the protection of civilians in
this area should be considered very carefully.
Despite the achievements — limited though they
are in some areas — of the past decade, there is
widespread recognition that much more remains to be
done to realize the promise of resolution 1325 (2000).
Ten years on, far too many gaps remain. Resolution
1325 (2000) still needs to be addressed in a

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

comprehensive and strategic way. Although many
activities have been undertaken over the past 10 years,
a comprehensive analysis of the impact of these
initiatives is yet to be conducted. To do so will require
data. That data will need to be assessed against reliable
and relevant indicators to evaluate results, determine
the impact and identify best practices and lessons
learned. That must then form the basis for new and
effective policy responses.
We welcome the comprehensive set of indicators
developed for use at the global, regional and national
levels to track implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), as outlined in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/498), and we would ask the Security Council
to endorse those indicators and put them to use,
particularly where they are relevant to the Council’s
work. The indicators should be deployed by all
relevant parts of the United Nations system to collect
data and inform policy and programmatic responses,
particularly at the country level. They should also be
used as one method to inform policy at the national
level.
The recent mass rapes in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo obviously highlight to all of us
the challenges still faced in ensuring that sexual
violence in conflict is addressed comprehensively
throughout the entire United Nations system,
particularly as part of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. There remains a gap between our collective
expectations of what the United Nations system should
be able to do and the actual capacity of peacekeepers
on the ground. Operational guidance, training and
resources need to be provided to mission leadership
and peacekeepers so that they are prepared to take
action in response to threats against civilians.
Australia was pleased to support the joint
analytical inventory developed by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Development Fund for Women, under the auspices of
the inter-agency network United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict. The inventory was
released this year. It is a key tool for the United
Nations to use in improving its ability to protect
civilians from sexual violence in conflict as a part of
peacekeeping operations. We are committed to working
with our United Nations partners to fully operationalize
this tool, including by incorporating it into
predeployment training for peacekeepers.

10-60385

I am also pleased to announce that Australia will
fund the roll-out of the scenario-based training
materials for peacekeepers to prevent and respond to
sexual violence. We will also continue our funding to
the Gender Standby Capacity and the Protection
Standby Capacity Project to better ensure that the
broader protection needs of women are addressed in
humanitarian crises.
The establishment of UN Women provides real
opportunities to move forward on women, peace and
security. We commend Ms. Bachelet’s commitment to
this goal and are of course ready to support her efforts.
Effective and tailored in-country programmes,
formulated on the basis of data analysed against the
global indicators, will be essential. We look forward to
UN Women working with all relevant partners to
develop a comprehensive framework to guide the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
To conclude, we know that our common resolve
to take effective action on women, peace and security
must not abate with this tenth anniversary. Australia
will continue to work with others on how best to
improve our collective response in this critical and
vital area. We all have an irreducible obligation to do
much better than we are doing.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Let me begin by extending
our congratulations to you, Mr. President, and your
delegation on your presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October, and by assuring you of the
full support of my delegation. I also thank you and
your delegation for initiating this meeting and bringing
the Council together to discuss an issue that is
critically important to the Republic of Croatia and,
surely, to all nations.
Allow me to extend a warm welcome to
Ms. Michelle Bachelet and wish her success in her
future work as the first Executive Director of the newly
established gender entity, UN Women, and UnderSecretary-General for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women. Given her high political
stature and experience, we deem that Ms. Bachelet will
enhance the gender equality agenda and that
UN Women will grow into the principal voice for
gender mainstreaming and the empowerment of
women.

37

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Belgium on behalf of the
European Union. Here, I would like to make additional
remarks in my national capacity.
The adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 1325 (2000) bears testimony to the progress
made during the past decade in the area of women and
peace and security. This historic resolution has focused
much-needed attention on the question of women’s
empowerment, which represents a priority for my
country. While all the resolutions on women and peace
and security are equally important, resolution 1325
(2000) serves as an umbrella resolution in addressing
women’s empowerment, their task as peacebuilders and
their fragile position as victims of war.
The Republic of Croatia welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of this
landmark resolution (S/2010/498), the recommendations
contained therein, as well as the presidential statement
adopted by the Council today(S/PRST/2010/22). We
call upon the Security Council to endorse the indicators
developed by the Secretary-General as soon as
possible.
The commitments set forth by the resolution are
commendable, but translating words into action is the
only way of resolving the remaining issues — and the
issues are many. As numerous situations on the agenda
of this Council have shown, women still have a long
way to go in order to fulfil their empowerment goals as
well as to fully realize their human rights, both in times
of war and peace. The empowerment of women is
imperative to the full achievement of human rights, as
well as to overall economic and political development
and progress. Although women are widely recognized
as effective agents of peace, they still have little access
to decision-making positions and peace negotiations.
More should be done.
Armed conflicts continue to have a devastating
impact on women and girls and are often accompanied
by gender-based violence, including the increasing
scale and brutality of sexual violence, often used as a
means of war. Impunity for such acts of violence
against women is still prevalent and the prosecution
rate very low.
Even on Croatian territory, in the heart of Europe,
rape was used as a method of intimidation and terror
during the aggression to which Croatia was exposed in
the early 1990s. We are fully aware of the role both the

38

Security Council and the international community can
play in addressing sexual violence against women and
girls, especially when used by political or military
leaders as a means of achieving political or military
objectives. We believe that the Security Council needs
to provide strong and effective leadership on this issue,
including by taking concrete action when necessary,
with the ultimate aim of eradicating this abhorrent
behaviour. Such acts of violence demand further action
by the Security Council to strengthen the rule of law
and to end impunity. They need to be thoroughly
investigated and perpetrators brought to account, and it
is therefore imperative for the International Criminal
Court, as well as national courts, to be the last instance
of justice for the victims and a reminder that there can
be no tolerance for the crime of rape.
We are pleased to see that progress has been
made in several areas and that the United Nations
system continues to engage in a wide range of good
practices. We encourage the strengthening of the
coordination among United Nations agencies both at
Headquarters and in the field, especially in monitoring
and reporting on situations where parties to armed
conflict engage in rape and other sexual violence as a
means of war. Nevertheless, more consistent and
comprehensive reporting on sexual violence would
enable the Council to address the protection of women
and children in a more systematic manner, whereas the
Council should include specific reporting requirements
in resolutions establishing or renewing mandates.
More needs to be done also at the national level.
The integration of the resolution has to be countrydriven, and Member States need to take responsibility
for its success by ensuring that it is integrated into
national policies. We urge countries to apply a broad
gender-mainstreaming approach across Government,
for instance through a system-wide approach that links
development, humanitarian and defence issues. All
plans should include civil society consultations, as well
as monitoring and reporting mechanisms.
I am pleased to say that Croatia has taken steps to
integrate the gender perspective into its national
security policy through its national strategy for the
promotion of gender equality, and is currently
developing its national action plan on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which is
expected to be adopted in 2011. Under the leadership
of its first female Prime Minister, Croatia will continue
to give its firm support to all areas of the women and

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

peace and security agenda. We see it as a gender-based
peace agenda that involves addressing the
disproportionate effect of conflict on women and
combating sexual violence. It is also about securing the
full, equal and effective participation of women at all
stages of the peace process, giving them an equal role
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, as well as
in peacebuilding. The realization of these goals is
essential to safeguarding basic human rights and
achieving human security and lasting peace.

Since 2001 Afghanistan has made considerable
progress in the advancement of women. The
Government of Afghanistan has committed its energy
and resources to strengthening the rights of women and
improving their role in all aspects of political, social,
cultural and economic life, as shown through our
National Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan.
The voices of Afghan women have been increasingly
amplified by our growing, vibrant civil society and the
active presence of women in the media.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.

Key areas of success for the improvement of the
lives of women have been in the spheres of political
participation, education and health. As we finalize the
results of our second parliamentary election, we recall
that, last month, millions of Afghans went to the polls
to make their voice heard. In those recent elections,
406 out of 2,556 candidates were women. That
compares with 328 women candidates in 2005, and
ensures that women will fill at least all the 68 seats, or
25 per cent, allocated for women and will likely win
additional seats. Women will fill at least a quarter of
the Afghan parliament, nearing our Millennium
Development Goal of 30 per cent, and will make up
18 per cent of Government employees.

Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important and
historic debate on women and peace and security. On
behalf of my delegation, I commend you on your able
leadership of the Council this month. We welcome not
only the Secretary-General’s extensive report
(S/2010/498) before us, but also the SecretaryGeneral’s first cross-cutting report on women and
peace and security (S/2010/173).
On the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), it is important to take a step back to gain a
more global perspective and to celebrate how far we
have come, as well as to recognize areas for
improvement in terms of the participation and
protection of women in situations of conflict. These
have been 10 years of overwhelmingly strong
consensus around the resolution. During this time, my
country has emerged from decades of suffering to
achieve major progress for women. We now work in
solidarity with the international community to
eliminate the deeply rooted tragedy of the
disproportionate effects of conflict on women and to
highlight the crucial role of women’s leadership in the
peace process.
The Afghan people have suffered immensely for
more than 30 years under foreign invasions, civil wars
and Taliban rule. In the 1990s, Afghan women were the
targets of brutality and widespread violence, including
gender-based violence and oppression. The Taliban
completely removed women from all aspects of public
life, depriving them of such fundamental rights as
education and participation in both the economic and
political sectors. The enemies of women’s rights
remain strong in their efforts. They misrepresent
Afghan traditions, using their own interpretations of
Islam to justify their actions.

10-60385

There are now over 1,000 women in the Afghan
National Security Forces. We plan to increase the
number of women in the Afghan National Police to
over 5,000 in the next five years. The presence of
women in those crucial positions has had a significant
impact. We are proud of their resilience and bravery in
protecting our population.
Remarkable progress has been made in terms of
the number of women and girls at all levels of
education and the increased literacy ratio of girls to
boys. Around 37 per cent of the 7 million students in
Afghanistan are female. Today, Afghan boys and girls
have equal access to education. We must continue our
efforts to teach girls to read and to provide more
accessible schooling for women and girls, particularly
in rural areas.
Furthermore, by providing basic health services
to nearly 90 per cent of our population, in Afghanistan,
health care has improved tremendously for both men
and women. That sector also provides employment
opportunities for women, as over 20 per cent of doctors
and half of the health-care workers in Afghanistan are
women.

39

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

The commitment of the Government of
Afghanistan and the support of the international
community have been crucial factors in our
achievements regarding women in the past decade.
During the London and Kabul Conferences, in January
and July of this year, we reaffirmed our commitment to
protecting the rights of women. As the country moves
towards seeking a new political framework for peace
and reconciliation, it is vital to make sure that those
achievements are sustained and that the rights of
women are protected in the future.
While we consider the peace talks to be an
important part of our shared stabilization efforts, the
human rights and women’s rights enshrined in our
Constitution are non-negotiable. Today, I can affirm
that women’s rights will remain a priority in all peace
talks and at every single step of the reconciliation
process. We see our reconciliation process as the way
to end violence for all Afghan people, including
women. The representation of women in the Afghan
Peace Jirga in June 2010 and the inclusion of 10
women representatives in the newly established High
Peace Council are important steps in efforts to
guarantee the active involvement of women in the
peace process and facilitate reconciliation talks with
those who are willing to renounce violence.
At the 10-year mark, as we reflect on the
successes and challenges of resolution 1325 (2000), we
welcome the Secretary-General’s report of 28
September 2010 (S/2010/498), which suggests clear,
revised indicators for measuring the success of that
resolution. We now have an extremely useful set of
tools, which must be implemented in order to gauge
our impact in that area going forward. We must revisit
the original goals and objectives of resolution 1325
(2000) in order to strengthen the monitoring process,
address potential gaps and learn from one another’s
best practices.
We are appreciative of the crucial role of the
international community and thank the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for its support of all
national efforts towards improving the situation of
women in Afghanistan. We extend our gratitude to the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) for engaging women’s groups to support
the efforts of authorities to improve the investigation of
sexual violence, thus strengthening the capacity of
communities to prevent such horrendous acts. We are
committed to further working with UNIFEM in

40

completing our report to the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women in the
near future.
We also appreciate the roles of all United Nations
bodies, such as UNICEF, the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations
Population Fund, for their efforts towards improving
the lives of women in Afghanistan. We have high
expectations for the work of UN Women and support
the development of a strong relationship with that
institution going forward.
Resolution 1325 (2000) is not just about rescuing
women, nor jus about helping women who are
struggling to overcome conflict, but about recognizing
the unique role of women as peacemakers and creating
opportunities for women to excel in leadership roles.
What better place in the world than Afghanistan to
demonstrate the importance of that issue. Afghan
women are not damsels in distress. They have been
victimized, but they are not helpless victims. They
have their own ideas about the needs of women in their
country and must be listened to and supported on their
paths to self-empowerment.
Honouring resolution 1325 (2000) and the
subsequent resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and
1889 (2009) is not only a commitment on the part of
the Afghan Government, but a necessity. While women
are generally the first to be affected by conflict, let us
all look forward to witnessing women as the first
beneficiaries of peace.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
representative of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), unanimously adopted on 31
October 2000, is considered the most significant legal
and political document in the advancement of the role
of women in the fields of peace and security. It was
welcomed by women worldwide, particularly women
in situations of armed conflict and women living under
foreign occupation, as it was seen as an essential tool
for their protection and empowerment.
Indeed, resolution 1325 (2000) not only provides
tools to strengthen women’s capacity and promote
gender equality, but also addresses the impact of armed
conflict and war on women, calling for measures to be
taken by the international community, including the
Security Council, to protect them in times of conflict,

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

post conflict and peace. It is also important to recall
that the Council expressed concern that civilians,
mainly women and children, account for the vast
majority of those adversely affected by armed conflict,
and it reaffirmed the need to fully implement
international humanitarian and human rights law for
the protection of the rights of women and girls during
and after conflicts.
The importance of resolution 1325 (2000) for
Palestinian women stems from its content and direct
applicability to their unique situation. On one hand, it
provides a framework for their protection against the
crimes committed by Israel, the occupying Power,
while, on the other, it recommends the means to
strengthen their role in the decision-making process,
including in terms of conflict resolution and
peacebuilding.
Regrettably, however, women’s hopes for more
tangible improvements in their daily lives have not
been realized. A review of indicators regarding the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) shows that
little progress has been achieved and that major gaps
remain between the objectives of the resolution and
their attainment. In this context, we share the
assessment made by the Secretary-General in his
report, in which he stated:
“Despite an apparent firm foundation and
promise, 10 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), significant achievements are
difficult to identify or quantify. The conditions
that women and girls face in situations of armed
conflict continue to be abhorrent and effective
methods for monitoring their impact are lacking.”
(S/2010/498, para. 3)

other relevant resolutions, to exert greater efforts to
finally bring an end to this deplorable situation.
Moreover, in the context of today’s debate, we believe
it is appropriate to call once again upon the
international community to hold Israel accountable for
all the crimes committed against Palestinian women
and to end its impunity.
A recent, tragic example of the international
community, mainly the Security Council, failing to
protect Palestinian women came during and after the
latest Israeli war of aggression against the Gaza Strip,
with its traumatizing impact on women and children.
That failure shows the extent to which resolution 1325
(2000) has been totally ignored and breached by the
occupying Power without any accountability. In this
regard, we continue to witness unbearable human
suffering in the Gaza Strip as a result of that
aggression, in which more than 1,400 civilians were
brutally killed, including hundreds of innocent women
and children, and 5,500 other civilians were injured.
This, along with the widespread destruction of
Palestinian property and infrastructure and gross
violations of human rights committed against the
Palestinian civilian population by the occupying
Power, has compounded the dire consequences that the
illegal, inhumane Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip has
had on the population, with severe poverty,
unemployment and rampant hardship gravely
impacting the socio-economic and psychological
conditions of Palestinian women.

This regrettable fact is extremely tragic in the
case of Palestinian women. Their situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, remains one of a dire humanitarian crisis
that has impacted all aspects of their daily lives,
causing extensive suffering, misery and loss. Indeed,
the vast toll of the Israeli occupation on Palestinian
women cannot be overemphasized; nor can the impact
of Israel’s systematic human rights violations against
Palestinian women and their families.

At the same time, living conditions in the West
Bank remain intolerable, in particular as a result of
Israel’s ongoing seizure and colonization of Palestinian
land, particularly in and around East Jerusalem, for the
construction and expansion of illegal settlements and
the apartheid annexation wall, as well as ongoing home
demolitions and evictions, resulting in the continued
dispossession and displacement of Palestinian women
and their families, obstruction of freedom of movement
and acts of terror and violence by Israeli settlers
against innocent Palestinian civilians. Those and
countless other Israeli violations, together with the
constant humiliation of the Palestinian population,
continue to have vicious consequences on the
advancement and empowerment of Palestinian women.

This now 43-year Israeli military occupation has
caused innumerable hardships and challenges for
Palestinian women, which require the international
community, in line with resolution 1325 (2000) and

In conclusion, as we observe the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), let us renew our
commitment to action and shoulder our responsibility
to take more effective measures to fully implement this

10-60385

41

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

important legislation by the Security Council. Let us
move forward on our commitment to end all types of
violence against women, protect them from the scourge
of war and advance their participation at the highest
level, for these are surely key components of peace and
security in our world.

peacebuilding and peace consolidation. In this regard,
we commend the efforts that have been undertaken by
various stakeholders, in particular the United Nations
system, civil society and various national political
leaders, in promoting the participation of women in
peacebuilding and peace consolidation processes.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Republic of Tanzania.

The adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) was an important milestone in empowering
women in the critical areas of peace and security,
where women have often been deliberate targets and
silent victims of violent conflicts. The effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is therefore a
necessity. In this regard we wish to emphasize the
following points.

Mr. Sefue (United Republic of Tanzania): Let me
begin by expressing our sincere appreciation to the
delegation of Uganda for organizing this open debate.
The tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
provides us with an opportunity to further reaffirm the
indispensable role of women in conflict prevention and
resolution and peacebuilding.
My delegation associates itself with the
statements made by the representative of Namibia on
behalf of States members of the Southern African
Development Community and by the representative of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2010/498). The set of indicators annexed to the
report provides a good and objective basis for
monitoring the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). It is our hope that the Council will endorse
those indicators.
As an equal component of any society, women
should have equal and active participation in
formulating political, economic and social policies.
Equally, as victims of exclusion, as vulnerable targets
in conflicts and as mothers and breadwinners, women
have high stakes in conflict prevention and resolution,
and in all issues related to peace and security. Yet, in
the name of tradition, in the name of culture and
sometimes even in the name of security, women have
continued to be excluded, and too often they have been
set aside while men brokered peace agreements. We are
encouraged, therefore, that more and more women are
challenging this viewpoint and are increasingly
demanding involvement as stakeholders in their
communities. Their potential as peacebuilders must
now be harnessed.
We have to make concerted efforts to support and
strengthen the capacities of women and their networks
to actively participate in all processes of conflict
prevention and management, as well as in

42

First, there is a need to create more awareness
and to provide technical support for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions, such as 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009) and 1889 (2009), specifically in national gender
machineries, foreign affairs ministries, the judiciary
and the army.
Secondly, women’s participation in peace
processes and post-conflict planning should be routine,
predictable and mandatory. Such participation must
now be the norm, not tokenism.
Thirdly, women’s political and economic
empowerment and the promotion and protection of
women’s and girls’ rights are critical for promoting
women’s participation in conflict prevention,
post-conflict activities and gender mainstreaming in
post-conflict strategies. More funds should now be
provided in this regard, including to ensure that women
have access to quality education, to capacity-building
through entrepreneurship and to economic opportunity.
Fourthly, support for post-conflict countries
should include reform of their justice systems and
security sectors to ensure that there is a credible and
supportive environment for the participation and
protection of women.
Fifthly, impunity for all those who abuse women
and girls and violate their human rights, as well as for
those who commission such acts, must cease forthwith.
These persons must be speedily brought to justice.
Sixthly, we must support UN Women, which is
well placed to coordinate the various actors within the
United Nations system and bring coherence to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

Allow me to conclude by encouraging the
Security Council to continue to be seized of this matter.

and prevention, promotion, relief and recovery, and
monitoring and evaluation.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.

As enshrined in its interim Constitution, Nepal is
committed to setting aside 33 per cent of seats in
Parliament for women. We are also committed to
continuing an affirmative action policy in our civil
service with a view to bringing women into the
decision-making levels of the public sector. We are
also committed to increasing women’s participation in
our army and police forces.

Mr. Rai (Nepal): My delegation wishes to
express its sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important open debate on the
occasion of the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was a landmark in the
efforts to inject the perspectives of women and gender
into every aspect of the peace process, peacekeeping
operations, rehabilitation and reintegration, and
governance structures in the aftermath of conflict. The
resolution has been vital not only for promoting gender
equality within United Nations activities while
addressing issues related to conflict, peace and
security, but also to efforts to encourage Member
States to mainstream a gender perspective in the areas
of peace, security and the post-conflict reconstruction
of nations.
As we commemorate the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), it is quite pertinent to take
stock of our achievements, identify shortcomings and
exchange views and experiences relevant to our future
courses of action on the effective implementation of
the resolution. This debate could serve as an
opportunity to gather pragmatic input, experiences and
policy suggestions.
We are appreciative of the various notable efforts
in a broad range of areas that the United Nations
system, Member States, civil society and other actors
have made towards implementing resolution 1325
(2000). But there are many areas in which our
concerted efforts are still much needed. My delegation
wishes to see an increased number of women in
high-ranking positions in the United Nations system, as
well as peacekeepers in the field.
My Government attaches great importance to
resolution 1325 (2000), and we are in the final stage of
preparing our national action plan for the effective
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008). As a nation emerging from conflict and moving
towards lasting peace, stability and prosperity, Nepal is
fully aware of the benefits of effective implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). Our national action plan is
structured around five pillars: participation, protection

10-60385

The Government of Nepal has adopted various
measures to fight gender-related violence, establishing
a toll-free hotline in the Office of the Prime Minister, a
gender violence prevention fund, and gender violence
control committees in every district in the country. We
have also set up local peace committees in every
district — empowered to address conflict at the local
level and to mediate between conflicting parties —
with at least 33 per cent participation by women. We
are committed to establishing women’s and children’s
service centres in police stations across the country for
the expeditious investigation and prosecution of sexual
and gender-related violence cases.
Women cannot be the silent bearers of the pain
and sorrows of conflict, with all of the psychosocial
trauma and stigmatization that implies. They are
peacemakers and the very foundation of social
cohesion and integration. They are an inherent part of
the reconstruction and rebuilding of our country. The
time has come to consolidate and redouble our efforts
to enhance women’s involvement in peacekeeping,
peacemaking and peacebuilding by putting resolution
1325 (2000) into practice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji.
Mr. Thomson (Fiji): At the outset, the Fiji
delegation wishes to salute you personally,
Mr. President, and your Government, and to convey
our gratitude for your convening this important event.
At the same time, we thank the Secretary-General for
his most comprehensive report (S/2010/498).
Fiji associates itself with the statement to be
delivered this evening by the representative of Papua
New Guinea on behalf of the Pacific small island
developing States (SIDs).
For the purposes of this event, we first wish to
comment on the pronouncement, highlighted in the

43

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

Secretary-General’s report, that in the 10 years since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), its overall
implementation has been slow. Undoubtedly, progress
has been made, but much work remains to be done in
implementing the resolution and assessing the progress
of individual countries.
On a more positive note, we welcome with
appreciation the initiative of the Security Council and
the work carried out by the Secretary-General in
establishing the set of indicators, which will not only
track the implementation of the resolution, but also
serve as a guide for all Member States in their efforts
to achieve its goals. We believe that such universal
indicators can be used to full advantage only if national
frameworks and policies are put in place to implement
the various thematic areas of the resolution. This belief
is based on the fact that the slow rates of overall
implementation of the resolution derive from the
difficulties faced by many countries in linking and
incorporating its relevant principles into practical
Government policies.
It is for this reason that the Pacific SIDs are of
the view that the first important step for us to take is to
develop a regional framework that incorporates the
principles of the resolution, with clear policy
guidelines on its application to our unique national and
regional characteristics. We believe that this will
provide the impetus to accelerate the implementation
process in the Pacific.
Consequently, the Fiji delegation reiterates the
Pacific SIDs’ request for the United Nations to support
the convening of a regional high-level meeting to
develop and adopt a regional action plan on women
and peace and security in order to support
implementation of the resolution at the regional and
country levels. In addition, with the establishment of
the Asia-Pacific Regional Advisory Group on Women,
Peace and Security by the Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific, we are hopeful
that it will also play an active role in providing the
expertise and advice the region requires.
Fiji is fully committed to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). This commitment is
exemplified in our continuing efforts to meet the goals
set out in the four broad thematic areas of the United
Nations System-wide Action Plan. In the area of
participation, our policies strongly encourage the
recruitment of women in our security forces and their

44

deployment, with equal opportunities, to peacekeeping
missions. We support the global effort to increase the
participation of women in United Nations police
peacekeeping roles to 20 per cent by 2014. We
encourage the provision of pre- and post-deployment
training of our peacekeepers and welcome further
assistance and expertise in this aspect of training.
Furthermore, we support the participation and
representation of women at all levels of decisionmaking. In our consultations and interactions with civil
society and the public, we are fortunate to have
femLINKpacific, a Fiji-based non-governmental
organization that specifically deals with resolution
1325 (2000). We also welcome the appointment of its
coordinator to the United Nations Civil Society
Advisory Group on Women, Peace and Security. The
Fiji Government promotes the enhancement of efforts
to collaborate with the expertise and experience of
women’s civil society, with a view to enhancing the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) at the
national level.
We consider this event to be an important
opportunity to take stock of achievements, best
practices and lessons learned. It is an important step
towards achieving the intent of the resolution. To this
end, we look forward to further exchanges of best
practices from other countries and regions on
resolution 1325 (2000) and call for the support of the
United Nations system in assisting Fiji and Pacific
SIDS in the implementation of that resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Papua New Guinea.
Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Pacific small island
developing States (Pacific SIDS) represented at the
United Nations, namely, Fiji, whose representative has
just spoken, Nauru, Palau, the Republic of the Marshall
Islands, Micronesia, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga,
Tuvalu, Vanuatu and my own country, Papua New
Guinea.
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, and your
delegation for convening this important event. I would
also like to acknowledge Ms. Bachelet’s presence
amongst us this evening.
The Pacific SIDS are committed to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We
welcome the launch earlier this month of the Regional

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

Advisory Group on Women, Peace and Security in
Asia-Pacific by the Economic and Social Commission
for Asia and the Pacific. The Advisory Group will
advise and support Governments, civil society and
other relevant players on the effective implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) in the Asia-Pacific region.
Our countries look forward to working with the
members of the Group.
In order to advance the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and its related resolutions —
and I would mention here, especially, resolution 1889
(2009) — in the Pacific region, it is important that we
focus our work on approaches that reflect the reality of
the situation on the ground in our island countries. We
ask the United Nations to support the convening of a
regional high-level meeting to develop and adopt a
regional action plan on women and peace and security
to support the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) at the country level. This proposal was
supported in the outcome statement of the eleventh
Triennial Conference of Pacific Women, convened by
the Secretariat of the Pacific Community in August of
this year.
We consider that the development of a Pacific
regional action plan to support the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) would bring women into
official processes and build on our efforts to integrate
resolution 1325 (2000) into the regional peace and
security agenda. Moreover, a Pacific regional action
plan also has the potential to bring together a series of
high-level regional commitments into viable national
action plans, which is essential to enhancing security
sector governance policies and programmes in our
region and will allow us to develop tailored solutions
to the challenges that our diverse nations face.
Inadequate funding remains a serious challenge to the
success of the national action plans.
We also recognize the work of Pacific
non-governmental and civil society organizations like
FemLINKpacific in advocacy and programme efforts
to implement resolution 1325 (2000) and request the
United Nations and other donor partners to continue to
provide resources for such efforts, particularly to
enhance women’s participation in prevention and
broader peacebuilding. We also ask the United Nations
to support pre- and post-deployment training of
peacekeepers in our region, both police and military,
particularly to ensure the incorporation of human rights
compliance.

10-60385

Finally, the Pacific SIDS wish to highlight the
importance of conflict prevention as an essential
element of resolution 1325 (2000). Unabated climate
change risks increased violent conflict in many parts of
the world, and the consequent impacts on women and
girls are potentially beyond the capacity of the
international community to respond to adequately.
Adverse impacts of climate change alter the
distribution and quality of natural resources such as
freshwater, arable land, coastal territory and marine
resources. These changes can increase competition for
available resources, weaken Government institutions
and lead to internal and international migration.
Further, the adverse impacts can create obstacles that
substantially interfere with the ability of nations to
maintain territorial integrity, sovereignty and
independence. All these impacts of climate change
create severe risk of increased violent conflict in many
parts of the world, with ensuing impacts on women and
girls during and after conflict. We consider that climate
change severely jeopardizes the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
So, we reiterate our call for climate change and
security to be an item on the agenda of the Security
Council. If the United Nations responds to the threat of
climate change, it has the potential to truly prevent
conflict and thereby reduce violence against women.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Burundi.
Mr. Gahutu (Burundi): Mr. President, my
delegation would like to thank you for organizing this
debate on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000). I would also like to commend
the Secretary-General for his report on the
implementation of the resolution (S/2010/498).
Throughout the many conflicts that Burundi has
gone through, the people of Burundi have understood
that the search for a viable and promising peace cannot
be carried out by men alone but should also include
women. Moreover, it has been well known for a long
time in my country that women are the pillar of the
family and therefore of society. When society is shaken
by an armed conflict, its grisly effects inevitably have
repercussions for women and their children.
Therefore, the women of Burundi have
understood that they should play a role in the search
for peace. Thus, since the crisis broke out in Burundi in
1993, women’s organizations have become involved in

45

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

bringing together different groups of the population
who were sharply divided along political and ethnic
lines in collaboration with local administrations.
During the same period, two decisive events were
under way at the regional and international levels. The
first was the Arusha negotiations, which gave the
women of Burundi a seat at the negotiating table. The
second was the period of the evolution of resolution
1325 (2000), here at the United Nations. Some
observers, moreover, believe that the peace negotiation
process in Burundi, which formally began in 1998, two
years before the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
inspired many actors who, drawing on the lessons
learned in Arusha, certainly helped to improve the text
of the resolution. Consequently, the peace agreement
signed by the protagonists in the Burundi conflict in
August 2000 already contained a gender-specific
dimension in some of its provisions and protocols.
On 31 October 2000, when resolution 1325 (2000)
was solemnly adopted by the Security Council,
Burundi was in a good position to implement it, given
not only the experience that Burundian actors had
recently acquired in Arusha and the backing of
international organizations in the support of women of
Burundi during the peace process, but also the
challenges still to be tackled, in particular, agreeing on
a ceasefire with the armed movements and the
implementation of the gender-specific dimensions of
the agreement.
Since 2005, Burundi has sought to give women
an important role in managing public affairs. The
unremitting struggle of the women of Burundi, together
with the determination of the Government, made it
possible to achieve the results that the whole world can
see today in terms of the representation of women in
decision-making bodies, both at the executive and the
legislative levels. Indeed, after the elections this year,
the women of Burundi have enjoyed a significant
presence within decision-making bodies. They hold 32
and 44 per cent of the seats in the National Assembly
and the Senate, respectively, and 42 per cent of the
ministerial portfolios in the Government, including in
the Ministry of Finance, Agriculture and Livestock
Farming, Trade, Tourism and Industry, and Justice, and
this is just to cite a few of the posts that have long been
held by men.
In the judicial branch, there is a good level of
representation of women in high offices. Three women

46

in fact preside over the following higher courts: the
Supreme Court, the Constitutional Court and the
Administrative Court. In a society characterized by
male dominance in the highest State offices, those
positions reflect an important change in terms of
gender.
Turning to peacekeeping, it is important to
emphasize that, at this time, the idea of having women
in the police and army is socially accepted, even if
their numbers have not reached those of women in
other institutions. In our policy with regard to the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants, women have been included and
benefit equally from this policy. Their specific needs
are taken into account, be it through the assistance that
has been granted, in the past, to former male
combatants or through the integration of women into
the national defence forces.
The question that remains crucial in Burundi is
that of customary law and the access of women to
property and inheritance. That issue has become a
social concern that the Government of Burundi must
address in order to align itself with the parliamentary
debate convened in 2004, which resulted in a proposed
draft law on succession, matrimony and rights. With
the significant representation of women in the
Parliament and the Government and with the
determination of all of the actors in Burundi to fight
against social inequality, there is hope that the new law
will be promulgated after consultations among all
actors.
In order to fully achieve the objectives of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), women in
civil society, under the leadership of the Ministry of
National Solidarity, Human Rights and Gender and in
partnership with United Nations agencies, have drawn
up plan of action for resolution 1325 (2000)
comprising eight pillars that outline the steps to take to
make this resolution effective.
The topics promoted through these pillars are
primarily participation, conflict prevention, protection
against violence against women and children and
community recovery. In terms of the latter, projects
have already been carried out through the
peacebuilding programme in the western part of our
country, but, given the enormous needs in post-conflict
reconstruction, gender-based projects need to be
encouraged and established throughout the country.

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

In order to ensure that the participation of women
becomes more active and grows, there are also the
issues of strengthening their capacities and establishing
a fund to ensure their continuous participation in
various activities, so that they can take charge of their
own destiny.

peace and security (S/2010/498) that the development
of national action plans to guide the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) represents a particularly
important contribution by Member States and that a
total of 19 such plans, some in post-conflict nations,
have already been adopted.

In this connection, during the Global Open Day
for Women and Peace on 11 June 2010, the women of
Burundi firmly recommended to the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General for Burundi
the establishment of a basket fund that would facilitate
the economic recovery of women in the context of
post-conflict reconstruction.

Implementation of national action plans is a key
strategy for the achievement of commitments in the
area of women, peace and security, and we hope to see
the adoption of more national plans by other Member
States to ensure the systematic monitoring and
evaluation of activities with respect to policy goals.

In that respect, we welcome the creation of the
new entity, UN Women, and given the enormous task
facing its Director, Under-Secretary-General Bachelet,
we hope that she will receive the sustained support of
Member States, so that the new entity can respond to
the expectations of women, who are only asking for
access to resources. Once this has been achieved, the
empowerment of women will have become a reality.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): I would like to
start to by expressing my heartfelt congratulations to
Madam Michelle Bachelet for her appointment as
Under-Secretary-General and Director of UN Women.
We are confident that, under her leadership, the newly
established UN Women will be able to perform its
mandate expeditiously and effectively.
As we celebrate the tenth anniversary of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), it is incumbent upon
us to take stock of the progress made since its adoption
a decade ago and identify concrete actions to reinforce
the integration of gender equality perspectives in the
framework of peace and security.
The Philippines attaches great importance to the
integration of gender equality perspectives in peace
and security issues. This is demonstrated by the fact
that five years before the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), the Philippines had already established the
Philippine Plan for Gender Responsive Development,
1995-2025, a 30-year plan that gives due recognition to
the important role of women in peacebuilding efforts
and initiatives.
We are also pleased to note the SecretaryGeneral’s observation in his report on women and

10-60385

I am pleased to say that this year, on 25 March
2010, the Philippines became the first Asian country to
adopt a national action plan on women and peace and
security, implementing Security Council resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). Our plan envisions
enhancing and strengthening women’s role in
peacebuilding processes.
Our plan has four major goals: first, to ensure the
protection and prevention of violence of women’s
human rights in armed conflict and post-conflict
situations; secondly, to empower women and ensure
their active and meaningful participation in areas of
peacebuilding, peacekeeping and conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction;
thirdly, to promote and mainstream a gender
perspective in all aspect of conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding; and fourthly, to
institutionalize a monitoring and reporting system to
monitor, evaluate and report to enhance accountability
for the successful implementation of the Philippine
National Action Plan and the achievement of its goals.
The National Action Plan now serves as a
reference point in assessing the Philippine
Government’s commitment to the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and
1898 (2009) and other resolutions on women and peace
and security.
Significant steps have been taken by my country
to enhance the participation of women in peacekeeping
operations, and we are determined to pursue policies
and programmes that would help ensure full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the
international arena.
In fact, in 19 United Nations peacekeeping
missions where the Philippines actively participate and

47

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

in the United Nations Missions in Haiti, Darfur, Golan
Heights, Liberia, Sudan and Timor-Leste, 68 Filipino
women are now serving with dedication and
effectiveness.
Notwithstanding the advances made in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), challenges
and obstacles remain. We take note of the SecretaryGeneral’s conclusion in his report that a major
constraint to the implementation of the resolution has
been the absence of a single coherent and coordinated
approach guided by a clear framework, with concrete
and specific goals and targets and supported by a
meaningful set of indicators to track progress.
We agree that there is a need to set up a
comprehensive framework to establish strategic
system-wide priorities and coherence. We support the
endorsement of the indicators contained in the annex to
the Secretary-General’s report as guidelines for the
overall
monitoring
of
global
and
national
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We
recognize that there will always be gaps and
divergences in that implementation, but we remain
optimistic that those inadequacies will be addressed in
order to accelerate progress in the achievement of
women’s full and equal participation as active agents in
peace and security.
Finally, I should like to manifest my country’s
support for the Security Council’s continued leadership
in all issues encompassed under resolution 1325 (2000)
and other, related resolutions to ensure that those issues
are fully and consistently reflected and integrated in
the Council’s agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium): Belgium aligns itself with
the statement that will be made later on behalf of the
European Union (EU).
We thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000).
Women’s participation in peace processes
increases the likelihood that women’s needs will be
met, that their status in society will be enhanced and
that their well-being will improve. It is disconcerting,
in that regard, that 10 years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we are still excluding half of

48

the world’s population when we are discussing
sustainable peace and trying to build democracy.
If the ideals to which we committed ourselves in
resolution 1325 (2000) are to become a reality, it is
clear that we need to increase accountability and
monitor our commitments. We therefore call on the
Security Council to endorse the indicators developed
by the Secretary-General and to establish an
accountability and reporting mechanism in order to
monitor the implementation of the resolution on the
basis of those indicators.
Belgium also welcomes the creation of UN
Women and the appointment of Under-SecretaryGeneral Michelle Bachelet as its first head.
In the fight against impunity, Belgium further
asks the members of the Security Council to use, and
effectively impose, targeted and graduated measures
against all parties to conflicts who violate women’s
rights, including perpetrators of sexual violence and
commanders who commission or condone the use of
sexual violence. We believe that the Council should
include sexual violence in resolutions mandating its
sanctions committees, and those resolutions should
include sexual violence as a criterion for the
designation of political and military leaders for
targeted measures.
Belgium attaches great importance to the full and
thorough implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), as
well as of the follow-up resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009) and 1889 (2009).
In the run-up to this debate, and in order to raise
awareness and come to real and concrete commitments
around the celebration of the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), Belgium, together with the
European Union, organized three events at different
levels. We organized a high-level conference in
Brussels on women’s participation, an experts’ seminar
in Geneva on protection and a ministerial-level lunch
here in New York last month.
In 2009 and 2010, Belgium has supported
activities related to resolution 1325 (2000) and
women’s rights in 14 countries, not only politically, by
raising the issue in relevant dialogues and by
facilitating meetings with women’s groups, but also
financially. In the past two years, more than €30
million has been spent on gender-related projects in
fragile States.

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

Two years ago, Belgium also adopted a national
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Without a doubt, the plan has contributed to
increased ownership at different levels of public
administration and civil society. For example, our
Ministry of Defence has assigned clear duties within its
staff and adopted specific budgetary lines for the
implementation of all activities relating to the
implementation of the national plan of action that fall
within its responsibilities.
We commit today to revise our national action
plan by 2012, in full cooperation with civil society and
taking into account EU indicators, as well as the
indicators that we hope to see adopted by the Council
today. We further declare ourselves ready to consider
assisting the development of such a plan by any
country that would welcome our support.
Finally, let me add, as Chair of a country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, that
that Commission is a very appropriate framework in
which to include the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) among its activities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. Colombia appreciates the convening of this
open debate to commemorate the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
especially
congratulate
Under-Secretary-General
Michelle Bachelet on her appointment as the first
Executive Director of UN Women. I am grateful for her
presence here today and for her comprehensive
statement.
In his report on women and peace and security
(S/2010/498), the Secretary-General acknowledges that
significant progress has been made in several areas.
However, he also warns that much remains to be done
to realize the vision of resolution 1325 (2000). In
particular, the report refers to the need to redouble
efforts to ensure that women can play their rightful role
in conflict prevention and resolution and in
reconstruction processes. Similar efforts are needed to

10-60385

protect women from abuse during conflict, including
gender-based violence.
In order to meet the various existing international
commitments with regard to the promotion and
protection of the rights of women, including Security
Council resolutions on women and peace and security,
Colombia has at its disposal a significant
constitutional, legal and institutional framework and
gender-based strategies that cover social, economic and
cultural aspects.
Among recent developments, I would like to
mention that, as recognition of the particular needs of
women and with a view to ensuring a life free of
violence, in December 2008 we adopted law No. 1257
of 2008. That law sets out standards of awareness,
prevention and punishment for forms of violence and
discrimination against women. It extends the concept
of violence against women to any act or omission that
causes death, injury or physical, sexual, psychological,
economic or patrimonial injury because of gender, as
well as threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary
deprivation of liberty, whether in the public or private
spheres.
In addition, under decree No. 164, of 25 January
2010, the national Government set up the Inter-Agency
Group to Eradicate Violence against Women, a body
that will facilitate comprehensive, targeted, accessible
and quality care to women who are victims of violence
and will act as a forum to coordinate and organize the
various entities engaged in that task.
Furthermore, the Presidential Advisory Office on
Gender Equality, the United Nations Development
Fund for Women, the United Nations Population Fund
and the International Organization for Migration
jointly run the Integrated Programme Against Gender
Violence, which seeks to help prevent, treat and
eradicate gender-based violence affecting Colombian
women both publicly and privately. The Programme
underscores the most frequent and severe cases
nationally and gives particular attention to displaced,
indigenous and Afro-Colombian women.
In peacebuilding, State bodies work together in
joint efforts to guarantee the protection of women from
risks that affect them in areas where there are illegal
armed groups. Furthermore, ensuring inclusion of the
gender perspective and the full participation of women
in the prevention of violence is being promoted. In that
regard, with the support of the European Union and

49

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

citizen
participation,
the
Peace
Laboratories
programme is being promoted in areas affected by
violence. That initiative explores paths of dialogue and
coexistence, peaceful mechanisms for resistance and
protection of the civilian population. Women are
beneficiaries and/or agents of projects that promote
peace in those areas.
Moreover, guidelines for the displaced population
are being drawn up with a targeted gender approach.
Their goal is to provide effective care that responds to
the specific needs and impact that displacement has on
women. The guidelines are based on three guiding
aspects: participation a focus on law, and a genderperspective approach.
The national policy for the socio-economic
reintegration of people demobilized from illegal armed
groups seeks full inclusion of the gender perspective
approach in institutional actions. Likewise, there is a
programme for the prevention of domestic violence in
families with reintegrated persons.
Although Colombia has a significant legislative
framework and public policies that mainstream the
gender perspective and variables, there persist
challenges such as full integration, a review of
indicators on the basis of international standards and
the adoption of specific measures against gender-based
violence.
For their part, the bodies responsible for
implementing the Organization’s policies and mandates
on women and peace and security within the United
Nations system must strengthen coordination and
cooperation and avoid duplication of work. My country
trusts that the new gender framework adopted by the
United Nations and, in particular, the new entity UN
Women ensure consistency in the Organization’s
activities.
Strengthening the role and capacity of women
and respect for their rights are priority areas for the
Government of Colombia. As a member of the Security
Council’s Group of Friends of resolution 1325 (2000),
my country reaffirms its commitment to implementing
policies, plans and programmes that broaden and
strengthen the role of women in peacebuilding.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, Acting Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.

50

Mr. Serrano: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having invited the European Union
(EU) to this important debate. The candidate countries
Turkey, Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia; as well
as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and
Georgia align themselves with this declaration.
Despite 10 years of efforts, progress in protecting
women in conflict situations and in promoting their
participation in peace processes, conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and reconstruction has fallen short both
of the commitments that the international community
has made and of the needs on the ground. Violence, in
particular sexual and gender-based violence, against
women and girls in conflicts continues to devastate the
lives of many and perpetrators too often enjoy
impunity, as events in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo remind us.
The European Union is strongly committed to the
full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and its
follow-up resolutions. We urge all parties to intensify
their efforts to reach the common goal of full
implementation. In 2008, the European Union adopted
a comprehensive approach to the implementation of
resolutions
1325
(2000)
and
1820
(2008),
encompassing humanitarian, development, security and
foreign policy measures.
In practical and operational terms, the European
Union has a range of programmes addressing the needs
of women and girls in conflict-affected and
post-conflict situations, such as funding medical
services for survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence. In less than two years, it funded projects with
a direct impact on women and peace and security worth
over €300 million in 67 countries.
The European Union has started using a gender
marker to track gender mainstreaming in its
development cooperation programmes and has
appointed gender advisers or gender focal points to all
its peace and security missions.
The European Union works closely with the
United Nations and civil society to boost women’s
participation in peace and security. Inspired by the
United Nations example, European Union delegations
and missions organized Open Door Days to mark this
tenth anniversary and to meet with local women’s

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

groups. Last week, the European Union and the African
Union organized a seminar in Addis Ababa, bringing EU
civil society representatives to discuss such issues with
African representatives and to make recommendations
for joint African Union-European Union actions.
The European Union is now also creating the new
European External Action Service. There is a firm
commitment to further the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and following resolutions in our
diplomatic, defence and development efforts, as well as
to strive towards gender balance.
As for renewed and measurable commitments, we
are looking, first, to develop specific standard training
elements on gender and human rights in crisis
management, to be used by European Union staff and
peace and security missions and operations, with the
aim of increasing gender capacity and female civil and
military participation in peace missions.
Secondly, by 2013, the European Union will
develop local strategies to implement resolution 1325
(2000) in its development cooperation activities in at
least 60 per cent of fragile, conflict or post-conflict
countries.
Thirdly, to further boost women’s participation in
peace and security, in 2011 we will implement specific
capacity-building projects to support civil society and
women’s networks in crisis-affected countries.
Fourthly, we are committed to reporting regularly
on the implementation of EU women and peace and
security commitments, using the 17 EU indicators that
were adopted in July 2010. Those EU indicators seek
to measure progress and assess gaps in implementation
of the EU’s comprehensive approach. The first report is
in the process of being completed. It is a strong
commitment towards strengthened accountability. The
EU thus commits to increasing its own accountability.
The European Union is encouraged by the
Security Council decision to take forward the set of
indicators developed by the Secretary-General to track
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in situations
of armed conflict and post-conflict and other situations.
The European Union now calls for a swift
operationalization of the indicators. The newly
established UN Women will play an important role. It
has our full support. The European Union also supports
the Secretary-General’s other recommendations.

10-60385

In the Secretary-General’s next annual report to
the Council, the EU hopes to see proposals for a single
comprehensive framework, consisting of an agreed set
of goals, targets and indicators, to guide the
implementation of the resolution in the next decade,
including defining clear roles and responsibilities
within the United Nations system.
The European Union considers that a dedicated
working group should be established to review
progress in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and to make recommendations to the Council
on how to address gaps and challenges and accelerate
progress in implementing the resolution.
The EU asks the Security Council to redouble its
efforts in the fight against impunity. Targeted and
graduated measures should be imposed against all
parties to conflict responsible for grave violations of
women’s rights. Perpetrators of sexual violence,
including commanders who commission or condone
the use of sexual violence, should be held accountable.
The Council should include sexual violence as a
priority element in resolutions mandating its sanctions
committees, and these should explicitly include sexual
violence as a criterion for the designation of political
and military leaders for targeted measures. The EU also
emphasizes the importance of the rule of law in general
and the strengthening of national and international
judicial systems to promote women’s legal
empowerment.
Finally, the EU is convinced that ownership and
awareness can be strongly increased by developing
national action plans or other strategic instruments.
The EU member States currently have 10 national
action plans, with two more in the pipeline.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Téte
António, Permanent Observer of the African Union to
the United Nations.
Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): Given the time
allotted to us, I will try to state the essence of my
statement, which has been provided to the Secretariat. I
represent an organization that comprises a quarter of
United Nations Member States, so we do have much to
say.
I would like to apologize on behalf of
Commissioner Ramtane Lamamra, who was unable to
stay on in New York to participate in today’s debate. I

51

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

would also like to commend the Ugandan presidency
for raising issues that are of great interest to Africa.

general to the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission.

I commend the role of the Secretary-General,
who despite being far away was resolved to address us
this morning. I especially commend the United Nations
commitment to Africa. This month, we launched the
African Women’s Decade in Nairobi, Kenya. The
United Nations was represented by Deputy SecretaryGeneral Asha-Rose Migiro, another African sister
serving the Organization. We also commend the
leadership of Ms. Bachelet. Her term has begun well
with this energetic and busy meeting, punctuated for
once by applause. We assure her of the African Union’s
cooperation.

The African Union Gender Policy, launched two
years ago, stresses the need to reinforce good practices
of respect, equality and human dignity between men
and women in the workplace and in society at large,
and to enforce zero tolerance for gender-based
violence, sexual harassment, assault, rape, sexual
favours, gender stereotyping, sexism and abusive
language and actions in the workplace, society and
situations of conflict. It stresses the need ensure severe
sanction and punishment for perpetrators of such acts.
It further calls for the use of the Paris Principles and
Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups as the basis for programmatic
interventions in Africa, which should incorporate
measures to prevent sexual abuse and pervasive
discrimination against women and girls as weapons in
armed conflict, and to promote their equal status in
society.

I am compelled to begin by stressing the great
interest that Africa attaches to the subject at hand.
Africa is host to 70 per cent of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations, so today’s issue is of direct
relevance to its peoples. I would like to thank all the
women of the world for the solidarity they
demonstrated, above all to the women of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, when they marched
this month in Bukavu. In so doing, they manifested
their solidarity with all the women and, by extension,
the peoples of Africa.
I would like to offer some background. The
African Union (AU) is about the same age as Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000). I am sure it will be
understood that this historic coincidence or opportunity
has had an impact on the very structure of the African
Union Commission, with its five female and five male
Commissioners. That is a sacrosanct rule of the African
Union. The Constitutive Act of the African Union
incorporates gender elements from the international
bill of human rights, as does the Union’s Solemn
Declaration on the Equality of the Sexes. This issue is
clearly of great importance to the African continent and
is reflected in its legal instruments.
(spoke in English)
Regarding the specific topic of today’s debate,
the African Union has continued to develop its specific
policy and institutional capacity in this area. In July
2003, following a decision by the Executive Council,
the African Women Committee on Peace and
Development was strengthened to serve as an advisory
body on peace and security matters and on
empowerment and advocacy for gender equality in

52

The AU Gender Policy also calls for the
mobilization of women leaders to participate in peace
mediation and related processes and in post-conflict
processes. It also calls for the AU to work jointly with
relevant United Nations bodies on measures to track
violations against women and girls during conflict and
to find lasting solutions to abuses.
The African Union is further committed to
working towards addressing violence against women
perpetrated through human and drug trafficking, and to
articulate the gender perspectives of child labour,
prostitution and abuse. Furthermore, the African Union
has developed a gender training manual for AU
peacekeepers, designed to be a resource for the African
standby force and other hybrid operations, and for
training institutions in troop-contributing countries.
Other important measures taken by the AU
include the adoption of the Protocol to the African
Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of
Women in Africa, the AU Gender Policy and the
launching of the African Women’s Development Fund.
The AU has also taken measures in the context of the
Regional Economic Communities in order to give
further impetus to the efforts for overall gender
equality in Africa. As is known, in February 2009, the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
African Union declared the period 2010-2020 as the
African Women’s Decade, which was just launched, as

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

I mentioned earlier, in October in Nairobi. We have
also taken further measures in the framework of the
Secretary-General’s campaign to end violence against
women. The AU, jointly with United Nations agencies
in Addis Ababa, launched the Africa UNiTE campaign
on 30 January.
During the African Union’s Year of Peace and
Security in Africa, 2010, the Gender Directorate of the
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa also
worked closely with the AU Peace and Security
Department and the Peace and Security Council to
ensure that gender issues were well addressed in this
framework.
I think I have to conclude my statement here.
There are many proposals that are discussed in the
written text that I provided to the Secretariat. But I
would like to thank all the women who have played
leadership roles in resolving conflicts in Africa, from
Mozambique, Angola and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to the ongoing conflicts in Somalia and in
the Sudan.

The choice of the subject for this debate is
extremely relevant to our time. Moreover, if any
country is qualified to summon us to this debate, it is
Uganda, which has experienced this topic’s terrible
realities in a concrete way on the ground through the
depredations of the Lord’s Resistance Army and by
virtue of belonging to a region where every day the
drama of women in armed conflict is played out.
I need remind no one here of the hopes raised by
the Security Council’s adoption in October 2000 of
resolution 1325 (2000), and subsequently of
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009),
which provide clear proof of the special attention the
Council gives to the lot of women and girls who live in
life-threatening conditions in armed conflict zones and
daily pay a heavy toll. Ten years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), what account can we give?

The President: I now give the floor to the
delegation of Burkina Faso.

First of all, we can legitimately welcome some
achievements, notably at the institutional level, with the
appointment of Ms. Margot Wallström as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Another gain is the identification
by the Secretary-General of 26 indicators for the
monitoring and revitalization of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) (reports of the SecretaryGeneral S/2010/173 and S/2010/498). We should also
mention the adoption of resolution 1882 (2009), which
allows the specific consideration of the case of girls, by
extending the monitoring and reporting mechanism on
sexual violence against children and the killing and
maiming of children. We also note the initiatives taken
by States, the United Nations system, regional
organizations and civil society in particular, in the
realms of the prevention of sexual violence, the
promotion of gender equality, the training of mediators,
the strengthening of the capacity for women and others.

Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
It is a genuine pleasure to see Uganda presiding over
the Security Council in this month of October, and I
congratulate the delegation on the excellent way in
which it has carried out that responsibility. The
contribution of Uganda to the work of the Security
Council is greatly appreciated, and, as the end of the
Ugandan presidency approaches, I would like to
express our great satisfaction.

Unfortunately, that progress and all of those
efforts and the regular consideration of the issue of
women and peace and security by the Security Council
have not ensured the protection of women and girls
during conflicts, nor their full involvement and
participation at all stages of the peace process, not to
mention the fact that the issue of the inequalities and
disparities between men and women continues to be a
challenge.

Before embarking on the subject at hand, I would
like to say that we take note of the statement just made
by the representative of the African Union.

With respect to sexual violence, the situation is
the more terrible for its unequalled scale and the
unspeakable suffering of its victims. Even some

In conclusion, I would like to join my voice to
those who have called for the adoption of the indicators
to help monitor implementation, address the issue of
fragmentation in global progress in implementation and
provide a basis for monitoring the success of national
action plans in implementation.
(spoke in French)
That is a summary of what we wished to say this
evening. I would like once again to thank the delegation
of Uganda for having brought such a high standard to
Africa’s participation in the Security Council.

10-60385

53

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

refugee camps and displaced persons camps have
become unsafe places for women and girls, instead of
being islands of peace. We note, among other
obstacles, the low degree of access of women and girls
to basic social services and legal mechanisms and the
meagre participation of women in peace negotiation
processes. With such a record, what should be our
response and what actions should be taken?
On the occasion of the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), we think that it is necessary to
step up our commitment to a complete implementation
of its noble objectives in a number of ways. That
includes making the protection of women and girls an
absolute priority at the legislative, judicial, regulatory
and operational levels; strengthening the participation
of women in the process of settling and mediating
conflicts, including during decision-making processes;
and consciousness raising among the different parties
so that they realize that they must carry out their
respective obligations and fully assume their
responsibilities. Other important steps are the
economic reintegration of women, including former
combatants, and taking into account gender issues in
security sector and judicial reform; wide publication of
resolution 1325 (2000) to combat wide-spread
ignorance of the resolution; dialogue with non-State
actors in cooperation with States, so as to inform them
of and sensitize them to the content of the fundamental
texts and their responsibilities; and calling on States to
adopt plans of action featuring clear objectives and
deadlines, with the involvement of women’s groups in
the conception, formulation and implementation of
those policies.
One of the challenges for an ideal implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) remains coordination. Given
the multisectoral nature of the issue, every entity and
agency of the United Nations should play its role, in
the framework of a common, coherent effort
capitalizing on individual strengths. From that point of
view, we hope that the appointment of the
Under-Secretary-General for UN Women, Michelle
Bachelet — whom we congratulate — will help fulfil
the need for rationality, coherence and coordination.
To conclude, I would like to recall that my
country, Burkina Faso, adopted in 2009 a national
gender policy, which was drawn up in a participatory
and inclusive way. For its implementation a three-year
plan of action — 2011 to 2013 — was drafted and
adopted. In terms of gender equality, the adoption of a

54

law setting quotas of 30 per cent in the legislative and
municipal elections is an important step forward. Its
implementation will certainly contribute to better
representation of women in politics.
On 15 December 2009, Burkina Faso also
launched a programme to combat violence against
women. This year it commemorated the International
Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women
with the clear motto: “The consequences of violence
against women on victims, families and communities”.
Our national women’s forum, set up in 2008, is a
high-level forum exclusively focused on the specific
concerns of women and presided over by the head of
State personally. The latest of these was held last
month and was an opportunity for the Government to
launch the African Women’s Decade: 2010-2020.
The issue of women and peace and security will
not find a definitive solution without the complete
empowerment of women and their full participation in
the lives of their communities and countries. That is
why Burkina Faso again welcomes the establishment of
UN Women in this year marking the tenth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000). We hope that that entity will
enjoy all the support necessary for the success of its
mandate. As with all of the bodies responsible for
protecting women, Burkina Faso will also provide for
its support.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to place on record India’s appreciation to
you, Sir, and through you to your delegation, for
having organized this open debate to mark the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
I belong to a country with a 5,000 year-old
civilization that regards gender equality and the
empowerment of women as its constitutive principles. I
am equally proud to be a Sikh — a member of a
religion which, at the time of its founding in the latter
half of the fifteenth century, deemed it fit to
incorporate gender equality and independence for
women among its essential attributes.
The imperative of the political empowerment of
women cannot be overemphasized. India took a
historic initiative of empowering women by reserving
one third of the seats in more than 300,000 institutions
of local self-government to women. As a result, today,
out of the 3.2 million elected representatives in these
local bodies, there are 1.2 million women, about
86,000 of whom serve as chairpersons or

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

vice-chairpersons of their respective units. We are
taking further steps to increase the participation of
women to 50 per cent in these institutions, which
would take the number of elected women to between
1.6 and 1.8 million. Presently, a bill mandating such
measures is under consideration by the Parliament of
India. There are, perhaps, more democratically elected
women in India alone than in the rest of the world put
together. This political empowerment of women is an
unprecedented feat in the entire history of the world.
Today’s open debate of the Security Council
marks the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. I am honoured to take part in this debate.
When resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted
unanimously in 2000, it was a landmark resolution
dealing with women’s issues in the area of
international peace and security. Recognizing this, the
Secretary-General made a very pertinent point by
saying that although women suffered the impact of
conflict disproportionately, they also held the key to
the solutions of the conflict.
Resolution 1325 (2000) highlights the impact of
armed conflict on women and the need for effective
institutional arrangements to guarantee their protection
and full participation in peace processes. Having had
the resolution in operational mode for a decade, we
now need to redouble our efforts to increase women’s
participation at all stages and all levels of peace
processes and peacebuilding efforts. We can achieve
lasting peace and security in any country only when
women are represented at the negotiating table or in
talks on post-conflict reconstruction. In the same vein,
let me add that the three pillars of lasting peace —
namely, economic recovery, social cohesion and
political legitimacy — cannot be achieved without the
active engagement of women.
India has consistently held the view that the
greater participation of women in the areas of conflict
prevention, peace negotiations, peacekeeping and
post-conflict reconstruction is an essential prerequisite
of lasting peace and security. Let me also add my voice
to those of other speakers who have called for the
greater deployment of female military and police
personnel to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
and for the provision to all military and police
personnel with adequate training to carry out their
responsibilities. In this regard, we especially encourage
those who champion the importance of the

10-60385

participation of women peacekeepers and have the
inclination and capacity to do so.
Over the past six decades, India has contributed
more than 100,000 peacekeepers to virtually every
peacekeeping
operation.
We
have
necessary
disciplinary provisions in place to ensure that reports
of incidents of violence against women, children or
civilians are dealt with firmly, swiftly and resolutely
within our existing legal provisions. In 2007, India
even had the distinction of being the first country to
deploy a full female peacekeeping unit — a 100-strong
contingent in Liberia. Deployments similar to this
oft-cited Indian example remain, unfortunately, a rarity.
India will be happy to contribute positively to
this process. As one of the largest contributors of
troops to the United Nations, India has been conscious
of its responsibility and has trained its troops on this
important issue.
The United Nations system, Member States and
civil society have made steady and noticeable efforts in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). While the
Secretary-General and several speakers before me have
pointed out the mixed results in the implementation of
the resolution by the international community and the
United Nations system, it is worth noting that the
appointment of women to senior decision-making
positions, as well as their participation in mission
planning, reporting, assessment, post-conflict planning
and peacekeeping operations, have increased. We
welcome this, but must stress the need to do much more.
Equally pertinent is the role played by civil
society in internalizing the provisions of resolution
1325 (2000) while addressing issues in various conflict
zones. We would also, in particular, like to encourage
local communities to step forward and assume their
rightful role in conflict zones.
Discussions on the establishment of a Security
Council working group dedicated to reviewing the
progress in implementing this resolution are relevant
and have our support. We are confident that such an
effort will go a long way towards transforming words
into concrete action.
The United Nations system has also come up with
a useful set of indicators as global markers of progress
in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). India
has taken note of the set of 26 global indicators in the
four key areas. We believe that reaching agreement on

55

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

the set of goals, targets and indicators to monitor the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) should be
the first step in reducing the fragmentation of
information and monitoring progress on this critical
and important issue.
We are equally mindful that the development of
such indicators, benchmarks and guidelines, given their
sensitivity, should involve a process of broader
intergovernmental consultations and discussions before
their eventual adoption. One must also be aware of the
difficulties
in
obtaining
authentic,
credible,
corroborative and verifiable data from conflict-ridden
environments.
We are happy that Member States were able to
reach consensus earlier this year in establishing UN
Women, which will be fully operational by January
2011. We were, in that context, particularly pleased by
the presence of the newly appointed Under-SecretaryGeneral who heads this Entity with us earlier today.
With the consolidation of authority and responsibility
within the United Nations system on women’s issues, I
am positive that the United Nations system will also
coherently coordinate and assist Member States, at
their request, in the implementation of the resolution
1325 (2000).
We unequivocally, unambiguously and resolutely
condemn the abhorrent behaviour of sexual violence in
armed conflict, regardless of who perpetrates it, be
they party to an armed conflict, peacekeeping
personnel, including their civilian components, or
humanitarian actors.
There is a need for more stringent regulations in
combating and eliminating this menace. We would also
request the Secretary-General to further strengthen his
efforts to ensure zero tolerance of sexual exploitation
and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We have not yet attained a global culture of
human rights that could serve as a unifying force rather
than a divisive force. As the world’s largest democracy,
India considers it an honour to uphold and cherish the
concept of gender equality and the empowerment of
women.
I would like to reiterate India’s firm commitment
to its international obligations flowing from resolution
1325 (2000) and its successor resolutions, and I look
forward to engaging constructively and proactively
with other delegations in the Security Council from the

56

beginning of next year, when we assume our
responsibility as a member of the Council.
Let us not lose the momentum that has been
generated on this issue on the occasion of the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), a symbol of
strength for women and peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset to express my gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for having organized this open debate on
a subject to which Morocco attaches particular
significance and which directly concerns our continent
of Africa. My delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his statement and his report
(S/2010/498). My thanks also go to Ms. Bachelet for her
contribution to this debate. I would take this opportunity
to congratulate Ms. Bachelet, on behalf of my country,
on her appointment as the head of UN Women, and we
wish her every success in the fulfilment of her mandate.
I also thank the President of the Economic and Social
Council and Mr. Alain Le Roy, as well as Ms. Thelma
Awori speaking on behalf of civil society, for their
important contributions to this debate.
Our debate today provides us with the
opportunity to take stock of the commitments that have
been honoured and the goals that have been met, as
well as the further efforts that remain to be carried out
to implement resolution 1325 (2000). In this respect,
we can be proud of the fact that the momentum created
by the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) has paved
the way for a strengthening of the judicial and
institutional arsenal at the national and international
levels for promoting and protecting women’s rights and
their empowerment in conflict and post-conflict
situations, in particular through the adoption in several
countries, including in Africa, of specific national
action plans.
Furthermore, significant progress has been
recorded in terms of women’s participation in
peacekeeping
operations
and
decision-making
processes, and we welcome that progress. However, we
must note that, despite those efforts, the situation of
women and girls in several regions around the world
remains difficult and sometimes even intolerable. This
is particularly true in situations involving fresh
outbreaks in armed violence, violations of international
humanitarian law by military or paramilitary groups,

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

the use of child soldiers, in particular young girls,
extreme poverty, pandemics and sexual violence.
My delegation would like to commend the efforts
undertaken by the Security Council to ensure regular
reviews of the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), in particular through the inclusion of the
gender perspective in the resolution of conflicts and
peacekeeping within the various organs and institutions
of the United Nations, and the importance of the role of
women in general in matters concerning peace and
security.
In terms of establishing quantifiable indicators in
the follow-up to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), as requested by the Security Council, we
should note, as was indeed highlighted by the
Secretary-General, that these indicators must be further
enhanced. The debate organized a few weeks ago by
the Security Council on post-conflict peacebuilding
(see S/PV.6396) allowed us, among other things, to
highlight the substantial contribution of women to
peacebuilding processes. The success and durability of
peacebuilding processes after conflict often depend on
the full participation of women in such processes. In
that regard, lasting solutions must be proposed for
women, in particular women refugees, who are often
the first victims in conflict and post-conflict situations.
It is clear that the Secretariat has undertaken
substantial efforts to promote the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). We therefore believe that the
creation of UN Women will contribute to improving
coordination between the various United Nations
entities involved. This will have a positive impact on
United Nations system support to the various national
and regional stakeholders involved in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000).
Furthermore, we must commend the central role
played by civil society organizations in the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) and in its implementation these
past ten years. Since that adoption, they have carried
out substantial work in terms of collective awarenessraising and have enhanced the mobilization of efforts
to achieve the objectives of resolution 1325 (2000).
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco believes
that the effective implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) will require better representation for women in
national, regional and international institutions, in
particular in conflict prevention and management
processes, as well as full respect by the parties

10-60385

involved for the resolution’s provisions, better
coordination between the various national and
international stakeholders, and more sustained support
by the United Nations in terms of cooperation and
technical assistance.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mr. Emvula (Namibia): I would like to put it on
record that it was earlier agreed that Namibia would
deliver two statements during this time slot, but due to
time constraints and to make your task, Mr. President, a
little bit easier, we have agreed to give precedence to
the statement to be delivered on behalf of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC), while our
own will be distributed along with the earlier statement.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Southern African Development Community member
States — Angola, Botswana, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Lesotho, Malawi, Mauritius,
Mozambique, Seychelles, South Africa, Swaziland, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe and
my own country, Namibia.
Allow me first and foremost to congratulate you,
Sir, on having created this opportunity for an open
debate on this very important issue. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his report on women and peace
and security (S/2010/498).
SADC is delighted that today marks 10 years
since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security, which was unanimously
adopted during the time of the Namibian presidency of
the Security Council in October 2000. The resolution
sought to ensure women’s full and active participation
in conflict resolution, peace processes and post-conflict
reconstruction. It also sought the protection of women
and girls from all forms of violence in conflict and
post-conflict situations. It affirms that women are an
integral part of peace and security.
SADC welcomes the creation of the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN Women), and the
appointment of Ms. Michelle Bachelet as its Executive
Director. We are confident that UN Women, in addition
to devoting its attention to the economic empowerment
of women at the country level, will also greatly
enhance coordination and coherence on women and
peace and security.

57

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

Gender equality and the empowerment of women
is one of the founding principles of SADC, as
enshrined in its Treaty. The 2008 SADC Protocol on
Gender and Development puts measures in place to
ensure that women enjoy equal representation and
participation in all key decision-making positions by
2015. The Protocol also calls upon SADC member
States to take the necessary steps to prevent and
eliminate incidences of human rights abuses of women
and children during time of armed and other forms of
conflict.
As we believe that effective peacebuilding starts
at the national and subregional levels and then
proceeds to the international level, it is of vital
importance that the United Nations works closely
together with regional groups such as SADC. To that
end, the United Nations and SADC signed an
agreement, on 21 September, to work together on
issues vital to peace and security, such as conflict
prevention, mediation and elections. The framework
for cooperation is intended to strengthen and draw
upon the experiences of both organizations and to
allow the Department for Political Affairs to utilize
SADC’s knowledge and understanding of the region
and its mediation, peacemaking and peacebuilding
capacities.
SADC is deeply concerned about the widespread
and systematic sexual violence to which women and
girls are subjected in conflict situations. It is our
considered view that all parties to armed conflict
should respect regional mechanisms and international
law applicable to the rights and protection of women
and children.
SADC has devoted a lot of effort to empower and
advance women. However, women still remain largely
underrepresented in key decision-making structures
and in peacemaking and peacebuilding processes. The
region believes that, given the opportunity, women are
active agents of change and play a critical role in the
recovery and reintegration of families after conflicts.
Women are also instrumental in bringing about
reconciliation and democracy in post-conflict societies.
SADC therefore remains fully committed to the full
and effective implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), as well as to ensuring that the rights of women
and children are promoted and protected.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.

58

Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I would like to begin
by commending the presidency of Uganda for
convening this thematic debate to give the Council and
Member States an opportunity to have a broad
exchange of views and proposals on such an important
issue.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union.
Today’s debate presents yet another important
opportunity to promote the effective, coherent and
systematic implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
which gave much-needed and welcome visibility to the
question of women’s empowerment, their role as
peacebuilders and their vulnerable position as victims
of war.
As a non-permanent member of the Council in
2000, Ukraine was one of the 15 countries that voted
for resolution 1325 (2000). That decision by the
Council has been a milestone document on the
empowerment of women. We welcome the latest report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
resolution
(S/2010/498)
and
support
its
recommendations. Ukraine welcomes the development
of a set of indicators for use at the global level to track
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We urge
Member States to begin to use the proposed indicators
for which data already exist.
We believe that the empowerment of women is
important for the realization of the human rights of
women, as well as for economic and political
development. It is equally important for durable peace,
security, early recovery and reconciliation.
Ukraine stands fully committed to the
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009). However, there must be a
coherent strategy to cover all aspects of the protection
of women and women’s rights. In that regard, Ukraine
welcomes the establishment of the United Nations
composite entity, UN Women. We hope it will bring
about much-needed improvements in the work of the
United Nations on gender equality, including in the
area of international peace and security.
Despite all international efforts, women continue
to be the most vulnerable victims of armed conflict and
to be targeted with the most brutal forms of sexual
violence. In addition to that, women also experience
the trauma of losing relatives and friends in armed

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

conflict, as well as having to take responsibility for the
care of surviving family members. They also constitute
the majority of refugees and displaced persons. My
country is greatly concerned about that situation and
strongly condemns the targeting of women and girls in
situations of armed conflict. We welcome Security
Council efforts to pay special attention to the particular
needs of women affected by armed conflict when
considering action aimed at promoting peace and
security.
We believe that the Security Council has a special
responsibility to support women’s participation in
peace processes by ensuring a gender balance in United
Nations peacekeeping missions. We welcome the fact
that the Council has already recognized the important
role of women in conflict resolution, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.
In line with the position of the European Union,
Ukraine
considers
gender
equality,
gender
mainstreaming and the empowerment of women not
only as important objectives but also as the means to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals and as an
essential part of the development agenda.
As an active participant in United Nations
peacekeeping efforts, Ukraine has for years contributed
women civilian police and military observers to the
Organization’s peacekeeping missions. We believe that
the presence of women in United Nations missions can
foster confidence and trust among local populations,
which are critical elements in any peacekeeping
mission. In performing their tasks, women are perceived
to be compassionate, unwilling to opt for force over
reconciliation and ready to listen and learn. They are
also widely seen as contributors to an environment of
stability and morality that fosters the progress of peace.
At the same time, women are still
underrepresented in decision-making with regard to
conflict resolution. Their initiatives and visions for
peace and security are rarely heard during peace
negotiations. In that regard, I would like to stress that
the international community should use the potential of
women as agents of preventive diplomacy,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
In conclusion, Ukraine reiterates its readiness to
continue to work constructively with other Member
States in order to ensure the protection of women in
armed conflict and women’s participation in peace
processes.

10-60385

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Hungary.
Mr. Körösi (Hungary): I align myself with the
position of the European Union (EU) as communicated
by the head of the EU delegation a short while ago.
We are convinced that women’s participation in
the maintenance of peace and security is in itself a
basic human right.
In this context, we are pleased that this issue has
achieved a prominent place on the international
agenda. We believe that the involvement of women in
peace negotiations and conflict mediation should be
supported. Furthermore, let us remember that peace
negotiations and post-conflict reconstruction are not
only about achieving an end to hostilities, but also
about the beginning of a new future.
We have to recognize that violence against
women, including sexual and gender-based violence,
poses a real threat to broader security and creates a
serious challenge to the full and active participation of
women in peace processes. We believe that systematic
sexual violence, used as a tactic of war through the
deliberate targeting of civilians, in particular women
and girls, significantly aggravates the situation during
an armed conflict. Those lasting negative impacts may
seriously impede the recovery and reconciliation
processes as well.
I would like to take the opportunity to confirm
that the Government of the Republic of Hungary is
strongly committed to implementing resolution 1325
(2000). We stand firmly behind endeavours aimed at
mainstreaming gender issues in the strategies, policies,
programmes and actions aimed at promoting the
participation of women in decision-making and peace
processes. Upon assuming the Presidency of the
European Union for the first semester of 2011,
Hungary intends to maintain the current momentum by
organizing a conference as a follow-up to the series of
events marking the tenth anniversary of United Nations
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).
I strongly believe that enhanced cooperation in
the field of women rights, peace and security and the
joint commitment to foster the implementation of this
agenda will ensure that women fully enjoy their
fundamental rights, which are the basic components of
lasting peace and security.

59

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica): It is an honour for
Costa Rica to speak today in its capacity as Chair of
the Human Security Network. The Network is a crossregional group of countries that includes Austria,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan,
Mali, Norway, Slovenia, Switzerland and Thailand, as
well as South Africa as an observer. On behalf of the
members, I would like to express our appreciation to
the Republic of Uganda for convening this important
ministerial-level open debate on women and peace and
security, which is a priority issue for the Network, and
thank Executive Director of UN Women, Michelle
Bachelet, for her presentation of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2010/498), marking the progress
we have made and highlighting the challenges we
continue to face in implementing Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000).
Today, we are commemorating the tenth
anniversary of that resolution, which recognized the
important role of women in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts, as well as in peacebuilding, and
opened a new path in the protection of women’s full
enjoyment of all human rights in armed conflicts and in
the efforts to strengthen the participation and
representation of women in peace and security
processes.
It is evident that this landmark resolution has
greatly contributed to an increased political focus on
the area of women and peace and security. Over the
years, the Council has remained active in this area
through the adoption of resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009) and, most recently, resolution 1894 (2009).
With resolution 1888 (2009) the Council established
the mandate of a Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. We welcome the appointment of
Margot Wallström to that important position. Together
those resolutions form the basis of the United Nations
policy framework on women and peace and security,
and guide Member States, United Nations entities and
civil society. We also welcome the recent creation of
UN Women. With its central focus on supporting the
attainment of gender equality and the empowerment of
women in all aspects and in all situations, this new
entity will make a crucial contribution to meeting the
needs of women and girls worldwide and will
accelerate progress in further advancing the women
and peace and security agenda. We welcome the

60

appointment of Michelle Bachelet as head of the new
entity, and we look forward to cooperating with UN
Women, both here in New York as well as in the field.
However, despite the progress of the past ten
years, many challenges remain. The abhorrent
conditions that women and girls have faced in armed
conflict situations persist and effective, and
comprehensive methods for addressing those realities
are still lacking. As we speak in this Chamber,
discrimination and violence against women in conflict
and
post-conflict
situations,
often
seemingly
committed with complete impunity, are still rampant in
certain areas of the world. The horror of such genderbased violence, particularly rape and other forms of
sexual abuse, continues to be brought to the attention
of the Security Council, and efforts to prevent such
crimes, including through peacekeeping missions, and
to fight impunity have to be redoubled. Let us not
forget the statement delivered by Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, in the
Fourth Committee of the General Assembly just days
ago, stipulating that widespread or systematic use of
sexual violence against civilians in armed conflicts is
used as a tactic of war. That is indeed a very disturbing
fact of today’s reality.
An urgent and effective response from the
international community is required. There must be
clear objectives, starting with ending impunity,
empowering women, rejecting various forms of
discrimination, mobilizing political leadership and
increasing awareness of rape as a tactic and
consequence of armed conflict. In addition, greater
coherence and a more systematic response by the
United Nations system and increased consultation and
cooperation
with
regional
and
subregional
organizations, Member States and civil society are vital
to the success of such action.
With regard to impunity, we should recognize the
essential role of international criminal justice, and
particularly of the International Criminal Court, in
addressing cases of sexual violence in armed conflict.
The Rome Statute, in itself a major achievement,
recognizes sexual violence as a potential war crime and
crime against humanity. Now, the Court is examining
situations
involving
sexual
violence,
which
demonstrates the central contribution that international
criminal justice can and does make in dealing with
sexual violence in armed conflict.

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

The widespread or systematic use of violence
against women in armed conflicts is a security issue as
well as, of course, a human rights issue. It affects a
whole society, significantly exacerbates situations of
armed conflict and may impede the restoration of
international peace and security. As has recently been
reaffirmed by the Council in a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2010/20), the Peacebuilding Commission
plays an important role in promoting and supporting an
integrated and coherent approach to peacebuilding,
including women’s participation.
Women play a pivotal role in the economic
recovery of post-conflict countries. The PBC has
committed to working on this issue as part of its
broader efforts to promote and address women’s
post-conflict needs. But this fact must also be
recognized at the political level by increasing women’s
participation in political posts, whether appointed or
elected; by systematically ensuring the full and equal
involvement of women in peace negotiations; and by
taking into account women’s needs in peace
agreements.
Furthermore, education is a fundamental
requirement for eliminating violence against women in
armed conflict, and in this respect civil society has a
key role to play in the peacekeeping and peacebuilding
processes. The issue of violence against women in
armed conflict is closely related to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, which is a priority of the
Human Security Network. Both the protection of
civilians and the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000)
should be fully incorporated into the mandates of all
peacekeeping operations.
All Member States have a responsibility to
implement resolution 1325 (2000). The development of
national action plans is a key component of Member
States’ commitment to fulfilling that responsibility, and
the coming decade should aim for action and
accountability.
Women’s full enjoyment of all human rights has
been at the heart of the Human Security Network since
its inception. We are committed to supporting
meaningful steps to promote and enhance the role of
women in peace processes. Without women’s
participation in this area, sustainable peace will not be
possible. Women must be an integral part of all our
thinking on peace and security. We look to the Security
Council for strong leadership in the effective

10-60385

implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and its
related resolutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bahamas.
Ms. Bethel (Bahamas): Like previous speakers, I
would like to commend you, Mr. President, for your
initiative in organizing this important event.
This meeting marks an important milestone —
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). My delegation praises the valiant efforts
of the countless people who have worked tirelessly to
put women at the centre of global efforts for peace, not
only in responding to their needs as victims, but —
equally importantly — in drawing on women’s talents
as peacemakers. As noted in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/498), notable efforts have
been made by the United Nations system, Member
States, civil society and other actors across a broad
range of areas. We have seen increased participation of
women in decision-making roles and peacekeeping
operations, which is indicative of the important role
that women can and must play in the development of
peace.
However, despite this progress, we continue to
receive shocking reports of atrocious abuses and sexual
violence against women in conflict zones, as recently
occurred in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Warring parties must first and foremost halt all
systematic and individual abuses against women. My
delegation believes that the Security Council and the
international community as a whole owe it to these
victims and others around the world to do much more
to prevent such crimes, punish the perpetrators and
establish conditions where violence against women is
treated like the societal anathema it is. The Council has
a special responsibility to enable the United Nations to
do the best job it can on this front.
This meeting is an opportunity for us all to
declare our commitment to achieving this goal. But it
should be more. It should spark concrete action,
through a more coherent and coordinated approach
geared towards helping women, not next year or next
month, but right now, today.
My fellow countrywomen and countrymen in the
Bahamas count ourselves most fortunate, for we have
no first-hand knowledge of the horrors and ravages of
war and civil strife. Nonetheless, we feel the pain and

61

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

suffering of our fellow human beings caught up in
conflict and war in other parts of the world,
particularly the women and children who are
disproportionately
affected
by
such
negative
circumstances. As noted by Martin Luther King, Jr.,
“Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere”,
and one might correctly extrapolate from that notable
quote that conflict anywhere is a threat to peace
everywhere. For this reason, we feel compelled to lend
our voice to this important debate today and to
recognize the important role of women in this process.
In recognition of the meaningful participation of
women at all stages of the peace process, including
disarmament, and in the integration of a gender
perspective, we note the recent introduction of a draft
resolution in the First Committee (A/C.1/65/L.39),
spearheaded by our sister Caribbean Community
country of Trinidad and Tobago, on women,
disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation, and
we welcome this as another important step in the right
direction.
We welcome the fact that since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), the Security Council has given
this issue increased attention. But we urge members of
the Council and all other countries to back these
declarations and directives with appropriate resources:
police, troops, funds, equipment and training. These
are solid tools that can be used in assisting individual
women to surmount their circumstances and contribute
to lasting peace and the development of their
communities and countries. Currently, just 8 per cent
of the 13,000 United Nations police officers are
women. The Organization must promote the
recruitment and training of more skilled women, not
only as police officers but at all levels, especially in
leadership positions.
The Secretary-General’s assertion that “securing
lasting peace and security requires commitment and
ownership of decisions by Member States as well as all
parties to armed conflict” (S/2010/498, para. 81) should
serve as an axiom undergirding all our efforts in this
regard. It is an axiom that cuts across gender lines,
cultures and levels of development, and it demands the
support of us all. If we can empower all of the good
words and positive intentions in this Chamber with real
action, that will unleash the much more transformative
power of the world’s women and usher in a better future
for all. This must be done with the full engagement,
participation, cooperation and support of men.

62

Finally, we are greatly encouraged by the
appointments of Margot Wallström as the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict and Michelle Bachelet as the Executive
Director of UN Women. My delegation is confident
that the leadership roles these two women will play in
their respective arenas will greatly advance the causes
that have brought us together today, and I assure them
both of my delegation’s support and cooperation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Ms. Ojiambo (Kenya): Kenya welcomes the
leadership shown by Uganda in holding this debate
during its presidency of the Council. This is a clear
demonstration of just how important it is for us to
tackle the growing problem of sexual and gender-based
violence if we are serious about resolving conflict,
empowering women and advancing gender equality.
The issue that we are addressing today — women
and peace and security — is important and deserves the
international community’s utmost attention and
unequivocal support. Nearly 10 years ago, the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1325 (2000), which
ever since has constituted a basis for cooperation
among all the parties concerned in the field of women
and peace and security. National ownership by all
Member States of this resolution is crucial. We report
that we have made modest gains in creating institutions
and developing frameworks aimed at addressing
violence against women in conflict situations. We still,
however, sadly recognize that women and children
continue to suffer disproportionately in times of
conflict. Today, we recognize that violence against
women in all its manifestations must be dealt with
firmly and decisively. It is in this regard that I wish to
reiterate
Kenya’s
commitment
to
the
full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), whose adoption we consider a milestone.
Kenya condemns all forms of violence against
women, including sexual violence, and has always
urged compliance with both humanitarian and human
rights law during times of conflict. Women must be
protected from violence and other atrocities during
times of conflict. Additionally, women must participate
in rebuilding efforts, free from threats, intimidation
and discrimination. It is important, therefore, that in
pre-conflict, conflict and post-conflict situations, the
special needs of women be respected and their

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

concerns addressed. My delegation recognizes the
fundamental factor that women’s perceptions, concerns
and opinions must form an integral part of all decisionmaking processes at all levels in all peace and
reconciliation processes. Indeed, traditional stereotypes
that have consistently kept women away from the
negotiating table are already being broken and must
continue to be broken.
In Kenya, the newly promulgated constitution has
entrenched pertinent provisions relating to the
participation of women at the highest levels. The
legislature will now have 47 and 16 seats reserved for
women, in the National Assembly and the Senate
respectively, in addition to those who will be elected
from the various constituencies. Furthermore, in all
cases where special interests are represented in the
legislature, the seats will be divided equally between
men and women. As relates to national commissions
and other bodies, the representation by women shall
not be less than 30 per cent of the total membership,
and a woman shall serve in one of the two highest
positions in the entity.
Pursuant to the resolution, Kenya has made
deliberate efforts to increase the participation of
women in peacekeeping missions. Currently, we have
women in uniform deployed in the peacekeeping
missions in which Kenya is participating, and we are
determined to increase that number.
With the recent establishment of UN Women, we
believe that women will have a stronger voice to speak
on issues affecting them, including the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). The coordination of the
various agencies, offices and mandate holders that deal
with women, and violence against women in particular,
will be crucial to the implementation of the resolution.
While it is understood that the Security Council
has an important role to play in dealing with peace and
security matters internationally, States bear the primary
responsibility to protect their citizens — women and
children in particular — from violence. It is in this
regard that my delegation calls for more concerted
efforts by the international community and the Security
Council to prevent and address the myriad issues
surrounding conflicts. Indeed, countries in conflict and
those that have recently emerged from conflict have
unique challenges which, if not comprehensively
addressed, will lead to either a continuation of or
relapse into conflict. The international community must

10-60385

provide the necessary framework and assistance to
ensure that women do not suffer needlessly from
conflict or its aftermath. The adoption of resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009) clearly
demonstrates an increased commitment on the part of
the Security Council to address violence against women.
Kenya expresses its deep gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2010/498), which, inter alia, showcases the key
sectors where tangible progress is being made in this
context and identifies gaps and challenges in
implementation. Kenya is particularly grateful for the
indicators that have been suggested in the report and
will seek to engage further with all Member States and
stakeholders in order to achieve the widest acceptance
of them. My delegation believes that the indicators are
preliminary and form an important basis for overall
monitoring of the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Adhering to the indicators, however, will have
budgetary implications, for which support is requested.
As relates to the implementation of the resolution,
many challenges still continue to hamper countries’
efforts to implement it, such as lack of capacity to
implement gender mainstreaming initiatives, weak
accountability mechanisms and limitations with respect
to funding and resources. All these issues have to be
addressed to ensure systematic integration and
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my country’s
commitment to implementing resolution 1325 (2000).
Indeed, we are happy to report the ongoing discussions
being carried out among stakeholders in Kenya to
develop a action plan for the implementation of the
resolution. We support the Secretary-General in his
continued efforts to mainstream resolution 1325 (2000)
throughout the United Nations system.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to congratulate you once again, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month, as well as your initiative to
convene this open debate on women and peace and
security to mark the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000).
That resolution led to the adoption of the
2008-2009 System-wide Action Plan for implementation

63

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

across the United Nations system and to the
identification of standard indicators to measure progress
and the time frame needed to apply the indicators at the
regional and international levels. Here we recall the
prior report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2010/173), which set out
strategies and principles to guide the forging of a strong
framework for addressing gender equality and the status
of women, especially in situations of armed conflict.
On this occasion, we note the need to move
forward with the full implementation of the resolution
over the next decade by adopting comprehensive and
robust regional action plans in this field. These must
include capacity-building for developing countries that
have been afflicted by conflict, especially since the
item “Women and peace and security” has been one of
the most active on the Council’s agenda over the past
10 years, as evidenced by the subsequent adoption of
three other resolutions — resolutions 1820 (2008),
1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009) — and presidential
statements and statements to the press on the same
topic. All of this has been accompanied by a substantial
body of periodic reports of the Secretary-General on
women and peace and security.
When considering the status of women, we are
able to say proudly that the Sudan has deep-rooted
pioneering experience in this field, as Sudanese women
have always been genuine partners in the political and
decision-making structures of our country since their
participation in the election of the first Sudanese
parliament in 1954 on the eve of our declaration of
independence. These gains for women developed
further when women were elected as members of the
Sudanese parliament in 1964, following independence.
Moreover, my country has applied the concept of equal
pay for equal work for men and women since 1967. It
was therefore only natural that the gains of Sudanese
women in terms of political participation continued to
develop, reaching the level of 25 per cent
representation in the federal parliament as well as in
provincial councils, in accordance with the laws
governing the elections that were held in my country
last April. This means that a quarter of the seats in
Sudan’s federal and provincial legislatures are held by
women, which was mentioned by Ms. Michelle
Bachelet,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women, in her
statement at the opening of this debate. It is worth
mentioning as just one example that in the judiciary

64

alone 79 judgeships are held by Sudanese women,
many of whom have presided as judges of the Supreme
Court. Sudanese women have also held high-ranking
diplomatic positions, including ambassadorships, and
have been commanders in the armed forces, the police
and the security forces.
As for combating the phenomenon of violence
against women, the Government of the Sudan has
adopted a national strategy that was prepared by all
relevant official and public actors. The strategy has
been implemented at the central and provincial levels.
The fruits of the strategy include the establishment of
social police units which deal with women’s issues and
combat all forms of discrimination and violence
against women, including sexual violence.
Many specialized centres have also been founded
at the central and provincial levels in order to
coordinate women’s efforts in the fields of peace and
development and to offer women-oriented guidance
and consultations on bolstering the concept of gender
equality and dealing with the status of women in areas
afflicted by war, be it in the southern parts of the
country or in Darfur. It is worth noting here that
disarmament,
demobilization,
resettlement
and
reintegration programmes have given special priority
to the situation of women, in close coordination with
relevant United Nations agencies, including the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM).
Today, we would like to commend the existing
cooperation with UNIFEM and its active role in
translating the aforementioned action plan into tangible
reality. We look forward to seeing UNIFEM, through
the new gender Entity at the United Nations, play a
larger role in terms of building national capacity and
supporting efforts aimed at the advancement of women
and improvement of their status, especially in
post-conflict areas.
We would also like to recall aspects relating to
the status of women within the framework of
attainment of the Millennium Development Goals.
Building the capacity of developing countries and
enabling them to achieve the Goals would be the most
efficient way to improve the status of women, bearing
in mind the Beijing Platform for Action and especially
in the light of the close link between the Platform for
Action and the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals and their impact on factors relating
to progress in improving the status of women.

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

The Government of the Sudan has been
celebrating the tenth anniversary of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security since 10 June. In Khartoum, our capital, we
held an expanded workshop and an open day to
celebrate the anniversary, in coordination with the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) and the
Sudan country offices of United Nations agencies, at
the forefront of which was UNIFEM.
It is also worth noting that preparatory work for
the open day included workshops attended by women
in several parts of the Sudan, including Khartoum and
Juba, the capital of the southern province, the Warab
province in the south and the provinces of East and
Central Equatoria, as well as the three provinces of
Darfur. We would also note that, in coordination with
UNMIS and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), 88 women members
of provincial councils have been trained on
mainstreaming a gender perspective on all levels, and
female police units in the south and in Darfur have
been trained in capacity-building.
The situation of women in armed conflict has
always been part of dealing comprehensively with the
root causes of conflict. Therefore, we endorse the
report’s reference to a work plan covering the
underlying causes of conflict, such as poverty,
socio-economic and gender inequalities, endemic
underdevelopment, weak or non-existent institutions
and the absence of effective governance. This approach
is based on the fact that war is war. Wherever war
breaks out, its negative impact affects the vulnerable
parts of society: women and children. Accordingly, we
affirm that a comprehensive and sustainable political
settlement of conflicts is the mother of all solutions for
all issues pertaining to the situation of women in armed
conflict.
We also affirm that the Security Council’s
effectiveness in implementing and following up on
resolution 1325 (2000), including the specific measures
undertaken to that effect, must be based on accurate
information. I repeat: all these actions and measures
must be based on accurate information contained in the
Secretary-General’s periodic reports on the issue, not
on information cited in the reports of certain
non-governmental
organizations
and
media
organizations.

10-60385

We also affirm the need for the Council to rely on
the country reports submitted by Member States on
their implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We urge
the United Nations and its missions to organize
workshops and consultative round tables with those
involved in countries affected by conflict in order to
exchange experiences regarding the overall situation of
women in armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Silva (Sri Lanka): Mr. President, I thank you
for giving me this opportunity to participate in this
important debate. Also, we appreciate the briefings by
the Under-Secretary-General for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women and Executive Director of
UN Women, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, the President of the
Economic and Social Council and the civil society
representative.
The adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) 10 years ago was a landmark in our efforts to
recognize women’s contribution to the maintenance
and promotion of peace and security and their specific
needs and concerns during and in the aftermath of
armed conflicts. In many ways, today’s debate is an
assessment of the evolution of this issue as well as an
opportunity to identify the challenges that lie ahead.
Although the devastation stemming from armed
conflicts does not discriminate along gender lines, it is
known that women and children, particularly girls,
often experience a disproportionate share of harm
during and in the aftermath of armed conflicts.
It is known that in the context of some armed
conflicts involving non-State actors, young girls are
often forced into early and underage marriages and
early pregnancies in order to avoid forcible recruitment
into the fighting ranks by non-State actors. Such
practices have serious health implications for the
young mothers and their children.
The practice of recruiting young women and girls
as suicide bombers — undoubtedly a vicious and
obnoxious practice — not only snuffs out their worldly
aspirations but also deprives their communities and
societies of their productive contributions. The
perpetration of sexual violence against women leaves
them debilitated psychologically and, in most
instances, physically as well.

65

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

The challenges faced by women in post-conflict
environments remain formidable. Often, they are forced
to contend with family dislocation, social ostracism and
shattered livelihoods. Some face the everyday reality of
being single mothers. In many ways, a level playing
field in terms of gender equity continues to elude
women in post-conflict contexts as well. Those are
serious issues that call for the urgent and undivided
attention of the international community.
Sri Lanka, having grappled with a virulent form
of terrorism perpetrated by the Liberation Tigers of
Tamil Eelam (LTTE), is fully cognizant of the
despicable reality that clouded the lives of the young
girls and women in the north and east of our country.
The Council will recall that Sri Lanka had to intervene
in the Council’s deliberations under resolutions 1539
(2004) and 1612 (2005), on children and armed
conflict, to focus attention on the abhorrent practice of
child recruitment for combat by LTTE terrorists and on
the deployment of young women as suicide bombers.
With the defeat of terrorism in May 2009, through
a massive humanitarian rescue mission our Government
took concerted action to rehabilitate and reintegrate all
former child combatants. Among them, 351 were girls.
Knowing that those children had been forced to take up
guns instead of school books, the Government of Sri
Lanka adopted a prudent, practical and compassionate
approach towards their reintegration, an approach based
on the principles of women’s empowerment, livelihood
training, psychosocial support and, above all,
restorative justice.
For those who missed the opportunity to
experience a childhood and a formal education,
arrangements have been made through catch-up
schools to enable them to complete examinations for
the general certificate of education, irrespective of
their current age. The State and society view them as
victims and not as perpetrators. The lessons learned
and the good practices adopted by Sri Lanka in the
arduous process of rapidly restoring the future of those
children deserve appreciation. Ours is a success story
that has no parallel elsewhere.
With regard to former adult LTTE cadres, the
Government has placed high priority on their social
and economic reintegration. In recognition of that
priority, a vocational, technical and language-training
programme has been developed under our accelerated
skills acquisition programme. It includes, among other

66

things, training in information technology, heavy
machinery operation and the electrical, mechanical and
apparel sectors. That is intended to enable former
LTTE members to participate fully in the various
employment opportunities that are being created along
with the ongoing massive infrastructure and other
development projects in the north and the east of our
country.
Furthermore, with a view to harnessing the
potential of the social integration and social
development of those former combatants, the ministry
in charge of rehabilitation, in collaboration with the
Hindu Congress and the Commissioner-General for
Rehabilitation, organized a wedding ceremony for 53
couples who wished to get married. An equal number
of houses were constructed for the newlyweds to
complete their rehabilitation programme as husband
and wife.
We are mindful of the challenges before us on the
larger subject of women and peace and security. On the
policy level, programmes have already been identified
to address the critical issues facing women and girls in
the post-conflict phase. We are especially focused on
the special needs of thousands of widows and orphans.
However, resource limitations are a challenge in our
efforts to accelerate and implement the envisaged
ameliorative programmes for those segments of the
population. We sincerely thank our friends in the
international community for their generous support for
the livelihood development programme for the
country’s widows.
Despite the resource challenges, it is nevertheless
heartening to note that the 2010 Global Gender Gap
Report of the World Economic Forum ranks Sri Lanka
at number 16 in the area of gender parity. In page 27,
the report notes that
“Sri Lanka … is distinctive for being the only
South Asian country in the top 20 for the fourth
consecutive year. Sri Lanka’s performance
remains steady as it maintains the same rank as
2009. In addition to higher-than-average
performance in education and health, Sri Lanka
continues to hold a privileged position regarding
political empowerment.”
Sri Lanka will conduct a national population
census in 2011 for the entire country, the first such
country-wide census since 1981. The census will pave
the way for adopting gender disaggregated methods to

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

address data gaps in areas such as women and girls
with disabilities and their access to educational and
health services. Such focused census-taking will
facilitate the development of policy inputs to initiate
and strengthen programmes for women and girls in
areas that have escaped adequate policy focus. There is
no doubt that consolidated action will further empower
women and girls in post-conflict Sri Lanka.
We believe that the proliferation of small arms
increases the risk of interpersonal violence, including
domestic and societal violence, which often continue
after conflicts. Hence, curbing the spread of small arms
will be a step in the right direction in minimizing
gender-based violence.
As resolution 1325 (2000) focuses extensively on
women’s role in peacekeeping and peacebuilding, Sri
Lanka stands ready to extend its support to achieve
gender parity in United Nations peacekeeping activities
and in carrying out gender-related mandates of
peacekeeping missions. Necessary background efforts,
including pre-deployment training, have been
completed to deploy an all-female battalion, comprised
of 855 personnel and 28 female officers, at any given
time. Sri Lanka is also willing to share its experiences
in this area with other countries in need of such
assistance, through relevant United Nations agencies.
We remain hopeful that the Council will make
every effort to ensure that the indicators proposed for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) are also
acceptable to, and achievable by, all Member States.
That is especially so given our varying levels of
development and prevailing socio-economic conditions.

Exactly 10 years ago, the Security Council
adopted the important resolution 1325 (2000). It the
first resolution to address the impact of conflict on
women and the contribution that women can make to
solidifying peace. It recognizes that the major security,
economic and governance challenges of our time
cannot be solved without the protection and
participation of women at all levels of our society. As
such, resolution 1325 (2000) is truly a landmark
resolution which we must all live up to.
NATO is ready to play its full role by pursuing a
pragmatic approach. With our partners, we have agreed
on a comprehensive list of concrete actions to
mainstream gender perspectives into NATO’s
partnership programmes. Resolution 1325 (2000) has
become a fully integrated element of NATO’s
comprehensive approach to crisis management.
The Alliance currently has 150,000 women and
men engaged in operations from Afghanistan to the
Balkans, but also off the Horn of Africa. In these
gender-sensitive environments, we have made it clear
that the involvement of women in operations is crucial
if we want to establish relationships and trust with civil
society. It is important to ensure that women are
present, active and take decisions at all strategic,
operational and tactical levels.

The President: I now give the floor to the NATO
Civilian Liaison Officer to the United Nations.

In September 2009, NATO issued a military
directive to all NATO commanders and allied and
partner nations for the integration of resolution 1325
(2000) and gender perspectives in NATO military
organizations and the planning and execution of
operations. It included a strict code of behaviour for all
military personnel serving in NATO-led operations.
The directive paved the way for the deployment of
NATO’s first military gender advisers in the
headquarters of the International Security Assistance
Force in the autumn of last year, complementing the
network of national gender advisers already fielded in
some of the provincial reconstruction teams in
Afghanistan. Gender advisers will also soon be
deployed to the Kosovo Force and begin work at the
level of our strategic commands. This approach has
enabled us to mainstream a gender perspective from
NATO’s senior political level all the way to the tactical
engagement level of NATO troops in operations.

Ms. Lemos-Maniati: On behalf of NATO, it is a
special pleasure for me to be here today with the
Security Council to mark this important anniversary.

A related, important aspect is education and
training; it is one of the keys to changing mindsets.
Our education institutions are engaged in this process,

We wish to caution, however, that as one third of
the proposed indicators in the Secretary-General’s
report are qualitative in nature, a balanced, transparent
and objective approach must be exercised in the
selection of data. Also, it is important to carefully
design, through extensive consultations, the methods
that would be used to verify the quantitative data. After
all, it is the collective responsibility and objective of
all of us Member States to ensure a world free, safe
and fair for all women and girls.

10-60385

67

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

providing predeployment training for all civilian and
military personnel of peacekeeping operations.

Secretary-General for his comprehensive
contained in document S/2010/498.

But looking ahead, NATO intends to do more. We
will continue mainstreaming resolution 1325 (2000) in
our operations, recognizing that mainstreaming gender
perspectives requires a continuous and shared effort
until it becomes the norm. We will continue developing
education and training in civilian and military
frameworks. We will continue to engage with other
international organizations — including the United
Nations, the European Union and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) — as well
as with the civil society, to share our experiences,
lessons learned and best practices. Here, we welcome
the establishment of UN Women; we wish all the best
to Ms. Bachelet and are looking forward to working
with her.

From our own experience, sustainable peace
cannot be achieved without the full and effective
participation of women in conflict prevention, conflict
resolution, peace processes, and post-conflict
reconstruction and peacebuilding.

We will continue encouraging nations to develop
national action plans and to promote the participation
of women in their armed forces. In Afghanistan, in
particular, we will continue to encourage women to
take their rightful place in shaping their country’s
future. We will continue to support Afghan women’s
networks, which play a key role in the development of
governance and social and economic development, and
to help train female police and security officers.
Finally, we will also enhance our efforts to mainstream
resolution 1325 (2000) in the Alliance’s everyday
business. NATO must continue to become a modern
place of work where decisions can be taken
professionally and efficiently. For this to happen, a
healthy gender balance is as important.
One decade on from the adoption of the Security
Council’s groundbreaking resolution 1325 (2000), we
are confident that we can take the next steps. We will
remain committed to taking practical and pragmatic
actions with our allies and our partners. We will remain
active and engaged, and we look forward to continuing
our efforts and cooperation beyond this anniversary.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): My delegation
would like to thank you for organizing this debate in
connection with the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of what has become a landmark resolution in the
history of the United Nations — namely, resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security. We
would also like to express our appreciation to the

68

report

A few weeks ago, the Security Council itself
acknowledged the efforts that Sierra Leone is making
towards the prevention and resolution of conflict and in
peacebuilding. In resolution 1941 (2010), the Council
commended the Government of Sierra Leone for
recognizing the important role of women in
peacebuilding, with reference to resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008), by establishing national
strategies relating to women, peace and security.
Today, we can boast of a national action plan
launched by President Koroma on 8 June, which was
developed through a process that has been acclaimed
by many as highly participatory and inclusive. This
comprehensive plan includes a monitoring and
evaluation framework to ensure that all actors are
accountable for its full implementation. Prior to the
launching of our national action plan, we also launched
an overarching national gender strategic plan, with
which the national action plan has been harmonized
with a view to mainstreaming its implementation into
the President’s Agenda for Change.
Increasing the participation and representation of
our women in peace and security programmes within a
democratic governance structure for us is key. To
ensure that the role of women in the local Government
machinery is enhanced, the Local Government Act
stipulates gender parity at the municipal level. We have
also ensured a significant improvement in the
participation of women in the security and justice
sectors by appointing a number of women to senior
management positions. In 2008, for instance, there was
a landmark appointment. A woman was appointed as
Chief Justice of the judiciary of Sierra Leone. Nine of
the 21 judges are women, while four of the seven
Supreme Court justices are also women. The first
female brigadier in Sierra Leone — also the first in
West Africa — was recently appointed as a major step
towards the implementation of the equal opportunities
policy adopted in 2009 by the Republic of Sierra Leone
Armed Forces.

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

Access to justice for our women has been
reinforced through the enactment of the three genderresponsive laws: the Registration of Customary
Marriage and Divorce Act, the Domestic Violence Act,
and the Devolution of Estates Act. These laws are
designed to promote women’s human rights and protect
women against discrimination.
The illicit flow and use of small arms and light
weapons during the 11-year rebel war was devastating,
particularly for our women and girls. In this regard, the
enactment of the National Commission on Small Arms
Act of 2010 and the formal establishment of the
National Commission should, among other things,
enhance our capacity to address the issue of violence,
including gender-based and sexual violence. We have
also established a National Committee on Genderbased Violence to look into cases of abuse and violence
against women and girls. Moreover, pillar 3 of the
Sierra Leone national action plan specifically deals
with the prosecution and punishment of perpetrators as
a way of addressing the question of impunity for sexual
and gender-based violence.
Among other impressive strides taken by the
Government of Sierra Leone to improve the welfare of
our women and girls are affirmative action for girlchild education and the recent adoption of the free
health care delivery initiative for pregnant women,
lactating mothers and children under the age of five.
We are well aware that it is our national
responsibility to implement the provisions of this
groundbreaking resolution. We acknowledge the
support of the Unite Nations system and the
international community as a whole in what we have
been able to achieve since resolution 1325 (2000) was
adopted 10 years ago. We count on their continued and
sustained support, especially that of United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone, in this
noble venture.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Trinidad and Tobago.
Ms. Boissiere (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad
and Tobago welcomes the opportunity to make its
contribution to the debate on this significant topic
almost a decade to the day after resolution 1325 (2000)
was adopted by the Security Council. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2010/498) on this important subject.

10-60385

Trinidad and Tobago recognizes the competence
of the Council under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter in matters related to the maintenance of
international peace and security and wishes to support
the efforts made by the Council to integrate a gender
perspective into that traditionally male-focused
thematic area. It is our view that the seminal character
of this resolution cannot be overemphasized, as it was
the first to recognize the need for the involvement of
both women and men in efforts to attain sustainable
peace and security. The significance of the resolution is
also observed because of its call for the integration of
perspectives on the special needs of women and girls in
relation
to
post-conflict
reconstruction
and
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
initiatives.
Our support for the resolution is based not only
on our legal obligations under the Charter, but also on
our own national laws, which have entrenched the
inalienable rights of women into our domestic legal
framework. We note with satisfaction that resolution
1325 (2000) highlights the cross-cutting nature of
gender considerations in all areas related to peace and
security. In a similar manner, Trinidad and Tobago has
developed a draft national policy on gender and
development, which seeks to underscore the essential
contribution of women to national development and
integrate the gender perspective into all levels of
national policy.
Trinidad and Tobago also supports the important
role of United Nations specialized agencies and bodies
and the role they play in gender-mainstreaming
initiatives and the promotion of women. In this regard,
we are particularly encouraged by the establishment of
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN Women), and we
congratulate Michelle Bachelet on her appointment as
Under-Secretary-General and Executive Director of the
Entity. Additionally, we have made annual
contributions to the United Nations Children’s Fund
and, in the past, to the United Nations Development
Fund for Women.
We subscribe to the rule of law in the promotion
and maintenance of international peace and security as
well as in the empowerment and advancement of
women. In keeping with that approach, and in
recognition of the importance of the achievement of
some of the measures outlined in resolution 1325
(2000), Trinidad and Tobago, as a responsible member

69

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

of the international community, has implemented in its
domestic legal system not only its obligations under
the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the Additional
Protocols of 1977, but also its obligations under other
instruments, including, the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The vulnerability of women and girls in situations
of armed conflict and, in our specific circumstances,
armed violence, continue to engage our attention.
Consequently, we have implemented and continue to
implement measures to eliminate and mitigate the
effects of armed violence, particularly against women
and girls in our society. As such, and in light of the 15year review of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action, which, inter alia, calls for the elimination of
violence against women, Trinidad and Tobago has
developed a procedural manual on domestic violence to
guide the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service in
addressing this issue. We also offer gender training
workshops to members of our armed forces.
Notwithstanding
the
importance
of
the
implementation of agreements on peace and security,
Trinidad and Tobago is of the view that the prosecution
of those accused of committing grave crimes against
women and girls during armed conflict is a key factor
in the attainment of lasting peace. As a result, Trinidad
and Tobago as a founding State of the International
Criminal Court has given domestic legal effect to the
Rome Statute, which established the Court, and has
also encouraged adherence to the instrument by
Member States of the subregion of the Caribbean
Community. Any failure to prosecute the perpetrators
of grave crimes against women and girls would not
only contribute to a culture of impunity, but would also
be at variance with resolution 1325 (2000).
In the spirit of advancing the dual agenda of the
attainment of international peace and security and the
empowerment of women, the Prime Minister of
Trinidad and Tobago announced during the general
debate of the sixty-fifth session of the General
Assembly (20th plenary meeting) our intention to
introduce in the First Committee at the present session
a draft resolution on women, disarmament, nonproliferation and arms control. It is our view that this
draft resolution complements Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) by focusing on the participation
of women in processes geared towards the
advancement of disarmament and international peace

70

and security. The draft resolution seeks to emphasize
the value of women as contributors to the achievement
of international peace and security and encourages
Member States to promote and support their
involvement at the policymaking and other levels. The
draft resolution has since been introduced in the First
Committee as document A/C.1/65/L.39/Rev.1 and has
already attracted support from Member States. Trinidad
and Tobago welcomes further support for this initiative
and looks forward to the adoption of the draft
resolution by consensus.
In conclusion, Trinidad and Tobago remains
committed to working with other Member States as
well as its partners at the regional and hemispheric
levels in order to provide an environment which
promotes the involvement of women in matter relating
to peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): My delegation aligns
itself with the statement made by the delegation of
Namibia on behalf of Southern African Development
Community (SADC).
I would like to extend the gratitude of my
delegation to you, Mr. President, for having convened
this important meeting on women and peace and
security. We congratulate Ms. Michelle Bachelet on her
appointment
as
Under-Secretary-General
and
Executive Director of UN Women. We assure her of
our full support in the discharge of her mandate.
As 2010 marks the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), on women, peace and security, it is of the
utmost importance that we strive to ensure gender
equality, fight violence against women and to enhance
women’s participation in international peace and
security.
Resolution 1325 (2000) represents one of the
most important milestones of gender mainstreaming in
the United Nations. Since its adoption in 2000, this
important tool has allowed the United Nations and its
agencies, through the Inter-Agency Task Force on
Women and Peace and Security, to work together on
these issues. Considerable attention has also been paid
to its implementation at the national and international
levels.

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

Today’s deliberations reaffirm the great
importance that we attach individually and collectively
to the impact of conflict on women and to the role that
women can play in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts. The deliberations also provide an opportunity
to reaffirm the core message of resolution 1325 (2000)
that sustainable peace will be possible only with
women’s full participation, perspectives, leadership
and presence wherever we seek to make and keep the
peace.
As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/498) indicates, some progress has indeed been
made in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
as demonstrated by the notable efforts made by the
United Nations system, Member States, civil society
and other actors. In this regard, a number of activities
covering a broad range of areas have been undertaken
over the past decade.
However, we remain concerned that, in spite of the
adoption of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008),
which have become beacons of hope for millions of
women and girls, crimes of rape and sexual violence
persist. Women and girls continue to be targeted, while
rape and sexual violence continue to be used as weapons
of war. Women also constitute the majority of the
world’s refugees and internally displaced persons.
However, we share a sense of optimism that, given our
collective will, especially within the Security Council,
we can bring an end to impunity and to this crime
against humanity. In this regard, we call upon all
concerned parties to refrain from committing human
rights abuses in conflict situations, including sexual
violence, to respect international humanitarian law and
to promote non-violent forms of conflict resolution and
a culture of peace.
We recognize that peace is inextricably linked
with equality between women and men. One of the
most important issues to be addressed with regard to
women and armed conflict remains women’s
participation in conflict resolution and the negotiation
of peace agreements at the national and international
levels. In the same vein, we recognize that women’s
equal participation in decision-making at all levels is
key to better advance and address the specific needs
and concerns of women.
We believe that if women are to play an equal
part in the maintenance of peace and security, they
must be empowered politically and economically and

10-60385

represented adequately at all decision-making levels,
both at the pre-conflict stage and during hostilities, as
well as during peacekeeping, reconstruction and
reconciliation.
In this respect, it is also our belief that the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) can be
achieved only through increased recognition of the
crucial role of women, as well as their participation
and involvement in all efforts aimed at preventing and
resolving conflicts. We fully share the opinion that
gender equality should be recognized as a core issue in
the maintenance of peace and security.
Therefore, we must ensure that the provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000) are realized in order to enable
women to participate fully and equally in all levels of
decision-making with regard to conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. Women must become full agents in the
shaping and rebuilding of their communities in the
aftermath of war. It is our duty to continue to work
towards the full implementation of this resolution at
the national, regional and international levels.
In conclusion, Botswana
attaches
great
importance to the promotion and protection of the
rights and interests of women and to advancing the
status of women. The Government of Botswana has
made major achievements in protecting women from
violence and in ensuring a secure environment where
their rights are protected and their participation in
decision-making bodies is guaranteed.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
representative of Ghana.
Mr. Christian (Ghana): Ghana is pleased to join
others in congratulating the delegation of Uganda on
assuming the presidency of the Council for the month
of October and for convening this debate on resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security.
We thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2010/498) and his statement
here this morning. We equally thank the newly
appointed head of UN Women, Ms. Michelle Bachelet,
for her briefing to the Council. My delegation is
confident that, with her appointment, this key position
is in capable hands.
Resolution 1325 (2000) is indeed important and
unique, as it was the first of its kind to link women’s
experiences in conflict to the international peace and
security agenda, focusing attention on the impact of

71

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

conflict on women and girls and calling for women’s
engagement in conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
Ghana welcomes the findings of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, which acknowledges the growing
participation of women in decision-making and in
peacekeeping operations, as well as the key role played
by civil society in keeping critical issues on the
development
agenda
and
supporting
women
peacemakers in conflict areas. It also recognizes the
key role played by the United Nations Development
Fund for Women in the implementation of the
resolution and notes that gender has become a more
prominent feature of mission planning. In spite of these
achievements, the report indicates that methods for
monitoring the impact of the resolution are dismal.
Although the 2008-2009 System-wide Action
Plan was credible in terms of strengthening resultsbased management, it had design and development
weaknesses that will require extensive consultations
and redesigning. Tools for measuring progress, such as
the comprehensive set of indicators on resolution 1325
(2000), have been designed to ascertain the impact of
international efforts on women’s issues in order to
address the substantive gaps that remain between
policies and their implementation. These indicators
should also monitor success in the implementation of
national action plans. However, 10 years on, most
Member States have yet to implement national action
plans, with only 20 countries having adopted them.
We hold the view that the slow progress of
Member States in fully implementing resolution 1325
(2000) is the result of poor monitoring, lack of
awareness at the national, regional and international
levels, lack of capacity to operationalize the resolution,
compartmentalization of issues raised by the
resolution, poor coordination among various security
sectors, and poor funding and stereotyping of the
resolution as a women-only tool.
It is our belief that resolution 1325 (2000) will
further enhance our country’s strong traditions on
issues of peace and security, as exemplified through
our support of peace missions and the activities of the
Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training
Centre. In this context, Ghana, in partnership with the
Women Peace and Security Network Africa and the
Canadian Government, has taken steps to realize the
final stages of establishing Ghana’s national action
plan on resolution 1325 (2000).

72

Despite the intensified efforts made in the past
decade, there remain major analytical gaps, and
globally women account for only 2 per cent of military
peacekeeping personnel. Another question is on how
processed information can be compared among
different country situations. We should also bear in
mind that the structure and resourcing capabilities of
UN Women will come into effect only on 1 January
2011. Consequently, continued attention and support
are required to ensure the meaningful participation of
women at all stages of the peace process. The Council
could endorse a single comprehensive framework to
guide implementation of the resolution, or it could
endorse the set of indicators while urging Member
States to adopt national action plans for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We further
encourage the Secretary-General to take steps to
reiterate his commitment to the resolution and to
expedite the process towards the full implementation of
all 26 indicators.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of this
landmark resolution. As we review the progress made
so far, let us resolve to work harder to ensure its fuller
implementation. There is therefore a need to share
experiences and good practices across the board. We all
have a duty to exhibit the political will to ensure that
the next decade is one of action. The United Nations
system will need to intensify its efforts to support
Member States in accelerating the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I join previous
speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate on a topic that has gained sound
public and political acknowledgment.
Armenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
this evening by Ambassador Serrano of the European
Union. I would like to make some brief observations in
my national capacity.
Let me start with a quotation from the Beijing
Platform for Action: “Peace is inextricably linked with
equality between women and men and development”
(A/CONF.177/20, annex II, para. 131). Although a very
simple and straightforward statement, it goes to the
heart of what we are discussing today, namely, that
gender equality and security go hand in hand.

10-60385

S/PV.6411 (Resumption 1)

Armenia takes note of some positive
developments. During the past decade, the Security
Council has put in place a normative framework for
women’s participation in peace processes, the
elimination of sexual violence in armed conflict, the
protection and promotion of women’s human rights,
and the mainstreaming of gender equality and
perspectives in the context of armed conflict,
peacebuilding and reconstruction.
As noted by the Secretary-General earlier this
year, many peace processes now regularly include
consultations with women’s peace groups. In many
post-conflict countries, the number of women in
Government has increased dramatically, and they have
used their public decision-making roles to advance
women’s rights.
Despite the progress, however, much still needs
to be addressed and accomplished, as the female voice
is not always heard. In that regard, the most important
item on the agenda is to increase the presence of
women in decision-making processes. Women remain
largely excluded, especially from efforts to find
workable solutions to conflicts. We should further
promote their participation.
The
costs
of
conflicts
are
borne
disproportionately by women and children. Since
women pay the primary price when peace is absent,
they are important stakeholders in peacebuilding. As
such, the inclusion of women in all stages of the peace
process guarantees a more lasting and representative
settlement. A number of research studies have also
indicated that women generally are more collaborative,
and thus more inclined towards mutual compromise.
Women often use their role as mothers to cut across
international borders and divides.
We have experienced this first hand in our region.
Earlier this year, representatives of Armenian and
Azerbaijani women’s non-governmental organizations
discussed ways to find peaceful solutions to the
Nagorny Karabakh conflict. The peace dialogues are
oriented towards increasing the role of Armenian and
Azerbaijani women in peace processes and towards the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). More
meetings between the sides are expected to take place.
As we discuss the role of women in peacemaking
and peacebuilding, we cannot ignore an issue that is
inextricably tied to it — violence against women and
girls in conflict situations. It is unfortunate that,

10-60385

despite the existence of international legal instruments
and normative mechanisms, there has been a disturbing
escalation in levels of sexual violence during and after
armed conflicts.
During the past decade, particular attention has
been paid to addressing some of the specific crimes
experienced by women and girls during armed conflict,
namely, rape, trafficking, enforced prostitution and
enslavement. It is critical to ensure accountability for
past and present crimes and not to grant impunity to
perpetrators. Otherwise, we would provide amnesty for
future crimes.
Having had the privilege to chair the fifty-fourth
session of the Commission on the Status of Women
earlier this year, I would like to emphasize that special
attention needs to be paid to children who are victims
of rape and other forms of sexual violence, especially
girls, who are usually the largest group of victims in
armed conflict. In addition to the physical damage,
sexual violence often leaves lasting harm and stigma.
By recalling the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council, as well as
relevant provisions contained in instruments of
international law, the Commission on the Status of
Women has expressed grave concern about the
continuation of armed conflicts in many regions of the
world and about the human suffering and humanitarian
emergencies they have caused.
Peacebuilding needs the involvement of women.
Women’s roles in peacebuilding in Bosnia, Rwanda,
Sri Lanka and many other places in recent decades
highlight the importance of their full participation.
Women need to be present to discuss issues such as
genocide, impunity and security if just and enduring
peace is to be built. Armenia will continue to work
closely with the United Nations and all other interested
parties — including the newly established UN Women,
under the competent leadership of Michelle Bachelet —
to implement and expand the agenda of resolution 1325
(2000), with a view to bettering the situation of women
around the world.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 10.20 p.m.

73
