UNITED NATIONS

I

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

2234th

MEETING:

24 JUNE 1980

*

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

.. .. ... .. .. ... .. ... ... .. ... .. ... .. ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 from the Acting Permanent Representative of
Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13966). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..i.......................

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2234)

SlPV.2234

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2234th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 24 June 1980, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Ole ALGARD (Norway).

representatives of Lebanon, Mauritania and the Syrian
Arab Republic, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, GeDemocratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2234)
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tu&ni (Lebanon), Mr. Kane (Mauritania)
and Mr. Mansouri
(Syrian Arab Republic) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 from the Acting
Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13966)
The meeting

-.2 The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of Jordan. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

4. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): Mr. President, I wish to
take this occasion to express my sincere congratulations to you, Ambassador Alg5rd of friendly Norway,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
with your widely acknowledged outstanding wisdom,
statesmanship and dedication. Similarly, it is my
privilege to express my highest commendation to
Ambassador Oumarou of friendly Niger on the
exemplary manner in which he presided over the work
of the Council during the month of May.

was called to order at 4 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 from the Acting Permanent
Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13966)

5. The chief victim of Israeli cdlonization, despoliation and emasculation has been the Holy City of
Al-Quds AlSharif, Jerusalem.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions taken at the 2233rd meeting, I invite the representatives of Israel and Pakistan to take a seat at the
Council table, I invite the representatives of Egypt,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan and Morocco to take the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber
and I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a seat at the Council
table.

6. In 1947-1948, Israeli terrorists forcibly occupied
virtually the whole of Palestinian Arab West Jerusalem,
inaccurately described as Israeli Jerusalem. They
expelled the inhabitants, seized their homes, furniture,
lands and belongings and rendered them refugees under
every sky. If anyone should have the slightest doubt
about my assertion, all he need do is read the titledeeds of ownership, which have been microfilmed and
preserved by the British Government and passed on
to the United Natiqns and its Palestine Conciliation
Commission. The records of what belongs to whom
and where it is are at present available in the archives
of the United Nations for all to see and read. Seventy
per cent Arab was Chief Justice Sir William Fitzgerald’s verdict when he delineated the zoning of the
Arab and Jewish quarters in Jerusalem for the purpose
of autonomous administration by the ,two respective
communities where the inhabitants would enjoy wide

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Blum (Israel)
and Mr. Naik (Pakistan) took places at the Council
table, Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Suwondo (Indonesia),
Mr. Al-Ali
(Iraq),
Mr. Nuseibeh
(Jordan)
and
Mr. Laraki (Morocco) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber and Mr. Terzi
(Palestine Liberation Organization) took a place at the
Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received letters from the
1

powers of local government and administration, within
a special international regime in a corpus sepafarum,
for a IO-year period, unless an earlier t-e-examination
scheme was found necessary. That was an integral part
of General Assembly resolution 181 (II), part III,
which mandated the establishment of a Palestinian
Arab State and a Jewish State. The Jewish occupation
of West Jerusalem, as shown in the blue Armistice
Line of 1949, running north to south, included twice
as much territory as was assigned the Jews by the
Fitzgerald Commission on Jerusalem in 1945.

of unification under Israeli tutelage. One can never
impose unification on a city.
11. The 5 June 1967 occupation of the remnants of
what until 1948 had been a sprawling, heterogeneous
and prosperous city and environs predominantly Palestinian Arab in population as well as in lands and
properties was only the final act in the relentless
implementation of a carefully laid plan for the demise of
a historical Jerusalem which, under all rules of law
and equity, should have remained a sacred trust, a
tolerant and ecumenical city and the inalienable possession-and legacy of the indigenous inhabitants, who
were predominantly Palestinian Arabs, without in the
least dispossessing, excluding or discriminating against
the citizens of the Jewish faith or anyone else. As a
matter of fact, in 1947, when the Zionists started their
onslaught, my last neighbour in Jerusalem was Jewish.
Every citizen of Jerusalem and his offspring should
naturally have remained proud and free citizens of
their immortal city, regardless of race or creed. That is
the civilized way.

7. A glance at the provisions which spell out in
minute detail the inalienable rights of the indigenous
people of Jerusalem and its environs, and the deference
accorded to them by the world community, serves to
highlight the depth of the abyss in which Zionist
machinations and acts of aggression have obliterated
those sacred rights. It has been full-fledged conquest.
8. Not satisfied with the magnitude of the horrendous
and traumatic highway robbery perpetrated by the
Zionist gangs against new Jerusalem, its overwhelmingly Palestinian Arab environs and their inhabitants
before the end of the British Mandate, the Zionist
military machine persisted in its relentless military
onslaught against the tiny remnants of Arab Jerusalem
after the termination of the Mandate. But for the heroic
resistance of the civilian population in East Jerusalem
against all possible odds and the timely rescue intervention of a 600-man contingent of the Jordanian
army on 18 May 1948, at the urgent plea of the
beleaguered citizens, what had remained up to 1967
ad Arab Jerusalem might have suffered a fate identical
to what had been inflicted upon the greater part of
Jerusalem, namely, colonization, sequestration of
private property and exile and, within the context of
that period, large-scale massacres of the civilian
population, which would have dwarfed the Deir Yassin
massacre, to induce the inhabitants to flee, as
Menachem Begin boasted openly in his memoirs.

12. The magnitude of the injustice inflicted upon
the Palestinians can be gauged from the following
figures. In 1917 the Jews owned 1.5 per cent of the
land of Palestine; by the end of the Mandate that had
increased to 5.7 per cent, including public domains
granted to them by the Mandatory Power. As a consequence of the Israeli military onslaught against the
Palestinian people, in 1947-1948 the Israeli military
machine occupied 73 per cent of the total area of
Palestine.
13. In the Jerusalem of 1948, the Israelis militarily
seized and usurped almost the whole of new
Jerusalem; we were left with what we used to describe,
in jest, by an Arabic expression which means “the only
remaining quarter” and also means that God is the
only immortal thing. In 1967 the tiny remnant was
seized, including the Old City, comprising the most
sacred Islamic and Christian Holy Places and shrines.

9. Because Count Folke Bemadotte, the United
Nations Mediator, recognized the predominantly
Palestinian Arab character of the whole of Jerusalem
--old and new-he was made to pay with his life at
the hands of Jewish terrorists in the streets of Jerusalem in 1948. That is the background-lest we forget.

14. Throughout history neither the Arab world nor
the Islamic world has shown any intolerance towards
the people of the Judaic faith. Indeed, no Muslim
would be a tme MusIim if he showed such intolerance;
it would be an aberration. Also, it was the Muslims
who throughout the centuries allowed the Jews back
into Jerusalem whenever they were expelled from
it. And even after Israel’s occupation of most of
Jerusalem and the expulsion of its citizens, the Arabs,
after the General Armistice Agreement of 1949
between Jordan and Israel,’ were willing to permit the
Jews access to Al-Buraq Al-Sharif-the
Wailing
Wall-for prayer and gave a solemn declaration to that
effect, provided the Israelis accorded the Christians
and Muslims. the reciprocal right of visiting their Holy
Places under Israeli occupation. It was the Israelis
who turned down the offer, requesting that the matter
be deferred, Thiscan be ascertained from the official
records of the United Nations and the minutes of the

10. When the Israelis allege that their conquest and
annexation of Arab Jerusalem as it existed between
1948 and 5 June 1967 was a benign act of reunification, they deliberately overlook the fact that the
demarcation, barbed wires, armistice lines and other
consequences which flowed therefrom were a result
of deliberate Israeli aggression and designs. The
Jerusalem Arabs have never advocated or accepted
the dismemberment of their city. On the contrary, they
found themselves the principal and innocent victims
of Israel’s premeditated policy of brute force, usurpation, despoliation and conquest in Jerusalem as elsewhere in Palestine. Besides, it is outrageous to speak
2

Special Committee set up for this purpose under the
General Armistice Agreement.

18. The Israeli occupation of Palestine and the whole
City of Arab Jerusalem has in fact prevented tens of
millions of Christian Arabs throughout the Middle
East and hundreds of millions in the Islamic world
from performing their prayers at their Holy Places for
three decades in three fourths of Palestine, and for over
13 years in Arab Jerusalem and the rest of the territories occupied since 1967. Indeed, the Palestinian
inhabitants of Jerusalem are regarded as guests and
residents in their own ancestral city. They are treated
as beings, not human beings, and the Israeli occupiers
are impatiently awaiting the attrition by mortality of
the old, the exodus of the young abroad for education
and gainful employment-for hardly any exists for
them in their own city-to achieve their eventual
elimination. As for the Jerusalem exiles, it is hardly
an exaggeration to state that their chances of going
into outer space are far greater than their chances of
attaining the basic and inalienable right of repatriation
to their city. Incomprehensible as it may sound,
I assure representatives that it is the truth, the whole
truth and nothing but the truth. Is this what the world
is expected to live with or tolerate?

15. On 15 November 1949, the Governments of
Lebanon, Jordan, Syria and Egypt pledged themselves
to the following declaration, in response to an appeal
by the United Nations Conciliation Commission for
Palestine.
“The Governments of Egypt, the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, Lebanon and Syria undertake
to guarantee freedom of access to the Holy Places,
religious buildings and sites situated in the territory
placed under their authority by the final settlement
of the Palestine problem, or, pending that settlement, in the territory occupied by them under
armistice agreements; and, pursuant to this undertaking, will guarantee rights of entry and of transit
to ministers of religion, pilgrims and visitors, without
distinction as to nationality or faith, subject only to
considerations of national security, all the above in
conformity with the status quo prior to 14 May
1948.“*
The Conciliation Commission made a similar request
of Israel. The reply of the Israeli representative,
Mr. Arthur Lourie, contained in a letter of 8 November 1949to the Chairman of the Commission, was that

19. Over and above that, after 1967, Muslim and
Christian Holy Places in Jerusalem were placed under
the jurisdiction of an Israeli Ministry, namely the
Ministry of Religious Affairs. The Higher Islamic
Council, Al-Haya’ Al-Ilmiyyah Al-Islamiya, has been
refused recognition by the occupation authorities.

“[The Government of Israel] is of the opinion
. . . that it would in the circumstances be in the
interests of a constructive and final settlement if the
matter of formulation were dealt with after more
far-reaching consideration of these problems by the
General Assembly.“3

20. As I have already stressed, the foremost victim
of Israeli colonization, metamorphosis and despoliation have been east, north and south Jerusalem,
occupied during the 1967war. Millennia-old structures
have been felled; holy sites have been bulldozed; the
unique magnificence, serenity and character of that
ancient city have been compromised. How can anybody rebuild those ruined and bulldozed houses?

16. It is manifestly clear, therefore, that, in spite of
persistent Israeli allegations that during the period of
unity between the West Bank and the East Bank
of Jordan the Israelis were denied access to the
Wailing Wall, it was Israel itself which refused to make
a declaration on visits to the Holy Places in Palestine
similar to that made by the Arab Governments. The
reasons are self-evident: the Israelis were determined
to prevent any Palestinian from returning to his home
and homeland or visiting his Holy Places. Their minds
were set on the occupation and annexation, at a subsequent appropriate time, of the rest of Palestine and
the remnants of Arab Jerusalem-which they carried
out in 1967.

21. The encirclement of the 1967occupied sector has
become virtually complete with a massive ring of
high-rise buildings to the north, south, west and
east. The latest feat of Israeli encirclement from the
east began to surface a mere couple of weeks ago with
the completion of some of the high-rise buildings at
the eastern entrance to Jerusalem from Eizeriyah
Village overlooking Gethsemane.
22. A whole town is being built on that site confiscated from the villagers of Eizeriyah, a town as large
as, if not larger than, the Ramat Eshkol Israeli colony
built in the north on Arab lands in the Al-Sheikh
Jarrah quarter, where Mr. Begin declared two days
ago that he intended to move his Government. By
reason of the manifold expansion of Jerusalem’s
municipal boundaries, Israeli colonization stretches
today from the doorsteps of Ramallah in the north to
Bethlehem in the south. By incorporating more and
more of the environs and villages, the Israelis can
boast to the world that the Jerusalem Arabs have
increased to over 100,000. I should remind the Coun-

17. All the crocodile tears about being denied freedom of access to- their Holy Places between 1949 and
1967 are maliciously false and misleading, and their
persistent charges to the contrary do little to give them
any credibility. They are mistaken in believing that by
repeating this charge they can eventually brainwash
people into believing it. This is Goebbels’s style par
excellence. And let me remind the representative of
the Israeli entity at this point that the Palestinian
people are a victimized refugee population, and not the
Nazi war machine and the SS, as Menachem Begin
is obsessively addicted to repeating.
3

cil that the district and suburbs of Arab Jerusalem
-and I am acquainted with it because we had
censuses taken during the usual elections-always
contained several hundred thousand.

Jerusalem. For all I know, they might extend the
boundaries to Nablus and still call it Jerusalem.
27. If any evidence were needed to prove that Israeli
designs are categorically intended to alter theuniversal
and indigenous character of the city, both territorially
and demographically, with the speedy and eventual
extinction of the universal character of the.city, the
evidence is right there in Jerusalem for all to see. As
I stated earlier, the Israelis in 1948 occupied and
confiscated most of the city of Jerusalem. Why should
anyone be driven out of his home? I should like an
answer to this. Why should I be driven from my home?
It is a home that I built with my own toil and labour,
savings and investments. Though such seizure was
strictly illegal, unilateral and wanton, these territories
afforded unlimited opportunity for additional building,
over and above what had already been extensively
built by the Palestinian Arab citizens of 3erusalem.

23. The more than a millennium-old walled City of
Jerusalem, with its monumental Al-Aqsa Mosque and
the breath-taking magnificence of the Dome of the
Rock, the great church of the Holy Sepulchre-the
oldest church in the world-along with numerous
other religious and cultural shrines and sites, were for
centuries surrounded by characteristically neighbourly
and friendly ethnic quarters governed by an immutable
and, if I may add, an inimitable status quo. They
included a Jewish quarter, although 80 per cent of all
properties in the Shurafa-or Jewish Quarter, as it
came to be known-was leased to the Jews by Arab
owners, and leased willingly, because we recognized
the adherents of the three monotheistic faiths,
24. Nevertheless, after the occupation of the Old
City, Israel embarked upon a programme to enlarge
the three-metre-wide area between Al-Buraq Al-Sharif,
or Wailing Wall, and the adjacent Moroccan and
Bab Al-Silsila quarters. Both quarters, and many
others, of course, were Islamic Wuqfreligious endowments. They consisted of hundreds of ancient and
picturesque Arab homes and buildings of great
artistic, historical and religious value. Their age
alone entitled them to deference. They were all bulldozed to the ground in spite of the outcry of the international community and condemnation by UNESCO
and other United Nations bodies. A huge assembly
square opposite the Wailing Wall-Al-Buraq
AlSharif+ow
covers the area where those historic
buildings once stood. It is at present being used for
tourists and buses, and overlooking the whole panorama are newly built villas for the habitation of Israeli
ministers, military governors and other usurpers.

28. The premises of the ‘Knesset and the Hebrew
University were built after 1948 on Arab lands
belonging to the beautiful village of Ein Karem. But
apart from these and a few other instances, very
little indeed has been done in the field of construction
in those areas-I am talking about the new Jerusalemover the past three decades; not even essential maintenance and repairs. Members of the Council may have
read a little report in The New York Times the other
day in which the residents of the Katamon quarter,
a 100 per cent Arab quarter in west Jerusalem, were
complaining about the delapidation of the quarters in
which they were living. Of course, they happened to be
Sephardic or Oriental Jews.
29. When the remaining part of Arab Jerusalem in
the east, north and south was occupied in June 1967,
a spurt of construction suddenly began on an unparalleled scale, not in the western section, but in the
eastern; not over Jewish lands or Arab lands already
confiscated since 1947-1948, but over additional
lands, likewise confiscated, in the east, south, north
and west of an expanded Jerusalem.

25. I need hardly repeat that when an international
commission, under the chairmanship of a former
Swedish Foreign Minister, investigated the Wailing
Wall dispute in 1930, it definitely established that the
Western Wall and the pavements therein were the
property and legacy of Islam and not the remains of the
Old Jewish Temple, as the Israelis today claim. Indeed,
extensive, diligent and deep excavations beneath that
entire area, going down almost 50 metres below the
Al-Aqsa Mosque itself,. carried out over the past
13 years by Israeli archaeologists have unearthed no
Israeli traces whatsoever.

30. Both sectors are part of Jerusalem, and yet,
because Israel’s main objective is to obliterate, and not
to coexist alongside, the people of Jerusalem with its
unique character and its immortal past, this destructive
course has been recklessly pursued under Israeli
occupation. That this sickly obsession and racist
psychosis will one day assuredly lead to unspeakable
destruction does not seem to worry the Israelis in the
least. But that is one more reason that the rest of the
world should not allow a tiny group of chauvinistic
fanatics to lead us all down the drain through their
carnage. Responsible decision-makers-and not the
Gush Emunim, Kahane and their thinly disguised
protectors, such as Begin, Shamir and Burg-should
be the peace-makers and the decision-makers.in issues
pertaining to justice and injustice, to law and lawlessness, to war and peace.

26. Concurrently, bulldozers were busily preparing
for the steel and cement structures which have disfigured the city from within and totally cut it off
from the rest of the West Bank. Eighteen new Israeli
settlement suburbs have rendered the Arab Jerusalem
of 1967 almost unrecognizable. And not only that;
for by expanding relentlessly outside the municipal
boundaries, the Israelis have practically eaten up the
heartland of the West Bank whilst still calling it
4

31. It is in full awareness of this potential horror
that the heads of State and Government and the
Ministers for Foreign Atfairs of the European Council
representing the European Community have joined
in the near-unanimous belief of mankind in advocating
the imperative need to achieve a comprehensive and
just settlement which highlights the legitimate national
rights of the Palestinian people, including, of course,
selfdetermination, the participation of the Palestine
Liberation Organization as the Palestinian people’s
representative, an end to territorial military occupation
and the illegality of settlements, and security for all.
And why do we- always talk about Israeli security?
What about our own security? We are an endangered
species; when we talk about security, let us talk about
it within the proper framework. The nine countries of
the European Community have also recognized the
special importance of the role played by the question
of Jerusalem for all the parties concerned. According
to the text of the Venice declaration, the Nine stressed

concepts to conceal real aims. And, incidentally, this
is not even a novelty of the Camp David participants,
for Mr. Shimon Peres, as Minister of Defence, in
January 1974 presented it to the mayors and leaders
in the occupied territories, who unanimously and
scornfully turned it down. They told him, “What are
you offering us? Are you offering us positions as
mayors of our cities? We are already mayors. Are you
advising us to make sure that the water systems work?
We are already doing that.” No, this is not an
exaggeration.
35. Barring conquest, which the United Nations was
created specifically to prevent and declare illegal, it
is pertinent briefly to examine within a legal context
how the Israelis occupied, colonized and annexed
most of new Jerusalem in 1948and the rest of Jerusalem
in 1967.
36. On 2 August 1948,claiming a failure by the United
Nations to provide a legal framework for Jerusalem
--even though that legal framework was very much
there in part III of resolution 181 (II), and assiduous
efforts were being made to solve the problem on that
basis by various United Nations emissaries, efforts
which culminated in the Lausanne Protocol of 1949,
which Israel initialled but on which it later renegedthe Israeli authorities declared western Jerusalem to
be Israeli-occupied territory retroactive to 15May and
began moving some of their ministries to the Holy
City.

“that they will not accept any unilateral initiative
designed to change the status of Jerusalem and that
any agreement on the city’s status should guarantee
freedom of access to the Holy Places” [S/14009,
paw. 81.

32. My Government takes this opportunity to express
the most profound appreciation and gratitude to His
Holiness Pope Paul II for the categorical, ecumenical
and universal humanism of His Holiness’ statements
on Jerusalem and the whole Palestinian question
during His Holiness* meeting with President Carter
two or three days ago.

37. On the same 2 August, the military Government ’
was disbanded and western Jerusalem was annexed.
Why such a bizarre exercise in legal abuse should
have been resorted to is beyond rational analysis.
The Knesset decision proclaiming Jerusalem the capital
of Israel on 23 January 1950consecrated that exercise.

33. To return to the declaration of the European Community, it is my Government’s assessmentthat, even
though we have no illusion that the declaration will
end occupation and redeem the Palestinian people’s
inalienable rights overnight, and while we recognize
that the declaration is not wholly adequate as it stands
and is somewhat blurred in some of its provisions
-those are the ways of international politics-it is a
vital and deeply valued tributary to a confluence which
is mightily emerging to achieve a just and comprehensive peace. To say the least, it alleviates the
bewildering burden-a psychological as well as
physical burden-to which our people have been subjected over the past two years by the attempt, albeit
totally without success, to convince us that the perpetuation of occupation is not occupation, that the
occupation and annexation of Jerusalem are neither
occupation nor annexation, that municipal rule is not
enslavement and eventual obliteration btit, rather,
self-determination and independence. That has been
the tragedy of the Camp David accord as it relates to
the question of Palestine.

38. On 3 April 1949 ‘an Armistice Agreement was
signed. In article II, paragraph 2, the Agreement
asserts that
“no provision of this Agreement shall in any way
prejudice the rights, claims and positions of either
Party hereto in the ultimate peaceful settlement of
the Palestine question**.*
39. The study entitled The Status of Jerusalem
prepared for, and under the guidance of, the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People is to be highly commended for
its judicious and factual description and presentation
pertaining to Jerusalem. It is in this spirit of appreciation and comprehension that I find myself in duty
bound to take exception to certain references to a socalled Jordanian occupation of the remnants of Arab
Jerusalem. This must have been inadvertent, because
I know the integrity of the members of that Committee. The Jordanian presence in Jerusalem, as
I have repeatedly stated, was fundamentally and
qualitatively different from Israeli occupation.

34. The bones of the sages of international law, the
many deceased architects of the Charter and the author
of Webster’s Dictionary must have been turning in their
graves as they witnessed such blatant misuse of
5

- 40. To begin with, the Jordanian army had been all
over Jerusalem and the rest of Palestine. They were
guarding the Palestine broadcasting station in which
I worked between 1945 and 1948. They were in the
whole of Palestine during the Second World War as
partof the Allied war effort. The Jordanian army withdrew totally and promptly at the termination of the
British Mandate to enable the United Nations to
implement its resolutions on Jerusalem and the rest of
Palestine.

18 May on a salvation mission, a mercy mission.
During the street fighting imposed upon us not only
synagogues, as I said, but churches andmosques were
damaged, including the Al-Aqsa Mosque itself, which
took years to repair.
43. The world conscience would hardly have
tolerated the massive massacre and expulsion of close
to 90,000 Palestinian Arab citizens of Jerusalem, many
of whom had by then been crowded into the Old
City of Jerusalem, in the monasteries and with
relatives in any space that they could find. Anyone
who lived at that time knows this fact all too well
and there are many such people today.

41. Prior to that, and while the British still had the
Mandate and were still responsible for law and order
in the city, Jewish forces belonging to the Haganah
and the Irgun and Stem terrorist groups had already
been rampaging and annexing most Arab quarters in
the New City and its environs. The unspeakable
massacre of at least 250 men, women and children and
the dumping of their mutilated and bayoneted bodies
in the village wells of Deir Yassin, a suburb of West
Jerusalem, was but one of the many notorious crimes
committed against the citizens of Jerusalem and its
environs. Everybody said that the people of Jerusalem
fled their city. This is the response: Who flees his
city voluntarily, unless he is totally unprotected and
subjected to the kind of massacre to which the people
of Deir Yassin were subjected? Meanwhile, the Israeli
aggressors planted about 1,000 men of their forces in
the Jewish quarter within the wailed and historic city
against the express and categorical wishes of the
Jewish inhabitants of that quarter. They did not wish
to have their quarter turned into a battlefield, and they
resisted and they refused. But those 1,000 soldiers,
who were captured and subsequently, of course,
returned through the Red Cross, insisted on going there
and turning that Jewish quarter into a battlefield. And
here there is talk about us desecrating Israeli Jewish
Holy Places. It was in the course of that street fighting.
that not only synagogues but churches and mosques,
including the Al-Aqsa Mosque, were damaged. That
is a fact of history, and there are many people alive
today who bore witness and can testify to it. We have
never desecrated any Jewish places in all our history
because, as I said, we would not be good Muslims
if we did.

44. The Jordanian army set up a military administration while waiting and striving for a United Nations
political settlement. When all those, efforts were
aborted and torpedoed by the Israelis and when there
remained a truncated eastern Palestine, cut offfrom the
sea, from the west, the north and south, it was the
Palestinian inhabitants themselves who requested
unification with their brethren in East Jordan, pending
a final solution of the Palestine problem.
45. But I should like to add the following. The act of
unity between the West Bank and the East Bank of
24 April I950 speaks for itself. It states:
to assure the safeguarding of all Arab rights
in Palestine, and defending those rights by a11legitimate means and, with full faith and without prejudicing the final settlement of its just cause, within
national aspirations, Arab co-operation and international justice”.
6‘

.

.

.

46. This position’ has never changed and, now that
the international community is striving to solve the
Palestine problem, it is absolutely for the Palestinians
to exercise their right of self-determination within
conditions of total freedom, in any way they wish.
That is a basic entitlement of every people on this little
planet on which we live.
47. I must confess that the term “Jordanian occupation” sounds sour in the light of what I have just stated.
A people cannot be in occupation of themselves.
The Governors of Jerusalem all through that period
were indigenous inhabitants: Jamal Tuqan; Aref AlAref, the famous historian; Daud Abu Ghazaleh, a
Supreme Court Justice; Hassan Al-Khatib, one of the
senior administrators of the British Mandate; Anwar
Nuseibeh; Anwar Al-Khatib and others were all sons
of Jerusalem and Palestine. The same was the
case with the Mayors and., indeed, at the central
Government level in Amman. At least half the Cabinet,
half the Parliament and 60 to 70 per cent of the army
were from the West Bank, and the trilateral regency
always had somebody from the West Bank included
whenever His Majesty King Hussein was outside the
country.

42. Immediately upon termination of the Mandate,
the Jewish forces from within and outside mercilessly
pounded the walled city for three days and nights
between the fifteenth and the eighteenth of that fateful
month. The Palmach itself, the striking force of the
Israeli army, was involved. But they were repulsed
by the determined citizenry, largely unarmed and with
no regular forces or any regular or dependable supplies
to enable them to continue a coherent defence. They
literally expended their last bullets and they repulsed
the last attacks by using the few sticks of dynamite
that were left at their disposal. It was then, and only
then, that they sent very urgent pleas for help to their
Jordanian brethren. An advance force of the Jordanian
army returned to Jerusalem-they did not occupy
Jerusalem, they returned to Jerusalem-at dawn on
6

48. At present, under Israeli occupation, colonization
and annexation, an Israeli corporal can summon the
elected Mayor of Bethlehem or of any city or town to
have an audience or to receive a summons or an act
of expulsion from the exalted military governorship,
an Israeli major, colonel or brigadier, or possibly a
captain. Not an inch of territory was ever taken by the
unified State from the people. That belongs to the
inhabitants, a common right which the Israelis cannot
and never will understand, because their basic aim
is conquest and the supplanting of the indigenous
inhabitants. That is the basic difference.

271 (1969), 298 (1971) and 465 (1980). Conseauentlv,
the issue,.as 1 see it and as it stands today, is detween
the Council, the highest executive organ of the United
Nations and an aggressive Israeli entity.
53. The Eleventh Islamic Conference of Foreign
Ministers, meeting at Islamabad from 17 to 22 l&y
1980, reviewed with the gravest alarm the all but complete devouring of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, Jerusalem. The
Israeli aggressors, having snuffed out the life and legacy
of Jerusalem, are seemingly determined to destroy
even its 1,400-year-old holiest places, the Al-Aqsa
Mosque sanctuary and the Dome of the Rock.

49. How did the Israeli occupation unilaterally annex
Arab Jerusalem occupied since 1%7? It was very
simple, after they gained all the necessary legal
experience in 1948. The occupation authorities did the
following: on 27 June 1967, the Knesset added a little
paragraph to the so-called Law and Administration
Ordinance of 1948 stating:

54. On 21 August 1969, a supposedly deranged man,
allegedly. Australian, partially succeeded in an arson
attempt against the Al-Aqsa Mosque. A month and a
half ago, in the words of former Defence Minister Ezer
Weizman, a horrible crime was about to be committed when two Israeli soldiers and their accomplices
were apprehended with a stockpile of 264 pounds of
explosives, scores of bombs, fuses and wiring. It was
subsequently disclosed that the plan of the not-soderanged but fanatical soldiers had been to blow up the
venerated Al-Aqsa Mosque and the unmatched Dome
of the Rock, so close to the hearts of almost 900 million
Muslims-their first kiblah in Islam and their third
holiest sanctuary. It is the spot from which the prophet
Mohammed made his nocturnal journey to the heavens
to witness God’s infinite creation. The plan was to
have been executed on a Friday, when normally
-except at Ramadan, when there are many more ,
people present-at least 100,000 civilian worshippers
assemble for prayer within the two mosques and
outside them, throughout the open spaces of the holy
sanctuary. Thousands, of course, would have been
killed, wounded and maimed. Civilization and culture
would have lost one of its most ancient and priceless
treasures. In its combination of Arab, Byzantine and
Palestinian elements, the sanctuary represents a
confluence of the artistic abilities of so many civilizations which contributed to the construction of the
ancient structures. The Israelis have also conceded
that the aim of that terrorist group was also to blow
up many Christian institutions within Jerusalem and
throughout Palestine. With the mushrooming of underground Israeli military movements, there is no way of
knowing when a third attempt might be made.

“The State’s laws, jurisdiction and administration
shall apply to any area of the land of Israel which
the Government shall designate by order”.
We are now talking about orders. The following day,
such an order was passed which included Jerusalem.
Let us recall that the entire world had regarded
Jerusalem and all the occupied territories as occupied
territories, and yet the Israelis lightly referred to them
as an area of the land of Israel, by ordinance, of
course. On 29 June’ 1967, an Israeli military order
dissolved the Municipal Council of Arab Jerusalem.
A little while later, Mr. Ruhi Al-Khatib, Mayor of
Jerusalem, was exiled.
50. I cannot understand why the international jurists
spend alI their precious time analysing legal rights and
wrongs when it is so much easier to emulate the
Israelis and issue decrees, orders and ordinances in
a~couple of lines which decide the fate of a whole
people and strike at the heart of international law and
universal values and legacies.
51. If Israel stands outside the shade of international
law, the international community, to be sure, is not the
obedient servant of this prodigal and lawless offshoot,
which, without unlimited United States support, would
have been forced to heed the universal will.

55. Let me assert that for Christians and Muslims
Jerusalem, with its Holy Places, is as vital as their
very heartbeat; it is linked to their spiritual experiences
and beliefs, their memories, traditions and existence
by over 2,000 years of profound spiritual history. If
the Israelis think that Jerusalem is uniquely the spiritual
centre of Judaism and of no other faith, they are
disastrously and myopically wrong. The Israelis can
talk in the most passionate terms about their own
feelings-that is their prerogative. But they have
neither the right nor the ability to gauge the infinite
and undying intensity of the innermost feelings of
reverence which the other two great religions hold

52. The annexation of Jerusalem and the measures
which have been taken to change the status and
character of the Holy City are blatantly contrary to
international law, the Hague Convention of 1907, the
fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, the. Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and other relevant conventions. They are audaciously in violation of the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations which
categorically prohibit the acquisition of territory by
military conquest. They arrogantly defy General
Assembly resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V)
and Security Council resolutions 252(1968), 267 (1969),
7

has already extended to you its warmest and most
sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. It is a good omen that
an able and recognized diplomat from Norway, with
its iong and distinguished commitment to peace, is
presiding over the Council’s deliberations while the
issue of the City. of Peace is under consideration.

* towards Jerusalem in its spiritual and historical
significance. Without the Palestinian Arab Jerusalemites, Muslim and Christian alike, there would be
no Islam or Christianity in Jerusalem. The existence
of the Palestinian Arabs-increasingly threatened,
as I mentioned earlier-is inextricably intertwined with
the concrete embodiment of the two great religions in
Jerusalem. The Palestinian Arabs are the sentinels
who daily fill the churches and mosques; without them
those hallowed places would become empty museums
for tourists and occasional pilgrims.

61. The status of the Holy City of Jerusalem has a
distinct and most profound significance. Protection of
and access to the Holy Places, in view of the diverse
deep-seated religious and spiritual attachments, require
that unilateral measures altering its status continue to
be rejected categorically by the international community. Notwithstanding the- stream of resolutions by
the Council, the General Assembly and other competent organs, the situation in Jerusalem and the
occupied territories is rapidly deteriorating. Every
day the Israeli authorities systematically carry out
well-planned and even well-publicized designs to build
new settlements, expand existing ones, expropriate
lands, demolish houses and expel inhabitants, including
elected officials.

56. Since Israel has already started through the
Knesset the legislative process of formalizing in basic
Iaw their de facto annexation, the Foreign Ministers
of the 40 Islamic States have decided, amongst other
measures, to request the Security Council to convene
in order to examine the dangers of the Israeli decision,
to declare the annulment of that decision if carried
through and to impose the sanctions as stipulated
in Chapter VII of the Charter against any recalcitrant
Member whose actions pose a grave threat to peace
and security in the world. The United Nations has
adopted numerous decisions, but to no avail. The
purpose which prompted the Islamic Conference of
Foreign Ministers was to urge the Council to shoulder
its full responsibilities under the Charter, by taking
meaningful and constraining action before it is too late.
My delegation is fully confident that the Council will
not shirk its solemn responsibilities.

62. Today’s deliberations attest to the perilous and
grave consequences of Israeli policy in Jerusalem and
in the occupied territories as a whole; a policy based
on utter disregard for the Charter, for the rule of
international law, for justice and for legitimacy; a
policy which persists in obstructing the realization of
the inalienable tights of a whole people and in frustrating earnest and&ncere efforts aimed at the establishment of a just peace in our region.

57. A word in passing: the representative of the
Israeli entity objected to the use by the- Foreign
Minister of Pakistan of the name Al-Quds Al-Sharif,
which means in Arabic the Holy City, for Jerusalem.
The Israeli representative wants the Hebrew name
used, but he should have known better, because the
Hebrew tribes adopted their name for the city from the
forefathers of the Palestinians, the Jebusite Canaanites,
who founded the city some 5,000 years ago and named
it Uru Salema or the City of Peace. The latest
archaeological excavations in Ebla in northern Syria
by an Italian archaeological team have unearthed
Jebusite inscriptions in which Jerusalem is called,
Uru Salema.

63. The Council has already heard the comprehensive and lucid presentations by the representatives
who preceded me. They advanced irrefutable facts
and figures to document convincingly Israel’s designs
on Arab Jerusalem.
64. This is not the first time, nor I suspect will it
be the last time, that the Council has convened to
.consider the status of the Holy City. On several
previous occasions, the Council considered the status
of Jerusalem and numerous resolutions were adopted
unanimously but, regrettably, never implemented.
Notwithstanding the gravity of Israel’s sustained
proclivity to defy the will of the community of
nations, my delegation firmly believes that it would be
erroneous for Israel to assume that those resolutions
have no value- or are destined to be shelved and to
languish in the archives of the United Nations without
exerting any real effect. From a legal point of view,
the relevant decisions have served a useful purpose.
Their adoption has confirmed the applicability of the
relevant principles of international law. Their provi-.
sions have, moreover, decisiveIy and repeatedly affirmed in clear terms that the attempts to annex Arab
Jeru$alem are illegal and invalid. The determination
by the competent United Nations organs defies and
articu@tes the legal status of Jerusalem beyond any
doubt, rendering illegal all past, present and future

58. The Zionist intransigence has set the world on
a collision course. Let us all act in concert to avoid
a global catastrophe. The foremost prerequisite is the
prompt Israeli withdrawal from all the occupied territories, foremost among which is Holy Jerusalem. That
could be the springboard to the formulation of a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East, which is the
aspiration of all mankind.
59. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
60. Mr. ELARABY (Egypt): It is indeed reassuring
to see you, Mr. President, presiding over the deliberations of the Security Council. The delegation of Egypt
8

efforts or attempt to annex Arab Jerusalem. It should
therefore be obvious to Israel that the mantle of legitimacy will never be conferred on its annexationist
designs over Jerusalem.

fact that their adoption was without prejudice to the
final outcome. This seemingly flexible posture did not,
however, last long. Shortly thereafter, a Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Thalman of Switzerland, conferred with the Israeli
authorities. On 12 September 1967, the SecretaryGeneral submitted a report [S/8146] in which his
personal representative disclosed Israel’s true intentions. The report stated that Israel’s leaders had made
clear to the personal representative of the SecretaryGeneral that Israel was taking every step to place
under its sovereignty those parts of the city not
controlled before June 1967. The Israeli authorities
stated that the process of integration was irreversible
and not negotiable. Slowly but consistently, the
Israeli authorities pursued further their expansionist
designs and strove to enlarge the area of the city, with
a view to annexing additional chunks of the occupied
West Bank. As a result of that deliberate policy, it is
estimated now that approximately 30 per cent of the
West Bank has been absorbed within the city limits.
To pass a basic State law in 1980, and then allegedly
to declare the enlarged city, comprising approximately
one third of the West Bank, the capital of Israel, is
the height of international illegality.

65. The thrust of the statements made in the course
of this debate, as well as in previous debates, has
amply clarified the overwhelmingly adverse impact
and the wide-ranging implications that ensue from all
attempts and measures designed to alter the status of
Jerusalem, regardless of the definition, description or
label attached to the source of such attempts. Whether
administrative or legislative, whether emanating from
the incumbent Government, from the former Govemment, from the governing coalition, from the opposition
or from splinter parties oreven individuals, all attempts
and measures taken by Israel to change the status of the
Holy City arejudged by the competent United Nations
organs as totally invalid. Israel has, moreover, been
resolutely and repeatedly called upon to rescind all
measures already taken and to desist from embarking
on any action which purports to alter in any way the’
status of the Holy City. The combined effect of those
resolutions constitutes an authoritative pronouncement of a body of law which confirms a fundamental
dictum of the contemporary international legal order,
namely, the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force and the necessity for respect for the
provisions of the relevant bindi.ng international legal
instruments. To allow any form of tampering with that
cardinal rule would amount to placing in jeopardy the
entire edifice of our modem civilization.

68. The position of Egypt is a matter of record. It
has been clearly and amply defined by President
Sadat during his recent visit to the United States. On
10 April, he stated that Al-Quds-Jerusalem-“has
a unique centrality in Islamic, Christian and Jewish
thought”. President Sadat went on to say:

66. The present debate was requested as a response
to the tabling of a bill in the Israeli Parliament to
declare Jerusalem the capital of Israel. The ultimate
objective of that bill was to consolidate and supplement
the illegal measures declared in the aftermath of the
1967war. It will be recalled that following the enunciation of those measures the General Assembly adopted
two resolutions, 2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V). The
Assembly declared those measures invalid and
requested the Secretary-General to report on the.
implementation of its decision. The pattern of Israel’s
gradual annexation of Jerusalem should be carefully
studied. It would seem even ironic to recall the
approach used by Israel then. Mr. Abba Eban, then
Foreign Minister of Israel, stated in the General
Assembly in 1967, when he attempted to rationalize
the measures his Government had adopted:

“We would like to set there a model for tolerance
and togetherness among all believers. This cannot
be achieved under the present circumstances. The
annexation .of territory by force and the expropriation of other peoples’ land cannot stimulate the sort
of coexistence we are promoting.
“The unification of the city cannot be used as a
cover for expansion and denial of rights.*’

Mr. Eban was obviously trying to secure a fall-back
position and create the impression that it was still
possible to achieve an acceptable solution in spite of
the unilateral Israeli measures of 1967.

69. Thus Egypt’s position is that Jerusalem, venerated by all Egyptians as a Holy City, is an integral
ptirt of the West Bank, that Arab Jerusalem should
always remain under Arab sovereignty and that the
Palestinians living in Arab Jerusalem are definitely
entitled to exercise their sacred right to selfdetermination. The Holy Places should be open to all faiths
without any discrimination as to race, nationality or
religion and all measures to change the demographic
composition of Arab Jerusalem should be rescinded.
The authority of Israel, as an occupying Power, is
strictly confined to limited action, in conformity with
the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and other
related international agreements. That, in essence,
is Egypt’s position.

67. What was then stressed by Mr. Eban was the
administrative nature of the Israeli measures and the

70. When it was reported that a final blow was about
to be struck, in the guise of a basic law, Egypt

“We have made it clear that ,measuresof an administrative nature do not prejudice our readiness and
our intention to work towards the goal of safeguarding those universal spiritual interests.“*

9

registered its vigorous and categorical objection. The
Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Cairo on 15 May
issued a statement confirming Egypt’s strong opposition to any unilateral attempt to alter the juridical or
pohtical status of Jerusalem and any action designed to
,create a&it accompli. The statement affirmed:
“Such action creates a serious and grave situation
which contravenes the principles of international
law and legitimacy, the framework of Camp David
and the spirit of peace”. [S/13945, annex.]
71. The Egyptian Government has made it abundantly clear that this policy adversely affects the
peace process and has gravely undermined the current
strenuous efforts for a just peace. Under such conditions, the Government of Egypt suspended the peace
talks.
72. On Jerusalem, the international community has
from the very outset committed itself to acting in
accordance with the unique importance and significance of the Holy City. It is universally recognized
that the Council’s deliberations encompass highly
sensitive political, legal, spiritual and secular considerations that transcend all man-made geographical
and political boundaries. It is, therefore, a source of
satisfaction for my delegation to recognize that opposition to all measures to alter the status of the
city has emerged and commanded clear and solid
unanimity. My delegation wishes most sincerely to
express the hope thaton other aspects of the Palestinian
problem, in particular the most fundamental of these
aspects, the realization of the inalienable Palestinian
rights, unanimity will soon materialize.
73. In this connection, we note with appreciation the
constructive position taken a few days ago by the
European Community. It should be recalled that for
over 10 years Egypt has been in close and constant
contact with the European Community and has always
urged the European countries to come out with a clear
policy statement in support of the efforts to establish
a comprehensive and just peace in the Middle East.
The Venice declaration [S/14009] was welcomed by
Egypt. President Sadat described it as positive, constructive and balanced. Mr. Boutros Ghali, Minister
of State for Foreign Affairs, expressed Egypt’s support for the constructive European policy and
w lcomed the objectives and principles contained in
thE Venice declaration. Moreover, he declared Egypt’s
complete readiness to co-operate with any delegation
dispatched to the Middle East and gave assurances
that Egypt would spare no effort to ensure the success
of all constructive measures aimed at the achievement
of a comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

report reference was made to the urgency of Israel’s
compliance with and implementation of the Security
Council resolutions pertaining to Jerusalem. As the
Committee’s report [S/13450 and Add.1 of 12 July
19791 clearly reveals, Egypt extended its full cooperation. The Commission visited Cairo in 1979 and
had a series of extensive meetings with high Govemment officials, including the Prime Minister and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, as well as many nonofftcials. In the light of the latest attempts to alter the
status of Jerusalem, my delegation takes note of the
most recent letter from Ambassador Mathias of
Portugal, Chairman of the Commission, requesting
information having a bearing on the Commission’s
.mandate. We whole-heartedly welcome the valuable
efforts of this Commission and we should like to pay a ’
tribute to its Chairman and its members for their
diligent and objective endeavours.
75. In conclusion, I should like to reiterate once
more- that Egypt’s policy is and will always remain
based on the attainment of a comprehensive and just
peace in- the. Middle East, a peace that, will provide
Arabs and Israelis alike, on an equal and reciprocal
basis, genuine opportunities to enjoy peace, security
and prosperity. It-is therefore imperative that occupation be terminated; it is also imperative to recognize
the futility of embarking on provocative measures
and the dire necessity of abandoning short-sighted
policies. Vision and courage are the prerequisites to
ensure peace and justice. It is high time that the world,
represented in the Council, took all appropriate steps
to ensure the speedy achievement of this lofty objective. The Council’s actions will affect-and affect
profoundly-not only the fate of a whole people but
also the deep religious feelings and the spiritual
heritage of hundreds of millions of Muslims and
Christians all over the world.
76. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of Mauritania. I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
77. Mr. KANE (Mauritania) (interpretation
from
French): The outbreak of violence, bringing in its wake
mourning and sorrow, that has once again shaken
occupied Arab Palestine has led the Council to place
at the centre of its most pressing concerns a conflict
which, unfortunately, remains completely unresolved
and with no solution in sight.
78. The concern shown by the Council, and rightly
so in the light of what is occurring in the Middle East,
is a surprise to no one, as the international balance
and peace and security in our world are today more
seriously imperilled than at any other pedod since the
creation of the United Nations.

74. Last’ year the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 446 (1979), which established a commission
with the clear mandate of examining the situation
relating to the settlements in the occupied Arab
territories, including Jerusalem. In the Commission’s

79. Why are we more threatened today than ever
before by a conflict which can be fraught only with
tragic consequences for mankind? It is because the
injustice- done to the Palestinian people-which
10

Zionism and its protectors have endeavoured to
minimize for more than a generation-has led to a
confrontation which has now reached its peak.
80. Indeed, for more than 30 years the politicommiiitarysystem which has chosen to reside in Palestine has attempted, with the aid of some Powers,
to eliminate the Palestinian people. Our Organization,
when it assumed the burdensome responsibility of
permitting the creation of the Zionist State, despite
itself was abetting the dispossession, expropriation,
deportation and the attempt systematically to liquidate
the Palestinian people.
81. This tragedy, which has long haunted our consciences without giving us sufficient strength to restore
the most sacred rights of the Palestinian people,
finally shook up the former international order and
caused a true mobiiization of oppressed peoples
against those who endeavoured and still endeavour
to make the Organization give a political and moral
endorsement to the crimes committed against the
Palestinian people and the Arab nation.
82. If the Organization has since been shaken by a
crisis which has undermined it and today threatens its
very foundations, it is because the decisions adoPted
by the majority of Member States are constantly
being called in question by means of procedures which
from every standpoint run counter to justice, law. and
the most elementary common sense. Indeed, the
arbitrary equation introduced into the Charter, an
equation that some seek to justify by all possible
means, an equation whereby a super-Power-a single
super-Power-is legally equal or even superior to
more than 150Member States, is not only an aberration
but indeed also an insult to one’s intelligence. The
right of veto-and I am talking about its excessive
and abusive utiiization-unfortunateiy
continues to
paralyse the Organization and to cause throughout
the world violent reactions, which are the legitimate
expression of those who are unable to rely on international justice to defend their most sacred. right to
freedom and life.
83. Permit me to dwell for a few moments on this
question, because it is obvious that international
peace and security, stability and freedom in the world
are now, more than ever, bound up with this principle
which has become the most essential of the Charter.
84. We for our part thought-and this is a profound
and sincere conviction-that those who arrogated to
themselves so many political privileges when drafting
the Charter were also quite obviously aware- of the
immense moral responsibility incumbent upon them.
We also thought that, because of this responsibility,
they would endeavour to be the jealous guardians of
justice and law and would avoid this most attractive,.
yet perilous, pitfall of being both judge and jury to the
problems the solution of which is the major responsibility of the Organization. We believe this because we

are a small country, but also and even more so because
we see in the Charter a real instrument in the service
of freedom, justice and peace. The equality of small
or large States, forcefully proclaimed in the Charter
which each of our countries freely and solemnly
pledged to respect, was for us the comer-stone of the
structure built after a murderous war whose ail too
disastrous moral consequences continue to be a matter
of concern to the international community.
85. If this was and remains the conviction of the
majority of nations comprising the United Nations,
none the less it does not seem to inspire certain great
Powers which are concerned to expand their living
space and are trying to establish zones of political
and economic influence throughout the world by
contravening commitments into which they have
entered.
86. In this feverish activity of colonial reconquest,
Israel and South Africa quite naturally are being used
as bases to liquidate Palestinian resistance and South
African liberation movements. So, as seems perfectly
clear, it is not a permissive attitude on the part of the
Organization that has led the Zionist entity to trample
underfoot relevant General Assembly resolutions and
decisions. The verdict of the General Assembly concerning the expansionist and genocidal policy practised
by Israel is sufficiently clear and peremptory. Both
the style and substance of that policy have been
unambiguously and irreversibly condemned.
87. In truth, what leads Israel to defy the Organization and to pursue its policy of liquidating the
Palestinian nation is doubtless the guilty complicity of
imperialism which continues to support the Zionists
militarily, financially and diplomatically. That is why
Israel, strengthened by the unconditional support of
imperialism, is continuing deliberately to violate the
most fundamental human rights in the Middle East.
88. This breach of the spirit and the letter of the
Charter, which has led to the expropriation and dis;
possession of the Palestinians unfortunately, recently
reached its peak when the Mayors of Hebron and
Haihoul and the Sharia Judge of Hebron were
expelled, without any justification whatever. And yet
those eminent Palestinian personalities had been
freely and democratically elected by the Palestinian
people even though Palestine is occupied by the
Zionists. In this connection, the Council has adopted
resolutions which have remained a dead letter because
of the well-known stubbornness of the Zionists.
89. But the arrogant policy of Israel does not stop
there. Al-Quds Al-Sharif, a Holy City for many
reasons, which had always been an integral part of
Arab Palestine, has just been transformed into the
capital of the Zionist entity. The Holy Places of this
city have been profaned. There is no religious corn- ’
munity in the world which has not condemned these
acts which are destructive from both the moral and

the human point of view. The Foreign Ministers of the
Islamic Conference, at their meeting held at Islamabad
last May, condemned this decision of the Israeli
Government and considered it to be null and void.
They requested a meeting of the Council to consider
the dangers that might result from that decision of the
Zionist entity.
90. The Council once again is seized of a matter that
has been before it for more than 30 years. It goes
without saying that the decision that emerges from the
discussion here may have a lasting effect on peace,
-stability and justice not only in Arab Palestine but
throughout the world, for the situation in Palestine
has spawned and continues to create other situations
which slowly are leading our universe towards a war
whose consequences would be incalculable for mankind as a whole.
91. The 1980s should witness a just and lasting solution of the question of Palestine. That solution will be
the work of the United Nations and of the Security
Council, and this is what we hope, since otherwise
the world will once again have to confront a conflagration that can only reduce and weaken the conscience
and reason of man. But if by misfortune a solution
within the framework of the United Nations cannot be
found, then the Arab nation, in so far as it is concerned,
will shoulder its responsibilities, all of them, because
the legitimate struggle waged by the Palestinian people
is being waged not only to affirm its right to exist;
that struggle is also being waged to defend the most
authentic values of the Arab nation-its age-old
civilization, its dignity, its personality and its sense of
responsibility.

regions. Likewise-and this should be emphasizedit is no mere chance if the same Powers aIways- adopt
the same attitude towards the same problems here in
the Security Council. The choice is clear and the
responsibility well defined.
95. What is required today more than ever of the
Arab and African nations, where unfortunately the
most flagrant violations of human rights still subsist,
,violations perpetrated by racism and Zionism, is that
resolute and unswerving respect be paid to the moral
values underlying the Charter. I mean to say that as
long as in our countries a man may be pursued without
justification, condemned without reason and executed
without trial, we will have assumed the responsibility
-the heavy responsibility, I would go so far as to
say-of bringing grist to the mill of Zionism, racism
and their foreign supporters. The Iife of a man,
wherever he may be and whatever may be his race or
colour-and this is a fundamental truth-is far too
precious for it to be extinguished without clear moral
justification.
%. In view of this situation, it is even more imperative that the Arab nation should stand united against
the Zionist and imperialist acts of aggression. In fact,
the Zionists of Tel Aviv have only too often exploited
our division to impose their domination over our
region. Consolidation of our independence by the
creation of an atmosphere that can promote unity
in our respective countries and a steadfast and
expanding solidarity among the States of the Arab
nation are the imperative duties incumbent upon each
and every one of our countries.
97. Above and beyond the unity of the Arab nation
which is so necessary, the strengthening of the natural
ties of solidarity between the Arab nation and the
African nation is today even more indispensable, for
who can understand the situation of the Palestinian
people better than the Namibian people? Who can
truly appreciate the situation in Lebanon better than
the South African people? Who can feel both the
suffering and the hopes of the Arab nation better than
the African nation?

92. In this connection, it should be indicated that it
would be useless for an Arab State to attempt to
estabhsh within its confines conditions of independence and prosperity, however necessary they may be,
as long as the Palestinian people, an integral and
inseparable part of the Arab nation, suffers under
Zionist domination and exploitation and is condemned
to wander and to beg. Any independence and prosperity in such circumstances can only be fictitious
and indeed constitute an act of betrayal. Those who
have embarked upon that path will inevitably have to
answer to history and to their peopIe.

98. Between the situation that we inherited immediately after the Second World War and the current
situation there has surely been an evolution in our
world. The circle of the United Nations has expanded.
The universality sought by the Organization and
which constituted the fundamental objective of
the Charter has increasingly become a fact. Wrested
by struggle and sometimes at the cost of indescribable
suffering, the independence, both political and economic, of the small countries nevertheless continues
to be a source of preoccupation. Imperialism, while
adopting a policy of retreat necessitated a few years
ago by the international situation, today seems-to be
trying to get the situation in hand. South Africa and
Israel are being used quite obviously by means of
weapons, money and publicity to ensure control ofthe

93. In the struggle against zionism, an enemy of
mankind, the Arab nation does not stand alone, cannot
stand alone and will never stand alone, since today,
like yesterday, it is a matter of the just against the
unjust, truth against falsehood, morality against the
denial of the most sacred right of man, that is, the free
choice of one’s destiny.
94. In the Middle East, in Latin America, in Asia and
in Africa, the struggle is the same, and it is not mere
chance that the Zionist entity is collaborating closely
with the South African racists in all areas in an attempt
to stem the surge of peoples to independence in those
12

Asian, African and Latin American peoples. As the
saying goes: “Settlers came with their cross when we
had our lands and later they left us their cross and took .
away our lands”.

raw materials of Africa and of the Middle East for the
benefit of the imperialist multinational corporations.
During this time, the Palestinian, Namibian and South
African peoples are forced to vegetate in concentration
camps on the very land of their ancestors. Unbearable
pictures of tearful children, with swoIlen bellies and
feverish countenances, which are published daily in
aewspapers and shown on television, reveal the full
dimension and cruelty of the tragedy imposed on
Africa and the Arab world. These people are forced
to beg, for these people poverty, disease and suffering
are their daily fare, and yet, when they defend by force
of arms their right to exist, it is they who are called
terrorists.

103. That is the policy that has been utilized by the
racist Government of Pretoria in an attempt to justify
the oppression and exploitation of the South African
and Namibian peoples. However, it appears that
neither Israel nor the racist regime in Pretoria has
understood that history is irreversible and that,
whether it be in 1 year, 5 years or 10 years, they too
will be thrown into the waste-basket of history along
with their kind.
104. I did not deliberately set out to change a well-.
established tradition, but I have decided to conclude
with remarks that would usuahy occur at the beginning
of a statement. The President of the Security Council
is both a friend and, if I may say so, a tireless defender
of the Palestinian cause and the independence of the
African continent. That is why I have reserved these
last words for you, Mr. President, as a friend. On
behalf of my country, the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, I should like to convey to you our sincere
congratulations not only on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month but also on the
steadfast courageous position your country has
assumed in defence of fundamental principles of the
Charter.

99. This approach by imperialism and Zionism is
certainly not-new. Was not the “yellow peril” long
exploited to prevent the People’s Republic of China
from taking its place in the concert of nations? Was
not the idea of so-called premature independence
utilized by colonial Powers to prevent African, Asian
and Latin American countries from acceding to
independence and national sovereignty?
100. The strategy of zionism and racism consists of
frightening the world by purveying the belief that the
independence of Palestine, Namibia and South Africa
will lead to an apocalypse. That is not a new strategy;
it surprises no one. Just like the admission of China
to the United Nations, just like the recent liberation
of Zimbabwe, independence for Palestine, Namibia
and South Africa will come about because truth is
obstinate and no State in the world-this has been
tested in parts of Africa, Asia and Latin America-no
State at all, wherever it may be, whatever’its wealth
and its military power-can now stay or will be abIe
to stay the course of history.

105. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Israel
wishes to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I now
call upon him.
106. Mr. BLUM (Israel): To start with, I wish to
register my appreciation and indebtedness to
Mr. Nuseibeh for having so eloquently explained to
the Council why Jordan must indeed be regarded as
the Palestinian Arab State. The representative of the
Palestinian Arab State of Jordan has spoken here today
about Jerusalem in his characteristically petulant and
parsimonious manner. He has given free rein to his
imagination and has not recoiled from the most crude
fabrications. He has also taken his customary liberties
with facts and figures.

101. The liberation of Jerusalem, an integral part of
Palestine, cannot be accomplished separately from the
liberation of Palestine as a whole. The Zionists and
their allies wish to use the Jerusalem issue to create
a situation where one cannot see the wood for the trees.
But that is not and cannot be the question. To be sure,
Jerusalem has its peculiar characteristics, as we all
agree, and its own religious status. But that cannot
abrogate the fact that legally and historically the Holy
City belongs to the Arab nation of Palestine. The
decision of the Knesset to change the character
and status of the city on the basis of a so-called
biblical interpretation moves only those who now and
always have exploited religion for base materialistic
ends. It is today obvious that the presence of Zionists
in a part of the Holy City and the measures they are
adopting are far from religious in nature.

107. It is an affront to history that Jordan should
complain to this body about Jerusalem, for Jordan
stands condemned as the first country in modem
history to have bombarded the Holy City. It will be
recalled that it was Jordan-or Transjordan, as it
was called in those days-which, intent on destroying
the fledgling State of Israel and on unlawfully grabbing
territory for itself, attacked Jerusalem in 1948in clear
defiance of the principles of the Charter. It placed
Jerusalem under siege and opened fire on its inhabitants
and on its historical and religious sites.

102. In fact, no one can remember religion ever
having been so profaned and utilized for such inhuman
and unjust purposes. Israel’s attitude is in no way
whatsoever different from that of the faithless and
lawless settlers that hid their colonial expeditions
with the cloak of religion the better to despoil the

108. Jordanian forces attacked and destroyed the
densely populated Jewish quarter of the Old City with
mortar shells and seized the eastern part of the city,
I3

including the historic wailed section, which contains
religious shrines holy to Jews, Christians and Muslims.
Between 1948 and 1967Jerusalem was a city cut in two
by barbed wire and minefields. In flagrant violation
of the Israel-Jordan General Armistice Agreement of
1949, Jordan barred access by Jews to their Holy
Places and cultural institutions. Further, the Jordanian
Government began systematically to eliminate
every trace of Jerusalem’s Jewish past. Fifty-eight
synagogues, some of great antiquity, like the 700-yearold Hurva Synagogue, were wantonly destroyed and
desecrated. Those that were not razed to the ground.
were converted into toilets, stables and hen houses
filled with dung heaps, garbage and carcasses. In the,
process, hundreds of holy Torah scrolls and books
reverently preserved for generations were plundered
and burned to ashes. On the Mount of Olives, a
hallowed spot for Jews for centuries, 38,000 of the
50,000 tombstones in the ancient Jewish burial ground
were tom up, profaned, broken into pieces and used as
flagstones, steps and building materials for public
latrines and Jordanian army barracks. Large areas of
the cemetery were levelled and converted into parking
areas and gas stations. Through the devastated remains
of the graves, the Jordanian Government cut an asphalt
road to provide a short cut to a new hotel, built
irreverently on the top of the Mount of Olives.
109. Nor were the discriminatory policies of Jordan
directed only against Jews, who, as is well known,
were not permitted to live in the Jordanian-occupied
section of Jerusalem, although they constituted in
Jerusalem then, as they have uninterruptedly for the
past 150 years, the vast majority of the city’s popuiation. During the Jordanian occupation of the eastern
part of Jerusalem between 1948 and 1967, stagnation
set in and there was considerable emigration from it,
since Jordan discouraged economic development in
Jerusalem with a view to ensuring the primacy of
Amman. Particularly hard-hit were the Christian
residents under Jordanian occupation, and their
numbers decreased significantly during that period,
from 19,000 in 1948 to 11,000 in 1967.
110. When in 1952 Jordan declared Islam to be the
official religion of the realm, that declaration was
made applicable also to the Jordanian-occupied part
of Jerusalem. As a result, Christian holidays were no
longer recognized as official holidays of the Christian
citizens. Christian civii.servants were required to take
their weekly holiday on Friday. They were permitted
to absent themselves from their jobs on Sundays only
until 11a.m. Christian schools were required to remain
closed on Fridays.

construction of any Christian church or place of
worship within the Old City. In October 1966 the
Jordanian Government took further measures with a
view to discriminating against Christianecclesiastical
institutions and clergy, such as the abolition of exemption from custom duties previously granted to those
institutions and clergy. A Jordanian law passed in
1955 was from then on strictly enforced also against
Christian educational institutions. It required them to
abandon foreign languages of instruction and to substitute Arabic for them. The teaching of the Koran
was also introduced on that occasion.
112. When Jerusalem was reunited in 1967, the
number of its non-Jewish residents was about
70,000-roughly one quarter of the population. The
non-Jewish population has since risen to more than
100,000.
113. In this regard, it is also relevant to recall that
for 19 years, between 1948 and 1967, Jordan also
barred the Muslim citizens of Israel from visiting and
praying in mosques of the Old City of Jerusalem.
They gained access to them only in 1967, when the
city was reunited.
114. This, then, is the lamentable record of the
Jordanian occupation of the eastern part of Jerusalem
between 1948 and 1967. The Jordanian Government
destroyed the ancient Jewish quarter in the,Oid City,
drove out ail of its inhabitants and subsequently
barred Jews from entering, even as tourists. It severely
oppressed and discriminated against the Christian
residents of the city, as well as against Christian
religious institutions. It equally discriminated against
the Christian and Muslim citizens of Israel. By contrast, Jerusalem today is a city open to ail its residents-3ews. Muslims and Christians-as well as to
members of ail faiths from ail nations. It is open even
to those who claim to be Israel’s enemies. Ta date,
millions of tourists from ail over the world, including
hostile Arab States, have visited Jerusalem and have
been afforded freedom of access and worship at their
respective Holy Places. And yet, the representative of
Jordan comes before the Council to regale it with the
fabrications of his vivid imagination.
115. There is a-maxim common to ail legal systems
which has found its succinct expression in English
law. It says in a most concise form: “He who comes
seeking equity must come with clean hands”. The
representative of Jordan may do well to remember
this- maxim.
116. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Jordan
has asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
I invite him to.take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

ii 1. In 1953 a Jordanian law imposed severe restrictions on the purchase of land by religious institutions
affiliated with “foreign religious organizations”. In
1965 Jordan completely prohibited the acquisition of
ownership or possession of land within the wailed city
of Jerusalem without prior special authorization by
the Government. This resulted in preventing the

117. Mr. NIJSEIBEH (Jordan): I regard iit as almost
immoral to give any response to the representative
of an entity which is in occupation of my country.
14

But yet ,I fe.el compelled to do so because of the
volume of his fabrications and distortions, which
everybody knows are completely at variance with the
truth. and :with the facts which I presented to the
Council a short while ago.

army, 600-men strong, came in at the urgent pleading
of our people. My own brother had his leg,amputated
on that mission, in asking for help and succour for
his brethren across the River Jordan.
121. The representative of Israel, along with all the
representatives of Israel over the past several years
that I have been here, have always gradually inflated
the number of synagogues in the small Jewish quarter
in Jerusalem. If anyone from the Old City of Jerusalem
is asked, he will answer that there were four synagogues-two important ones, Al-Kanis Al-Kabir or
the Greater Synagogue and Al-Kanis Al-Soghir or the
Lesser Synagogue. Unless Mr. Blum regards every
Jewish household as a synagogue, it is unclear how he
could possibly come up with that figure of 58 synagogues. Once in the past the figure 48 was mentioned.
And yet everybody knows that there were four synagogues in the Old City and, as I stated, ifwe had wanted
to desecrate any of those Holy Places, we could have
done so over the period of 1,400 years. However, not
a single stone was touched over those 14 centuries. It
was the Israelis who infiltrated some of their worst
elements from the Stem and Irgun gangs, in an attempt
to bombard the Holy City of Jerusalem from the outside, from the Jaffa Gate, as well as from the Jewish
quarter. Heaven knows what would have happened
to the 90,000 unarmed citizens whose few rifles had
become sticks once the few bullets in their possession
had been exhausted. They used to pay a whole shilling
for a bullet on the open market, because nobody was
supplying us as the Israelis were supplied with money
and arms.

118. To begin with, when I said that the Palestinians
during the period of unity between the East Bank and
the West Bank of the Jordan lived a life of dignity,
equality and freedom with their brethren in the East
Bank, I Made it categorically and specifically clear
that that was an interim arrangement which was
enacted by Parliament in 1950, pending a final solution of the Palestinian problem. Would it have been
better for any party, least of all the Palestinians, to
be kept, as they are now kept by those usurpers,
aggressors and occupiers for two decades, under the
whim and whip of a military Governor? They needed
to live a decent life pending a final solution of the
Palestine problem
119. What’ I said does not in any way mean that
Jordan is the Palestinian State of .Jordan. What it
means is that there were two brethren who came to
each other’s succour in their hour of need and made
the best of the situation, pending the redemption of the
Palestinian people and their repatriation, as an elementary right to their homes and homeland. “Thou
shalt not steal” is one of the Commandments; and
yet a11those Israelis about whom the representative
of Israel was talking are living in our homes, in Arab
,homes throughout Palestine. Palestine is Palestine
and Jordan is Jordan as they were before the partition and dismemberment of PaIestine.

122. The representative of Israel has talked about the
desecration of Israeli Holy Places. He, of course,
mentioned the famous Jewish cemetery on the Mount
of Olives. Allow me to read from the statement of the
Jordanian Mission annexed to the letter dated 20 January 1972 from the representative of Jordan to the
Secretary-General [S/10517]:
(I‘. . . the alleged desecration of a Jewish cemetery
on the Mount of Olives is again a subject which
Israel should not raise, for the invidious comparison
which reference to it would necessarily evoke. To
start with, this Jewish cemetery is only 100 years
old and it is a piece of land which belongs to the
Muslim Wa4f (charitable foundations)“-which
knew how to revere Judaism and to abhor zionism“and leased for a Jewish cemetery for 100 years,
which lease expired Lmore than a decade] ago.
[Whatever little] damage to this cemetery was done
when the Israeli gangs and forces barricaded themselves in it to bombard the Old City”-the representative of Israel said that the Jordanian army was
the first to have bombarded the Old City;,they never
fired a shot-“’ m their attempt to occupy it at the end
of 1947 and the beginning of 1948. As soon as the
Jordan civil administration was established in the
City, the municipality undertook the task of its maintenance and protection by assigning special watchmen and caretakers to it.”

120. The second point that the representative of
Israel made-and he made so many that I reserve the
right to give a more organized answer to his fabrications-was an ahegation that the Jordanian army fired
at Holy Places and at Jewish quarters during its stay
in Palestine under the. British Mandate. I think everybody knows--and the representative of the United
Kingdom can corroborate this point-that
the
Jordanian army never fired a shot during the entire
period of the Mandate and that they promptly and
completely evacuated all Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem, West Jerusalem, the Alamein
Bank, the Katamon quarter, Mia-Shairem and all the
strategic locations in Jerusalem, without firing a shot.
They were a disciplined armed force, which crossed
the river to enable the United Nations-the United
Nations Mediator and all other United Nations operatives-to implement the resolution on a solution of
the Palestinian problem. Only on 18 May 1948, three
days after the termination of the Mandate, did that
Jordanian army enter Jerusalem to save 90,000 hapless,
unarmed civilians who had never in their lives had any
military training. Under the British Mandate, anyone
who was caught with a bullet was liable to be hanged.
And yet our people fought off the best strike force in
the Israeli army for three days, until they were left
with not a bullet. It was then that the Jordanian
15

This was done even though Israel had cut us off from
all the sources of electricity and water. They literally
wanted us to die of thirst; we had to improvise and
we did so very well indeed.
“What do we find on the other side of the scoreboard? Without exaggeration, we come across one
of the most massive and sinful programmes of
desecration that the world has ever known.**-It
is compiled in books and I shall look them up in
my office- “One of the most hallowed Muslim
cemeteries, the Ma’manallah (Mamillah) Cemetery
in the western section of Jerusalem, is at least
1,000 years old. Lie the Kremlin or Arlington or
Westminster Abbey, it contains the remains of great
men by every standard and in all fields of achievement-saints,
warriors”-philosophers-“leaders
of men and of history. What is presently its fate?
A public park for human beings and animals to
trample on, as any visitor to Jerusalem can see
for himself.”
I am sure that the staff of the United States Consulate
in West Jerusalem can verify this for themselves
because the site is in very close proximity to that
Consulate.
“The shrine of a great religious leader in Jaffa,
several hundred years old: if anyone happens to
visit Jaffa and feels like having a drink in exotic
surroundings, he can go there, walk down a few
steps and see for himserf. The mosques of Safad
and Tiberius have been converted into art galleries.
Mr. Evan M. Wilson, previously quoted, has this
to say on page 125 of his book Jerusalem, Key lo
Peace:s

“ ‘After the war [of 19671Christian authorities
who had been unable for many years to visit
certain Christian properties on Mount Zion . . .
because they were . . . closed off by the Israeli
military, found that some of these institutions had
suffered severely. The tombs of the Armenian
Patriarchs in the courtyard of the Armenian
Church of St. Saviour had been broken into
and the bones scattered about. A famous mosaic
floor had been removed from the church during
or just after the war, and the church itself was in
a deplorable state of disrepair. Several Christian
cemeteries in the vicinity were in bad condition,
with thick vegetation and opened graves . . . There
is reason to believe, moreover, that this vandalism . . . is continuing.’ *’

Abbey was used for many years as an Israeli
machine-gun nest.’
“Several mosques, churches, shrines and other
sacred spots throughout Palestine have been desecrated or destroyed beyond recognition at Israeli
hands. Instances of desecration of Christian properties in Israel are given in a letter of 19 April 1968
from the Permanent Representative of Jordan to
the Secretary-General [S185.52].”
123. I do not think that I should abuse the Council’s
time, so I shall go on to something else. The representative of Israel has talked about discrimination
and the disappearance of the Christian Palestinian
Arab community. If he wants to know where the
Christian Palestinian Arabs are, I will tell him. They
are mainly in Amman. They have joined their Muslim
Palestinian Arab brethren mainly in Amman, but also
some emigrated to the United States and they are,
like the Muslims, dispersed under every sky. It is
unfortunate that the representative of Israel thinks
in terms of these petty differences. We have never had
that approach. We are one people. The Palestinian
people iS one people. Before Zionism it included the
Muslim Palestinians, the Christian Palestinians and
the Jewish Palestinians. After Zionism there were the
Christian Palestinians and the Muslim Palestinians.
There is no distinction whatsoever. That concept
applied strictly-no, not strictly; it was natural. We
cannot behave otherwise.
124. As for the holidays that the representative of
Israel has referred to, I should like to inform him that
for Christian schools Fridays and Sundays were
official holidays, whereas for Muslim schools it was
only Fridays. The same applied COexemptions from
taxes on importing vehicles or ambulances for
Christian institutions. I was a member of the Govemment and I remember that cases used to come before
us and invariably all the requests presented by the
Christian churches for charitable purposes were unequivocally endorsed. It was not quite the same with
the Muslim institutions and yet that was the case with
the Christian ones, because several of them were not
indigenous but came from other friendly countries.
I think that His Holiness the late Pope Paul VI would
have testified to how Christianity was faring in Jerusalem when he honoured us with- his visit to Jerusalem
in 1965-1966, because to us Christianity, is so venerated that we regard Jesus Christ as emanating-from
the spirit of God and we behave accordingly.
125. I shall reply in due course to some of the other
points that were mentioned by the representative of
Israel.

Why should there be reason to believe? It is still continuing. It happened a month ago and it was published
in the papers here.

126. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative
of Israel who wishes to speak in exercise of the right
of reply.

“ ‘It was found in the spring of 1968, after the
war, that the crosses on 83 tombs in the Catholic
cemetery on Mount Zion had been shattered. It
was in this area also that the tower of the Dormition

127. Mr. BLUM(Israe1); I wish to draw the.Council’s
attention to the.fact that the representative of*Jordan
16

has again repudiated his monarch here today, for it
was King Hussein who, in 1972, categorically stated
“Jordan is Palestine and Palestine is Jordan”. I would
express the hope that Ambassador Nuseibeh will not
be accused of Gse-majesth by his Government.

the office of the Israel Defence Forces Education
Officer and sent to all schools of the West Bank and
the Gaza Strip. Books are banned because their content is Marxist, because they contain the word “Palestine” or because they express opposition to Zionism
and imperialism.
However, on 9 June, West Bank
schools received a list of banned books which included
the interdiction to read, among others, Shakespeare’s
The Merchant of Venice. That is an item I saw in
Zu Haderekh, which really explains just how free our
children are in their schools.

128. We have been told by Ambassador Nuseibeh
that “only”
four synagogues were destroyed by the
Jordanians in 1948. That would seem to imply that the
destruction of four synagogues is regarded as permissible by him. However, Ambassador Nuseibeh
has unwittingly
supplied us here today with yet
another example of his notoriously
low credibility
rating. Let me therefore give the Council the full
list of those 58 synagogues: (1) Bikur Holim; (2) Or
Ha-Haim; (3) Ha-At-i Ha-Kadosh; (4) Sukkat Shalom;
(5) Hesed El; (6/7) Habad (two synagogues); (8) Shoneh
Halachot;
(9) Beit Hillel;
(10) Menahem
Zion;
(11) Ahavat Ha-Torah Veha-Shalom; (12) Ha-Ramban;
(13) Rabbi Baruch; (14) Rabbi Yehuda Ha-Hasid (the
“Hurva”
Synagogue); (15) Warsaw; (16/17) Adot HaMa’arav (two synagogues); (18) Beit-El Synagogue of
the Kabbalists;
(19) Rabbi Yohanan Ben Zakkai;
(20) Ha-Emtza’i;
(21) Istanbul; (22) Eliahu Ha-Navi;
(23) Beit Aharon; (24) Sha’arei Shamayim; (25) Yehu-’
dei Sepharad; (26) Yemenite;
(27) Ohel Avraham;
(28) Beit Meir; (29) Or Olam; (30) Karaite; (3 1) Tiferet
Yisrael; (32) Ohel Moshe; (33) Kurdish; (34) Porat
Yosef; (35) Hayei Olam; (36) Ha-Kotel Ha-Ma’aravi;
(37) Sukkat David; (38) Rabbi Meir Ba’al Ha-Nes;
(39) Georgian Jews; (40) Ohel Ya’acov; (41) Zion;
(42) Dubno; (43) Sdeh-Hemed;
(44) Ahavat Zion;
(45) Biderman;
(46) G’milut Hasadim; (47) MoshavZ’kainim Ha-Yashan; (48) Michael Rutman; (49) Torat
Ha-Cohanim;
(50) Aleppo Jews; (51) K’tav Torah;
(52) Or Zorai’ah; (53) Persian Jews; (54) Chassidei
Vizhnitz;
(55) Chassidei Bratzlav;
(56) Chassidei
Tzortkov; (57) Kollel Horodno; (58) Rabbi Pinhasel.

134. I do not want to stray from the subject before
us. We are dealing with a very, very serious issue
concerning the fate of Jerusalem, which reflects the
fate of all the occupied Palestinian
territories.
But
I think that we simply cannot leave here tonight
without recalling the Zionist concept of Jerusalem.
135. How does Herzl refer to Jerusalem? In his
diaries Herzl mentioned: “If Jerusalem is ever ours
-and if I were still able to do anything about itI would begin by cleaning it up. I would clear out
anything that is not sacred, set up workers’ houses”
and so on. Now, as far as Herzl is concerned, what is
“sacred”? I can assure the Council that, in his concept
of Christianity,
when he refers to the “Lovable
dreamer of Nazareth”
as having done nothing but
help to increase hatred, anything that resulted from
the teachings of the “Lovable
dreamer of Nazareth”
-our Redeemer Jesus Christ-is,
to him, not at all
sacred; it is something that should really be obliterated.
Those are the words of Herzl.
136. As the Council
was told this morning
[2233rd meeting],
there is in a committee
of the
Knesset a draft of a basic law concerning the future
of Jerusalem. It so happens that the Deputy Legal
Adviser to the Government is the same man who used
to be the legal adviser to Mayor Teddy Kollek of
Jerusalem. His name is Bar-Sela’. Now, how does he
view the fate of historic Jerusalem, the people of
Jerusalem? In his draft made four years ago, the legal
adviser Bar-Sela’ speaks of: “Old Jerusalem and all
the public areas located outside the walls of the city
which have been designated as a national park . . .”
-so the Old City would become a national park.
He adds:

129. I would very much hope that, now that I have
given the full list of these synagogues, the myth of two
or four synagogues canvassed by the representative
of Jordan in the Council over the years will have been
laid to rest. It is regrettable but understandable that
the representative of Jordan should have seen tit to
leave the chamber when I started reading out that list.
130. That, then, is how we have to evaluate
reliability or otherwise of Ambassador Nuseibeh.

the

“Many important historical and architectural sites
which are located in the Old City of Jerusalem do
. not receive appropriate care and are neglected, and
thus a preservation
committee
co-chaired by a
minister and the Mayor of Jerusalem would act to
preserve quarters and sites of a scenic, architectural,
historical and national character.”

131. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization,
who is
going to make a statement in reply.
132. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
I just want to report here about the so-called freedom
of education being given to the people under military
occupation.

137. We all know that, in that national park, it is not
only the scenery and architecture we are interested
in; it is the people; it is the spiritual dimension; it is
the religious dimension. Well, that is not taken into
consideration. But what is being taken into considera-

133. On 13 February this year, the publication ZU
Haderekh reported that almost every month a new list
of banned books is drawn up by what is known as
17

tion? And here comes the capital investment idea of
how to get money. According to the plan, Israel’s
budget would contain a grant for Jerusalem and this
would allow Jerusalem to enjoy what is known as a
“residents’
grant”,
which would be determined
according to the number of Jerusalem’s residents and
which would be increased following the rise in numbers
of Jerusalem’s residents with Israeli citizenship. The
draft law makes it clear there that every additional
Jewish citizen would improve the financial situation
of the municipality,
but adds that the Arabs are not
Israeli citizens. So the Arabs in Jerusalem are not
“a capital investment”;
Jewish citizens would be “a
capital investment”.
That leads us safely to believe
that the eventual fate of the non-Jewish citizens is
known. Who wants to have a burden in a city when he
can make some money by bringing in more Jewish
citizens?

we are really dealing with is not just one aspect
of the situation but the future of an entire people, the
Palestinian people, and also the future of peace in the
area.

138. I just thought that, at this juncture, I would
bring that to the attention of the Council because what

1554thmeeting, para. 74.
5 Washington (DC), the Middle EastInstitute, 1970.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

The meeting

rose at 6.30 p.m.

NOTES

’ Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year,
Special Supplement No. I.
2 OfJcial Records of the General Assembly, Fourth Session,
Ad Hoc Political
Committee, Annex, vol. I, document A/1113,

part C, art. 4.

3 Ibid., part B, para.4.
4 Ibid., Fifth Emergency

00400

Special

Session, Plenary Meetings,

8361462-September

1986-2.050
