S/PV.8429

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8429

th meeting
Tuesday, 18 December 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-44565 (E)
*1844565*

S/PV.8429

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

“immediately and completely cease all settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem”

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: On behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, today I will present the eighth report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), covering the
period from 13 September to 14 December. I will focus
on developments on the ground, in accordance with
the provisions of the resolution, including on regional
and international efforts to advance peace. Let me
underscore that these developments cannot be divorced
from the broader context — Israel’s continued military
occupation of Palestinian territory; uncertainties about
the future of the peace process and the two-State
solution; Hamas’s continuing hold over Gaza and its
militant activity; the persistent threat of war; unilateral
actions that undermine peace efforts; reduced donor
support for Palestine; and turmoil in the wider region.
Before I begin my report, I would like to warn of
the dangerous escalation of terrorist attacks, clashes
and violence in the West Bank. Over the past days and
weeks, there has been an alarming rise in incidents that
have led to the tragic deaths of Israeli and Palestinian
civilians and Israeli soldiers. My thoughts and prayers
go out to the bereaved families. The security measures
put in place in the aftermath of those incidents, search
operations in Ramallah, as well as clashes and protests
that turn violent, are adding to an already tense
atmosphere. I join the Secretary-General in his call
on Israeli and Palestinian security services to work
together to restore calm and avoid escalation.
Allow me to return to my reporting on resolution
2334 (2016). No steps were taken by Israel during the
reporting period, according to paragraph 2, to
2/25

18/12/2018

and to fully respect all of its legal obligations in
that regard, as required by the resolution. I reiterate
that all settlement activities are a violation under
international law and a major obstacle to peace. During
the reporting period, plans for some 2,200 housing
units in settlements in the West Bank were advanced or
approved by the Israeli authorities. The vast majority,
nearly 2,000, were advanced in East Jerusalem, further
consolidating the ring of settlements to the city’s
north. Two hundred are in Area C and have reached the
final stage of approval. That is the lowest number of
quarterly advancements and approvals recorded since
the resolution was adopted. This period, like the last
quarter, saw no tenders issued.
In October, the Government approved the allocation
of $6 million for advancing the construction of 31
housing units in Hebron, which would be the first new
construction there in 16 years. On 15 November, the High
Court of Justice rejected an appeal by two Palestinian
families living in the East Jerusalem neighbourhood
of Sheikh Jarrah and allowed the eviction of some 40
family members to advance construction. The decision
was based on an ownership claim by an Israeli company.
On 19 November, the Knesset passed legislation
enabling, under certain conditions, the planning for
residential purposes in national parks located within
municipal boundaries. That amendment could facilitate
the construction of additional housing units in the East
Jerusalem neighbourhood of Silwan. On 21 November,
Israel’s High Court of Justice rejected a petition filed
by over 100 Palestinian residents of Silwan to stop the
efforts of an Israeli organization to evict them from
their homes. The organization had gained control of the
properties by invoking an Israeli law by which Israelis,
but not Palestinians, may claim lands they owned prior
to 1948.
Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures by Israeli authorities continued across the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Citing
the absence of Israeli-issued building permits, which
are nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain in Area
C and East Jerusalem, 152 structures were demolished
or seized by the authorities. According to the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, that
has resulted in the displacement of 103 people. On
21 October, the Israeli authorities announced the delay
18-44565

18/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8429

of the demolition of the Bedouin community of Khan
Al-Ahmar/Abu Al-Helu in order to allow for negotiation
with the community to relocate residents with their
consent. Nevertheless, the threat of mass demolition
and displacement remains, despite broad international
opposition to the move.

causing damage in Israel. Since 13 September, some 43
Palestinians, including nine children, have been killed
during the protests and other incidents near the fence
and at sea. The youngest and most recent victim was a
four-year-old who died on 11 December after he was
injured by Israeli live fire during protests at the fence.

Let me turn now to the issue of violence. The
resolution calls for immediate steps to prevent all acts
of violence against civilians. However, violence and
the threat of war continue. Overall, 75 Palestinians
were killed by Israeli security forces, including during
demonstrations, clashes, air strikes, security operations
and other incidents. Seven Israelis, including three
soldiers and four civilians, were killed by Palestinians
in attacks in the West Bank and a military operation
in Gaza. The reporting period once again saw a major
escalation in Gaza that almost brought Israel and
Hamas to war.

Meanwhile in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, the situation has also deteriorated over the
past weeks. During the reporting period, six Israelis,
including four civilians, and 12 Palestinians were killed
in various incidents, including terror attacks, clashes
and military operations. On 7 October, an Israeli man
and woman were shot dead in the Barkan industrial
zone by a former Palestinian co-worker, who was killed
in an IDF operation near Nablus on 13 December.

On 11 November, in an exchange of fire following
the discovery of an undercover Israeli unit in Gaza,
seven members of the military wing of Hamas and
an Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) officer were killed.
Militants in Gaza immediately launched 18 rockets
and mortars. In the following 24 hours, some 450
projectiles were indiscriminately fired towards Israeli
cities and towns — more than in the entire period since
the 2014 conflict. One Palestinian civilian was killed
by a Hamas rocket in the Israeli city of Ashkelon. An
IDF soldier was also seriously wounded by a missile
strike that hit a military bus. The IDF responded by
striking 160 targets identified as militant sites. Seven
Palestinians were killed and at least four are reported
to have been members of armed groups.
On 11 October, the IDF announced that it had
destroyed a tunnel extending 200 metres from Gaza into
Israel. On 17 October, two medium-range rockets were
launched towards Israel, one directly hitting a residential
building in Be’er Sheva, some 40 kilometres away.
The IDF responded by firing 10 missiles at target sites
across the Gaza Strip. On 28 October, three Palestinian
children aged 13 to 15 were killed in an IDF strike
near the fence in the southern Gaza Strip, in disputed
circumstances. Protests at the Gaza perimeter fence
and near the beach continued, although their size
significantly decreased, and they have remained fairly
peaceful since the beginning of November.
Since early November, there have been no reports
of incendiary devices, balloons or kites from Gaza

On 12 October, a Palestinian woman was killed
south of Nablus by stones allegedly thrown by Israeli
assailants. On 4 December, in Tulkarm refugee camp, a
22-year old Palestinian with a psychological disability
was shot and killed by the Israeli security forces in
circumstances that would seem to indicate that he posed
no threat to security personnel or others. Investigations
have been launched into both incidents.
On 9 December, in a drive-by shooting near the West
Bank settlement of Ofra, seven Israelis were injured,
including four children and a pregnant woman whose
baby was delivered prematurely and subsequently
passed away. Hamas praised the attack and identified
one of the perpetrators, who was later killed in an Israeli
security forces operation north of Ramallah, as one of
their own. The Israeli Defence Forces have indicated
that there are additional individuals involved in the
incident still at large and that a manhunt is ongoing. I
want to strongly condemn that attack and reiterate that
there is no justification for terrorism.
On 13 December, in another drive-by shooting
near the Giv’at Asaf settlement, two Israeli soldiers
were killed and another was severely wounded
alongside an Israeli woman. The perpetrators, who fled
towards Ramallah, reportedly remain at large. In the
operations to apprehend the perpetrators of the Ofra
attack, on 10 and 11 December dozens of IDF troops
entered Ramallah, where, inter alia, they raided the
offices of the official Palestinian news agency, WAFA,
and seized surveillance video. Two Palestinians were
reportedly injured by live fire during ensuing clashes
and over 150 in related incidents around the West Bank
in subsequent days.

18-445653/25

S/PV.8429

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In a statement issued on 13 December, the Israeli
Prime Minister announced a series of measures in
response to the wave of attacks, including revoking the
permits of family members and demolishing houses
of the perpetrators of attacks, increasing checkpoints
and administrative detentions, and intensifying efforts
to capture assailants still at large. The Prime Minister
also announced that some 2,000 houses built on private
Palestinian land in settlements would be retroactively
legalized, and that steps had been taken to advance the
construction of 82 new housing units in Ofra and in
two industrial zones in the settlements of Avnei Hefetz
and Beitar Illit.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs has recorded 49 incidents of settler-related
violence resulting in the injury of Palestinians or
damage to their property. During the reporting period
there were also recurring clashes between settlers from
Yitzhar and residents of the neighbouring Palestinian
village of Urif.
Following the shooting attacks of the past few
days, settler leaders blamed the Government for failing
to protect them. Hundreds protested, some violently,
blocking traffic and throwing stones at Palestinian
vehicles. Police arrested some 40 people. Incidents of
stone throwing and vandalism, as well as shots fired at
villages have been reported in several locations in the
West Bank.
Resolution 2334 (2016), in its paragraph 7, calls
upon the parties “to refrain from provocative actions,
incitement and inflammatory rhetoric”. Unfortunately,
such actions and statements continued during the
reporting period. Hamas continued to use inciteful and
inflammatory rhetoric. Its officials praised the stabbing
and shooting attacks that killed Israeli civilians as
heroic and mourned the killers. Fatah, including on its
official social media accounts, also commemorated and
celebrated the perpetrators of recent attacks, as well
as past terror attacks in which Israeli civilians have
been killed. In a radio interview, a senior member of
the party glorified the perpetrators of stabbing attacks
in Jerusalem. In addition, senior Palestinian religious
leaders made a series of inflammatory speeches
alleging Israeli intentions to destroy the Al-Aqsa
mosque or change the status quo at the holy sites in
Jerusalem. President Abbas has spoken against the
recent surge of violence in the West Bank.
4/25

18/12/2018

Meanwhile, Israeli officials have also made
provocative and highly problematic statements
encouraging violence and undermining a two-State
solution. In the wake of the recent violence in the
West Bank, politicians have called for the deportation
of families of attackers. Separately, there have been
calls for a shoot-to-kill policy in Gaza, and one
politician has gone as far as to call for President Abbas
to be assassinated. Others have continued to reject
Palestinians’ right to statehood, to support openly
widespread settlement expansion, and to support the
annexation of all or parts of the West Bank.
Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterates calls by the
Middle East Quartet for affirmative steps to be taken
immediately to reverse negative trends on the ground
that are imperilling the two-State solution. There have
been some positive developments, but the negative
trends dominate. Among positive developments, I
can point to the mobilization of international support
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). On
19 November, UNRWA announced that the financial
shortfall for 2018 — which stood at some $446 million
in January — had been reduced to $21 million thanks
to substantial new funding by Member States.
In Gaza, the international community has taken
a number of steps to improve the lives of 2 million
people who live under Hamas control, struggle with
Israeli closures and have little prospect of seeing
national unity.
First, thanks to generous funding from the State
of Qatar, the United Nations has been able to import
life-saving fuel to operate the Gaza power plant.
Daily electricity supply has increased to more than 11
hours — the highest in over two years. Private homes,
hospitals, schools, water facilities and businesses are
all benefitting. Seventy-five per cent of the sewage can
now be treated again. That has significantly reduced
the contamination levels caused by discharge into
the sea. Piped water supply has increased by 40 per
cent, almost fully meeting water demand for domestic
household purposes. Drinking water supplied through
desalination plants has also increased by 20 per cent,
while private businesses have benefited from the
reduced fuel costs. Those are substantial improvements.
Finding sustainable solutions to Gaza’s electricity
crisis, however, remains critical. The Office of the
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and the World Bank have convened
18-44565

18/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8429

the international community to discuss how to stabilize
electricity supply in the long run.

international human rights law and national Palestinian
legislation.

Secondly, on 4 December, the United Nations
concluded a comprehensive review of the Gaza
Reconstruction Mechanism, together with the
Palestinian Authority and Israel. It has resulted in
several important changes that will be implemented as
of 1 January 2019. They will allow the Mechanism to
better respond to Gaza’s changed needs and increase its
functionality, transparency and predictability.

Resolution 2334 (2016) calls upon all States
“to distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between
the territory of the State of Israel and the territories
occupied since 1967”. On 28 November the Chilean
parliament approved a resolution that called on the
Government to examine all of its agreements with Israel
to ascertain that they apply solely to the territory of the
State of Israel, and not to the territories occupied since
1967. The Republic of Ireland advanced in the upper
house of parliament, the “Control of Economic Activity
(Occupied Territories) Bill 2018”, which, if passed into
law, would prohibit trade with and economic support
for settlements.

Thirdly, the reconstruction and rehabilitation
of 360 totally destroyed houses and the repair of 30
homes that were partially damaged in the 2014 conflict
in Gaza have also been completed.
Finally, in Gaza, the United Nations has enhanced
its project implementation capacity by establishing
a project management unit to work with all relevant
stakeholders to support implementation, including
of the package of urgent interventions from the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians.
Beyond Gaza, in another encouraging sign, civil
society groups continue to mobilize in support of
peace. This past month, I participated in a remarkable
conference organized by Women Wage Peace, a
non-governmental organization that brings together
Jewish and Arab women advocating a negotiated
solution to the conflict. The conference, attended by
close to 1,000 young women and men, is precisely the
kind of grass-roots effort called for in the 2016 Quartet
report (S/2016/595, annex). It encourages a culture of
tolerance and laying a crucial foundation for peace.
Regrettably, however, the negative trends continue
to overshadow any positive developments. The
humanitarian, economic and political crisis in Gaza
continues and, despite Egypt’s sustained efforts, there
has been no progress in implementing the October 2017
intra-Palestinian agreement. The goal remains that
Gaza and the West Bank are reunited under the control
of a single, legitimate national Government, with a
unified legal framework that would be responsible for
all aspects of governance, including security.
In December Hamas made public the decision
of a military court to sentence six people to death,
including a woman. Another death sentence was also
handed down in Gaza to a man convicted of murder by
a criminal court. These decisions are contrary to both

The resolution also called upon “all parties to
continue ... to exert collective efforts to launch credible
negotiations”. No progress was achieved in this respect
as well.
At the beginning of my statement, I addressed
the continuing expansion of Israeli settlements. On
28 and 29 October, the Central Council of the Palestine
Liberation Organization reaffirmed the decisions taken
to suspend the recognition of the State of Israel until
the latter recognizes the State of Palestine within the
4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
end security coordination in all its forms, and disengage
economically from Israel. These decisions have not
been implemented. President Abbas is reported to have
signed, on 15 November, 11 instruments of accession to
international agreements.
In closing, I would like to share some broad
observations concerning the implementation of the
provisions of resolution 2334 (2016) over the past year.
The continued expansion of the Israeli settlement
enterprise, in all its aspects, is illegal under international
law, and undermines hope among the population, trust
between the parties, and the two-State solution itself.
Settlement planning and tendering continued during
2018 but at lower rates compared to 2017. For Area C
settlements, plans were advanced or approved for some
4,800 housing units, compared to nearly 7,000 during
2017. Tenders were announced for some 2,900 units,
slightly less than the 3,200 tendered the previous year.
For East Jerusalem settlements, plans were advanced
or approved for 2,100 units in 2018, compared to about
3,100 in 2017, and a tender was announced for the
first time in two years. About one quarter of the units

18-445655/25

S/PV.8429

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

advanced, approved or tendered in 2018 are planned
for settlements in outlying locations deep in the West
Bank.
In this context, this year saw some worrying
moves, including the continued construction of a new
settlement, Amichai, located in a strategic location that
further consolidates the cluster of settlements to the
east of Shilo, at the very heart of the West Bank. Israeli
authorities also approved new construction in Hebron
after a lull of some 16 years. In addition, several judicial
and administrative decisions taken during 2018 have
removed long-standing obstacles to the use of private
Palestinian land for the benefit of settlements.
The United Nations continues to closely monitor the
threat of demolitions and displacement to Palestinians
in Area C and East Jerusalem. Between January and
November 2018, there were 422 Palestinian-owned
structures demolished or seized by Israel on the
grounds of a lack of building permits — 245 in Area
C and 167 in East Jerusalem. Some 411 people have
been displaced, which represents a slight increase in
the number of structures demolished compared with
the equivalent period of 2017.
Particularly worrisome is the situation in the
community of Khan al-Ahmar-Abu al Helu. Moving
forward on the demolition of the community would
amount to a serious violation of Israel’s obligations
under international law and undermine the prospects
for a two-State solution. I call on all concerned parties
to work towards resolving the issue in a manner that
is consistent with the community’s will and genuine
needs, and in line with Israel’s international legal
obligations.
In terms of violence over the past year, although
Gaza has been the most volatile, the risk of an explosion
in the West Bank has also grown. I am concerned by
the recent incidents and rising tensions in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. During the past three
months, we have witnessed stabbing, ramming and
three lethal shooting attacks against Israelis, one of
which led to the heartbreaking death of a baby. We have
also seen the death of a Palestinian woman, killed by a
stone. There can be no justification for any brutal acts
of terror, and I call on all to join the United Nations in
condemning them unequivocally. They feed mistrust
and hatred among people.
Israeli responses to recent events in the West Bank
have been harsh, as some of the perpetrators of recent
6/25

18/12/2018

attacks have been killed. Unfortunately, incidents like
the shooting of a Palestinian man with psychosocial
disabilities as he was walking away from the security
forces fuel a climate of fear and anger. These actions
continue to worsen a climate of hatred and fear and
drive Israelis and Palestinians further away from
resolution of the conflict.
Settler-related violence has also been on the rise
during 2018, with the highest number of incidents
recorded since 2014. Thousands of Palestinian-owned
trees and more than hundreds of vehicles have been
damaged. Settlers have continued to enter Palestinian
locations, triggering clashes, some of which involve
Israeli soldiers. Such incidents have resulted in the
death of two Palestinians. While I acknowledge efforts
by the authorities to prevent and investigate settlerrelated violence, I call for further measures to ensure
that Israel fulfils its obligation to protect civilians and
to investigate and hold accountable those responsible
for attacks.
And while Gala has been quiet since the last
escalation in November, it is critical that events in the
West Bank not lead to reigniting the Gaza fuse. The
people in Gaza have suffered enough and must not be
made to pay the price for violence elsewhere.
Each time, as the parties came frighteningly close
to the brink of war, tireless efforts by Egypt and the
United Nations prevented a full-fledged conflict.
Ultimately, what will ensure long-term peace is
reuniting Gaza and the West Bank under a single,
legitimate and democratic Palestinian Authority and
putting an end to the occupation. Meanwhile, however,
it is imperative that the current calm be preserved at all
costs. No one can afford another war in Gaza.
Since March, tens of thousands of people in Gaza
took part in demonstrations along the perimeter fence,
many of which turned violent. Throughout this period,
hundreds of fires were started in Israel by incendiary
devices, balloons and kites coming from Gaza. From
May through November, we witnessed the most serious
escalations since the 2014 conflict, with over 500
rockets and 700 mortars fired towards Israel by Hamas
and other militant groups. Some 175 Palestinians were
killed by Israeli live fire, including 32 children, two
women and three medical workers. One Israeli soldier
was killed by sniper fire during the demonstrations.
The indiscriminate launching of rockets and mortars
against Israeli towns and villages violates international
18-44565

18/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

law, placing hundreds of thousands of civilians under
imminent threat, and causing great fear and mental
trauma, particularly for children.
Serious concerns remain over the loss of life,
especially of children, in the context of these hostilities
and protests. The death of four-year-old child is a
tragedy that must not be repeated; I mourn his short
life. The killing of children is absolutely unacceptable.
Israeli security forces have a responsibility to exercise
restraint and should use firearms only when strictly
necessary in order to protect life or prevent serious
injury from an imminent threat. Hamas also has an
obligation to protect children, ensuring that they never
be put in harm’s way.
Ongoing instances of incitement, provocative steps
and inflammatory rhetoric plague the public discourse
of the conflict. They are highly dangerous and threaten
to push an already volatile situation past the boiling
point. I have repeatedly stated in my briefings to the
Council that leaders have a responsibility to reduce,
rather than escalate, tensions; yet over the past year,
statements that encourage violence continued. Such
rhetoric, particularly if it denies the right of existence
of one of the sides, or their right to Statehood or
glorifies terror, is dangerous and plays into the hands
of extremists beyond Israel and Palestine. I also
reiterate to political, community and religious leaders
the resolution’s call to clearly condemn all acts of
terrorism.
Regrettably, this year has seen no affirmative steps
by the parties to reverse negative trends nor serious
progress on implementing important agreements
signed in 2017, including agreements on water, energy
and telecommunications. On the contrary, significant
Israeli administrative and legal decisions are facilitating
the legalization, under Israeli law, of settlements on
private Palestinian land and threaten to undermine
the financial stability of the Palestinian Authority.
Meanwhile, restrictive measures by the Palestinian
Authority against Gaza compound the long-standing
Israeli closures of the Gaza Strip, further widening the
political and administrative gap between Ramallah and
Gaza. Such measures must end.
However, the completion of the review of the Gaza
Reconstruction Mechanism and, more specifically, the
commitment by the Palestinian Authority and Israel to
the Mechanism’s continuation and enhancement were
important developments. That rare example of direct

S/PV. 8429

Israeli and Palestinian engagement with United Nations
facilitation shows that there is room for cooperation.
Humanitarian partners have also struggled to fulfil
their mandates in the face of rising humanitarian needs
amid record-high cuts in funding, increased restrictions
on humanitarian operating space and attempts to
delegitimize the work of reputable organizations that
provide essential support to vulnerable Palestinians. I
encourage Member States to support the humanitarian
response plan for 2019.
The important financial support of the State of
Qatar has enabled the United Nations delivery of fuel
to the Gaza power plant and the resulting substantial
increase in the electricity supply for Palestinians in
Gaza. I urge other donors to support additional elements
of the package of urgent economic and humanitarian
interventions for Gaza that was endorsed by the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee in New York in September. I also
welcome the generous support of donors, which has
almost fully met the shortfall facing UNRWA this past
year. Looking ahead to 2019, I also urge donor countries
to maintain the funding levels achieved this year and to
increase the number of multi-year agreements.
The fate of two Israeli civilians and the bodies
of the IDF soldiers missing in Gaza also remains an
important humanitarian concern for us all.
While there has been no progress on intra-Palestinian
reconciliation, it is critical that the important Egyptianled process continue. The United Nations stands firmly
in support of Egypt’s efforts in that regard and urges
the parties to make serious efforts to ensure the return
of the legitimate Palestinian Government to Gaza. The
Gaza Strip is, and must remain, an integral part of the
future Palestinian State as part of a two-State solution.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that I remain
concerned about the weakening of the international
consensus and the absence of collective efforts to
achieve an end to the occupation and the realization
of a negotiated two-State solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, in line with the relevant United
Nations resolutions and prior agreements.
I believe that I speak on behalf of us all today
when I say that we all share the concern that, at the
end of 2018, we are no closer to reviving efforts for
a negotiated solution. Without a political horizon, all
our collective and individual efforts contribute only to
managing the conflict rather than to resolving it.

18-445657/25

S/PV.8429

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

It is only by realizing the vision of two States living
side by side in peace, security and mutual recognition,
with Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and Palestine and
all final-status issues permanently resolved through
negotiations, that the legitimate aspirations of both
peoples can be achieved.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): When I
first came to the United Nations two years ago, I was
a little taken aback by this monthly meeting. The fact
that the United Nations would consider the IsraeliPalestinian conflict was not striking. After all, it is a
matter of international peace and security. What was
striking was the frequency and the one-sidedness of the
discussion.
Members of the Security Council have heard me say
this many times — the problems of the Middle East are
numerous, and yet we spend a vastly disproportionate
amount of time on just one of them. The United
Nations has shown itself to be hopelessly biased, as we
witnessed again only two weeks ago when the General
Assembly failed to condemn Hamas’s terrorist activity
against Israel.
Over the past two years, I have attempted to
provide more value to this monthly meeting by using
my time to speak about other pressing problems in
the Middle East. I have spoken about Iran’s illegal
weapons transfers and destabilizing support for
terrorism throughout the region. I have spoken about
the barbarism of the Al-Assad regime in Syria. I
have spoken about Hamas’s illegal and diabolical
use of human shields. I have spoken about Hezbollah
jeopardizing the safety of the Lebanese people and its
violations of Israeli sovereignty, which have come to
light even more clearly in the past month. I have spoken
about Iraq, Yemen, refugees and humanitarian crises.
I have done that for two reasons. I have done it
to illustrate that most of the region’s problems have
absolutely nothing to do with the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. I have also done it to encourage the United
Nations to move away from its obsession with Israel.
That obsession of the United Nations with the issue has
been entirely unproductive. In fact, worse than that,
it has been counterproductive. It has sent a loud and
8/25

18/12/2018

false message to the Palestinians that they may perhaps
be able to achieve their goals by relying on the United
Nations rather than through direct negotiations. It has
sent a loud and accurate message to the Israelis that
they can never trust the United Nations. That biased
obsession is not the path to peace. It is the path to an
endless stalemate.
Today is the last time that I address this monthly
meeting as the United States Ambassador. For that
reason, I will deviate from my practice of the past
two years. Today, I will directly address the IsraeliPalestinian issue. Given my record, some may
mistakenly conclude that I am unsympathetic towards
the Palestinian people. Nothing could be further from
the truth. This is how I see it.
Israel is a thriving, strong, prosperous country. It
has always wanted peace with its neighbours. It has
clearly demonstrated its willingness to make great
sacrifices for peace, including by giving up large areas
of land. But Israel will not make a peace agreement at
any price, and it should not do so. No United Nations
resolutions, anti-Semitic boycotts or terrorist threats
will ever change that. Throughout its existence, and
even today, Israel has been surrounded by threats to its
security. It would be foolish for it to make a deal that
weakened its security. Yet, even in the face of constant
threats, Israel has become one of the leading nations in
the world. Israel wants a peace agreement but it does
not need such an agreement.
Then there are the Palestinian people. Like the
Israelis, they are a deservedly proud people. They, too,
do not need to accept a peace agreement at any price. But
the condition of the Palestinian people is very different.
Economic opportunity, health care and even electricity
are all scarce in the Palestinian territories. Terrorists
rule much of the territory, undermining the safety of all
civilians. The Palestinian people suffer terribly, while
their leadership clings to 50-year-old demands that
have become only less and less realistic. What awaits
the Palestinian people with a peace agreement are the
prospects of a huge improvement in the quality of their
lives and far greater control over their political future.
It is time that we faced a difficult truth: both sides
would benefit greatly from a peace agreement, but the
Palestinians would benefit more and the Israelis would
risk more. With that backdrop in mind, the Trump
Administration has crafted its plan for peace between
Israel and the Palestinians. I do not expect anyone to
18-44565

18/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

comment on a peace proposal that they have not read.
But I have read it, and I will share some thoughts on it
now.
Unlike previous attempts to address this conflict,
this plan is not just a few pages, containing unspecific
and unimaginative guidelines. It is much longer and
contains much more thoughtful detail. It brings new
elements to the discussion, taking advantage of the new
world of technology in which we live. It recognizes
that the realities on the ground in the Middle East
have changed in very powerful and important ways.
It embraces the reality that today, things that were
previously unthinkable can be done. This plan will be
different from all previous ones. The critical question
is whether the response will be any different. There are
things in the plan that every party will like, and there
are things in the plan that not all of them will like. That
is certainly true for the Israelis and the Palestinians,
but it is also true for every country in the world that
has taken an interest in this subject. Every country or
party will therefore have an important choice to make.
Council members can focus on the parts of the plan that
they dislike. For irresponsible parties, that would be
the easiest thing to do — simply reject the plan because
it does not satisfy all of their demands. Then we would
return to the failed status quo of the past 50 years, with
no prospects for change. Israel would continue to grow
and prosper. The Palestinian people would continue
to suffer, and innocent people on both sides would
continue to be killed.
Their other choice is to focus on the parts of the
plan that they do like and encourage negotiations to
move forward. And I can assure the Council that there
is a lot for both sides to like. Ultimately, as always,
the final decisions can be made only by the parties
themselves. Israelis and Palestinians will decide their
own futures. They will decide what sacrifices they
are willing to make, and they will need leaders with
real vision to do that. But my friends at the United
Nations, particularly my Arab and European brothers
and sisters, will also play a very important part. And
they will face the same choice. The choice between a
hopeful future that sheds the tired, old, and unrealistic
demands of the past, or a darker future that sticks with
the proven failed talking points of the past. The world
will be watching. More importantly, the Palestinians
and Israelis will be watching. Their response will be
affected by our response.

S/PV. 8429

I have heard privately from many of my Arab
friends. They have said that they know that a solution
is urgently needed, but their Governments have not
been willing to talk to their constituencies about what
is realistic or to the Palestinian leaders about the harm
they are doing to their own people. By taking the easy
route, they are really saying that the Palestinian people
are not a priority for them, because if they were, they
would all be in a room helping to bring both sides to
the table.
As for the American people, we have demonstrated
time and again our commitment to peace in the Middle
East. We will continue to offer our hand in friendship
to the Palestinian people, whom we have supported
financially far more than any other country has done.
The Palestinians have everything to gain by engaging
in peace negotiations, but whatever others may decide,
the world must know that America will remain steadfast
in its support to Israel and its people and security. That
is an unshakeable bond between our two peoples, and
it is that bond, more than anything else, that makes
peace possible. My hope is that once I become an
outside observer — one who has invested much time
on this issue — we will no longer be having this same
conversation and hearing the same old speeches in
years to come.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov
for his valuable briefing and reaffirm the full support
of the State of Kuwait to his role in finding a solution to
the protracted Palestinian question, which has had such
a severe impact on the daily lives of the Palestinians
who have been living under the yoke of occupation for
more than five decades. We also thank our colleague
Ambassador Nikki Haley. I am pleased that her very
important final statement to the Security Council was
on today’s topic of the Palestinian question, and that
she has revealed some of the points of the peace plan
that the United States will soon unveil.
We once again commend the efforts of
Mr. Mladenov and the parties concerned to improve the
daily lives of the citizens of the Gaza Strip, which have
led to the completion of the joint review of the Gaza
Reconstruction Mechanism in order to promote and
improve its effectiveness and performance. We look
forward to the implementation of its recommendations
by 1 January 2019. In that regard, we were awaiting a
written report for this month by the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016),

18-445659/25

S/PV.8429

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

similar to his first written report submitted in June (see
S/PV.8289) following his response, for which we are
grateful, to a request by 10 Security Council members.
This month, however, we regret to say that was not the
case. We therefore call for an increase in the number of
written reports on the status of the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) over the course of 2019. We do
not want to settle for just one written report per year.
That accords with the provisions of the resolution,
presidential note S/2010/507 and the practices used
in addressing other items on the Security Council’s
agenda.
As always, we listened carefully to Mr. Mladenov’s
briefing, especially with regard to the recent
developments in the West Bank, which show once
again how dangerous the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories has become, thanks to the crimes
perpetrated by Israel, the occupying Power, against the
Palestinian people and their land and holy sites, as well
as their inalienable rights. The most recent of those
crimes was the Israeli act of aggression against the
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and other parts of the
occupied Palestinian territory on 11 November, which
targeted the lives of Palestinian civilians and their
homes, media facilities and civilian infrastructure.
Its victims included dozens of martyrs and unarmed
civilians who were killed or injured as a result of the
Israeli occupying forces’ war crimes and crimes against
humanity.
The most recent child fatality was that of a boy
aged four years and eight months, a victim of the
occupying Israeli forces’ relentless crimes against
Palestinian civilians. On 12 December we saw the
images of hundreds of civilians in the town of Absan
in Khan Younis burying the small body of Ahmed
Abu Abed. His killing was the forty-second murder
of a Palestinian child since the Great March of Return
began in March. Since then, more than 230 Palestinian
martyrs have perished and more than 24,000 have
been injured. Reports from Doctors without Borders
estimate that more than 1,000 of those who have been
injured in the Gaza Strip now suffer from permanent
disabilities as a result of the live ammunition used by
the Israeli occupying forces.
The Security Council must not stand idly by in
the face of Israel’s systematic crimes against unarmed
Palestinians. They are war crimes and crimes against
humanity under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. As members of the
10/25

18/12/2018

Security Council, we must assume our responsibility
and stop Israel, the occupying Power, from perpetrating
such illegitimate and provocative actions in deliberate
and dangerous violation of international law and
the relevant United Nations resolutions. We call on
the United Nations and the Secretary-General to
implement General Assembly resolution ES-10/20, on
the protection of Palestinian civilians, pursuant to the
Secretary-General’s latest report (A/ES-10/794). We
must urge the States and institutions of the international
community to engage in the protection of Palestinian
civilians and establish a practical and effective
mechanism for implementing both the resolution and
the report.
We also call on the international community,
especially the Security Council, to implement resolution
2334 (2016), which emphasizes that Israel’s settlement
activities are a blatant violation of international law and
an obstacle to peace. It calls on Israel, the occupying
Power, to immediately and fully cease all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem and reaffirms the importance
of the implementation of other relevant international
resolutions on the illegal and illegitimate nature of
Israeli settlement activities, including resolutions 465
(1980) and 497 (1981).
We reaffirm our condemnation of Israel’s repeated
acts of aggression against the Al-Aqsa Mosque in the
form of daily violations and dangerous incursions,
which provoke Muslim and Arab feelings of
resentment. Those unprecedented attacks have recently
increased and demonstrate that Israel, the occupying
Power, plans to change the Mosque’s current historic
and legal status, which will have grave consequences.
We welcome Jordan’s announcement that it will be
organizing an international conference on 20 December
on an appeal for the Al-Aqsa Mosque, with wide Arab
and international participation. The aim is to hold
consultations in support of the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
Jerusalem and its Islamic holy sites. We reiterate our
rejection and condemnation of all violations by Israel,
the occupying Power, of Islamic and Christian holy
sites, especially its attempts to change the existing
historical and legal status of the Al-Aqsa Mosque by
dividing it in space and time, undermining the freedom
of Muslim prayer.
In conclusion, we welcomed the General
Assembly’s adoption few days ago of resolution 73/89,
submitted by Ireland on behalf of the European Union
18-44565

18/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and entitled “Comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the Middle East”. We reiterate our support for putting
an end to the Arab-Israeli conflict, in accordance with
the relevant international resolutions, international
law and the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002, with all its
provisions. The Initiative states that a comprehensive
peace and the normalization of relations with Israel
are conditional on ending Israel’s occupation since
1967 of Palestinian and Arab territories, including
East Jerusalem; on Israel’s recognition of the State of
Palestine and the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including the right to self-determination and the
right of return and reparation for Palestinian refugees;
on a just resolution of the Palestinian question pursuant
to General Assembly resolution 194 (III); and on a
rejection of any deal or initiative for a resolution of
the conflict that is not in line with the internationally
agreed terms of reference pertaining to the peace
process in the Middle East.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Mladenov for
his briefing on developments in the Middle East.
The situation in this region plagued by crises old and
new remains problematic and demands considerable
collective efforts, including by the Security Council.
The only way we can make progress on stabilizing
and normalizing the situation in the region is by
acting together, regardless of the differences in our
approaches. By presenting the broadest possible united
front, which Russia’s President Vladimir Putin has
called for, we can achieve substantive breakthroughs
in combating terrorism. Together we can end the
bloodshed in Yemen, stabilize Libya, help Syrian
refugees return home, tackle the global migration crisis,
support normalization in Iraq and end the stalemate in
other crises. And, of course, through our joint efforts
we can sort out the Palestinian-Israeli peace process.
We can say that based on our experience of friendly
relations with the Arab States, Palestine and Israel.
The foundations for our cooperation exist. They are
based on international law, including the Charter of the
United Nations and many Security Council resolutions.
Our main tools should be dialogue and mediation, and
we should refrain from unilateral steps. We cannot
achieve lasting solutions to these crises any other way.
The need for urgent collective action is greatest
with regard to the Palestinian-Israeli issue, which
is at the epicentre of the turmoil in the Middle East.
Resolving it is key to improving the situation in the

S/PV. 8429

entire region. We have regretfully had to conclude that
against a backdrop of increasingly frequent attempts to
aggressively revise previously settled agreements aimed
at achieving sustainable Palestinian-Israeli and ArabIsraeli settlements on an internationally recognized
basis, the prospects for a resumption of the negotiation
process are still faint. The misunderstanding and
mistrust between Palestinians and Israelis is growing
constantly. Aggressive attitudes are intensifying and
violence, unilateral measures and provocative rhetoric
are coming to the fore. But there is an alternative to
the current developments, which entails implementing
the steps outlined in the 2016 report of the Middle
East Quartet. Implementing its recommendations
would enable us to stop the violence, whose victims
are Palestinians and Israelis alike, and to tackle the
familiar destabilizing factors hindering progress on
the political process, including the settlement activities
and the rupture between the West Bank and Gaza.
Bringing that sector back under the control of the
legitimate authorities in Ramallah under the leadership
of President Abbas would strengthen the international
community’s humanitarian efforts there. We should
emphasize in particular that every step taken should
be geared to ensuring and restoring Palestinian unity.
It is urgent that we intensify our collective diplomacy
in order to prevent a collapse of the efforts that the
international community — all of us — have jointly
undertaken, including in the Security Council, for the
sake of ensuring the conditions for implementing the
only viable solution, which is the establishment of two
States through direct negotiations between Palestinians
and Israelis. It is direct dialogue that can find answers
to all final status issues regarding Jerusalem, refugees,
borders and security. Dismissing those problems will
not work. Any future deal must take account of these
issues, which are so sensitive and significant for both
parties.
Russia will continue to maintain its principled
and consistent position that a comprehensive and
lasting settlement between Palestinians and Israelis
and Arabs and Israelis can be achieved on the basis
of internationally recognized principles, including
the Security Council’s resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative, the Madrid principles — including the
principle of land for peace — and the two-State formula,
which provides for the creation, through negotiations,
of an independent State of Palestine living side by side
in peace and security with Israel. Policies that seek

18-4456511/25

S/PV.8429

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to change the facts on the ground are unacceptable,
and we reject violence in any form. We consider the
expansion of Israeli settlements, the demolition of
Palestinian property and the expulsion of Palestinian
families to be illegal.
Russia will continue to play an active role in
restoring peace in Israel, Palestine and the entire
Middle East in its capacity as a permanent member of
the Security Council and a participant in the Middle
East Quartet, which remains the only mediation format
approved in Security Council resolutions. Our offer
to convene a summit in Russia between the leaders of
Palestine and Israel is still on the table. We will continue
to assist the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, whose critical
humanitarian activities have an important stabilizing
effect in the Palestinian territories and the countries of
the Middle East.
In conclusion, we want to once again call for
genuine collective efforts in the Middle East. Despite
the evolving realities, we must help to create conditions
there that are conducive to strengthening a general
atmosphere of trust, which is hugely important to the
relations between the Arab States, Israel and Iran. We
would like to remind members that in its resolution 598
(1987), the Security Council directed the SecretaryGeneral to work with regional stakeholders on measures
to strengthen security and stability in the region. It
is time to implement that resolution. In that context,
we believe that the Russian blueprint for security in
the Persian Gulf could be very helpful. Russia stands
ready to work on all of those aspects, and others,
with interested partners on a basis of openness and
impartiality.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Special Coordinator
Mladenov for his briefing today and for his tireless
efforts, which we very much appreciate. The United
Nations and its agencies deserve to be commended
for the work that he is doing on the ground in what
we understand to be a challenging and sometimes
explosive environment.
This is the last time that Sweden will speak on this
issue in the Chamber, as we come to the end of our
two years as a member of the Security Council. I would
therefore like to begin with some broader reflections,
in the same vein as Ambassador Haley, whom I want
to thank for providing us with insights into the current
thinking in the United States on how to pursue peace in
12/25

18/12/2018

the Middle East, and to say that for us the United States
remains a key partner in that pursuit.
When Sweden joined the Council, there was a
moment of hope for Middle East peace. The Council
had just adopted resolution 2334 (2016), France was
organizing its international conference on the two-State
solution, and the new United States Administration had
announced its commitment to resolving the IsraeliPalestinian conflict.
Today it is with heavy hearts that we conclude
that hopes are evaporating, with no peace process in
sight. The two-State solution is rapidly moving beyond
our reach as realities on the ground trend towards
an expansion of Israeli settlements. The desperate
situation for the people in Gaza has further deteriorated
into a humanitarian crisis, making Gaza increasingly
unliveable and on the verge of social and economic
collapse. The spread of violence on the ground is
leading to a tragic loss of life on both sides, instilling
fear among Israelis and Palestinians and destroying
hopes for peace for young people, the so-called postOslo generation.
The idea behind resolution 2334 (2016) was for
the Security Council to shoulder its responsibility
and reverse this negative trend. Two years on, the
resolution remains as relevant as ever. Its core
components — demands for ceasing all settlement
activities and an end to the violence — reflect the
gravity of the situation on the ground.
We are deeply concerned over the deteriorating
security situation and escalation of violence in the West
Bank and Jerusalem. We strongly condemn the acts of
violence against civilians that have led to a tragic loss
of life in recent days. Terrorism can never be tolerated.
We call on all actors to de-escalate and stop attacks
against civilians. Security forces on both sides must
exercise restraint so as to avoid escalation and further
loss of life.
We reiterate our grave concern over the continued
Israeli settlement expansion. Israel’s settlement policy
is illegal under international law. We condemn the
Israeli decisions to advance additional settlement units,
including in Hebron and East Jerusalem. The illegal
settlement expansion seriously undermines the twoState solution and clouds all hope for peace.
We are also concerned about the demolition of
Palestinian homes and at the fact that the Palestinian
18-44565

18/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

population is at risk of forcible transfers in Area C.
We urge the Israeli authorities not to proceed with the
demolition of the Bedouin village of Khan Al-Ahmar,
as that would have serious consequences for its
residents, including children. The village is located in
Area E1, a location of strategic interest for preserving
the contiguity of the Palestinian State.
Against this dismal backdrop, the international
community must act, otherwise we risk ending up with
perpetual occupation and a one-State reality. Resolution
2334 (2016) was a milestone, and its implementation is
key to the return to a path of peace.
We are therefore disappointed that no written report
on the implementation of the resolution was circulated
prior to this meeting, as is standard practice for any
other issue. This is a question of the credibility of the
Council on how we conduct our work, and neglecting its
reporting serves only to distance the Council from its
responsibilities. Resolution 2334 (2016) was adopted by
the Council and cannot be disregarded. The oral report
we just heard is a long list of events and incidents, each
leading to personal calamity and despair. Along with
many others, we wish to see regular written reports
from the Secretary-General in future, so that these
meetings can be properly prepared and focus on the
direst realities on the ground and how to improve them.
Individually, we as Member States also need to step
up our implementation of the resolution, which calls
on all of us to distinguish, in our relevant dealings,
between the territory of the State of Israel and the
territories occupied since 1967. The European Union
has clear policies with regard to such differentiation.
Settlement products cannot be promoted as Israeli
products, and all agreements between the State of
Israel and the European Union must explicitly indicate
inapplicability to the occupied territories. This does not
constitute a boycott and is fully in line with resolution
2334 (2016). We encourage other Member States to
adopt similar policies.
We are as committed as anyone to peace in the
Middle East. During our two years as a member of
the Council, we have witnessed challenges to the
international consensus on peace as well as attempts to
take final-status issues off the table. We therefore wish
to reiterate once more our support for a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace, based on international
law, the relevant United Nations resolutions and
previous agreements. Our position and that of the

S/PV. 8429

whole European Union reflect the continued broad
international consensus on a two-State solution, as
expressed in the recently adopted General Assembly
resolution 73/89, submitted by Ireland.
Any peace plan that fails to recognize these
internationally agreed parameters would have little
chance of succeeding and would run counter to the
fundamental positions of the European Union. There
cannot be any clean slate. Final-status issues can
be taken off the table only when resolved through
negotiations between the parties.
Implementing resolution 2334 (2016) is not a matter
of taking sides. Sweden has a long-standing friendship
with the peoples of Israel and with the peoples of
Palestine. This is about the responsibility of the
international community to save yet another generation
of young Israelis and Palestinians from growing up in a
reality of constant tension, mistrust and conflict.
This is about making sure that the objective of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security, with Jerusalem as the future capital of
both States and home of three world religions, is kept
within reach. And this is about keeping hope of peace
in the Middle East alive.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Before I start, could
I, through the American delegation, pass on a tribute
to Ambassador Haley in connection with her time on
the Council. Her ambition for the Council and her
commitment to delivery and effectiveness have really
helped moved issues and ourselves forward. So I would
ask the United States delegation to please thank her
very much indeed for that, and I will come to what
she said about the peace process a little bit later. I also
thank the Special Coordinator. I completely echo the
Swedish Ambassador in paying tribute to him and his
team in such difficult circumstances.
As others have noted, it is two years since the
Council adopted resolution 2334 (2016), and no steps
have been taken by Israel to cease settlement activity
during this period. In fact, settlement activity has
continued. The Government of Israel has also moved
forward with retroactive legislation of the outpost Havat
Gilad. We are deeply concerned about the Government’s
announcement last week to retrospectively legalize
thousands more homes in the West Bank, construct
82 new residential units in the Ofra settlement and
advance the construction of two new industrial zones
in the West Bank.

18-4456513/25

S/PV.8429

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The United Kingdom’s position on settlements
is clear. They are illegal under international law.
Settlements present an obstacle to peace, and they
threaten the physical viability of a two-State solution.
That is why we supported resolution 2334 (2016), and
we urge the Government of Israel to reverse its policy
of settlement expansion.
At the same time, we see continued demolitions
taking place, including in East Jerusalem. We are
concerned by the demolition of 16 small businesses
in the Shuafat refugee camp on 21 November. There
are no valid town plans for the camp, and this forces
Palestinians to resort to building without permits. We
are also closely monitoring developments in Sheikh
Jarrah and Silwan, where many hundreds of Palestinians
are at risk of eviction. This risk is exacerbated by recent
Israeli legislative developments and court rulings. We
will continue to support the Palestinian presence in East
Jerusalem, including through legal aid programmes for
those facing demolition or eviction.
We welcome the temporary postponement of
plans to demolish the Bedouin community of Khan
Al-Ahmar, but we remain gravely concerned about the
fate of that community. The United Nations has said
that this demolition could amount to forcible transfer,
in violation of international humanitarian law. As I
have said before in this Chamber, Israel is in no way
obligated to demolish Khan Al-Ahmar. It has the power
to change its mind, and we urge it to do so.
We look to the Israeli Government to provide a
clear, transparent route for Palestinian construction to
end the cycle of illegal building and demolitions.
Turning to some of the other issues that the Special
Coordinator raised, I have no hesitation in joining him
in unreserved condemnation of all terrorist attacks, no
matter against whom they are perpetrated. We share
his concern about the intensity of these attacks, and we
convey our condolences to the families of the victims
on both sides.
In the context of the Hamas resolution in the
General Assembly recently (A/73/L.42), I note that it
would have been adopted by a majority of 30 had there
not been a required two-thirds majority. However, I
think that majority of 30 is very significant and shows
the direction in which the tide is going.
Turning to the humanitarian situation in Gaza,
yesterday the United Kingdom announced an additional
14/25

18/12/2018

$7 million of emergency funding to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East to provide food to refugees in Gaza.
The immediate priority must be to ease restrictions
on movement and access, reduce tensions and avoid
another conflict. We expect Hamas, the Palestinian
Authority and Israel to do their utmost to prevent
escalation. We continue to support tangible steps
towards intra-Palestinian reconciliation and uniting
the Gaza Strip and the West Bank under the effective
functioning of the Palestinian Authority. I welcome the
efforts of the Special Coordinator in this respect.
I would like to address what Ambassador Haley
said about the peace process. We very much welcome
the confirmation that a United States plan is ready and
we look forward to receiving it and studying it in due
course. We agree that both sides will clearly be asked to
make difficult decisions to achieve peace and we agree
that European and Arab States will have an important
role to play in supporting any peace plan. We look now
to the parties to take steps to build confidence and to
build the right environment so that any peace process
can succeed.
For the United Kingdom, it is very clear that the
well-known parameters are the most viable framework
for a just and lasting peace. First, there must be an
agreement on the borders of the two States, based on
the 4 June 1967 lines, with equivalent land swaps as
may be agreed between the parties. Secondly, security
arrangements for the Palestinians must respect their
sovereignty and show the occupation is over; for the
Israelis, they must protect their security. Thirdly, a
just, fair, agreed and realistic solution to the refugee
question must be put in place. Fourthly, the aspirations
of both parties for Jerusalem need to be fulfilled and a
way must be found through negotiations to resolve the
status of Jerusalem as the future capital of both States.
It follows from this that we continue to believe that a
two-State solution remains the best outcome of a peace
process. The United Kingdom remains committed to
working with both parties, as well as regional and
international partners, in support of this goal.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank Nikolay Mladenov for
his briefing, which was, as usual, most enlightening,
as well as for his commitment day in and day out. I
join other members of the Council, on principle, to
express our regret that the quarterly report presented
18-44565

18/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8429

to us today pursuant to resolution 2334 (2015) is not a
written report. In the absence of any clarification to the
contrary in the text of the resolution, the procedure that
must be followed by default is that of a written report.
Ten members of the Council made this request more
than six months ago and it is important that it be taken
into account.

Fourth Geneva Convention and paragraphs 1 and 2 of
resolution 2334 (2016). They are dangerous, aggravate
tensions between populations and exacerbate spiralling
violence. Settlement activity is counterproductive; it is
progressively destroying prospects both on the ground
and at the political level for the two-State solution,
which must remain our ultimate goal.

Developments over the past few days confirm
once again the assessment that we highlight before the
Council on a regular basis, namely, that the illusion
of the status quo conceals a daily deterioration of the
situation that is liable to degenerate at any time and
further undermines the foundations of peace every day.
I said this last month about Gaza (see S/PV.8405), which,
from 11 to 13 November, was on the verge of being
plunged into a new conflict. The return to relative calm
does not detract from the tragic humanitarian situation
of the people of that territory. The situation requires
urgent political, humanitarian and development
measures to be adopted. Today, however, I would like
to focus on the West Bank, where last week’s escalation
reminds us of just how volatile the situation is.

While resolution 2334 (2016) calls for an immediate
halt to settlement activity, exactly the opposite has
occurred since its adoption almost two years ago.
This systematic policy has continued over the course
of the year, with a number of announcements of new
housing units in Jerusalem, almost reaching the woeful
record set in 2012, and a succession of announcements
of new housing units in settlements in the West Bank,
especially in particularly sensitive areas such as
Hebron. I would like to recall here the unique situation
of that divided city, where the presence of 800 settlers
has become a symbol of settlement activity and its
consequences, including the expulsion of the Palestinian
population, recurrent tensions between armed settlers
and Palestinians, and restrictions on public freedoms,
including movement and access to places of worship.

First of all, I wish to recall the violence of recent
days, which intensified after the 9 December firearms
attack on Israeli civilians on the outskirts of the
Ofra settlement in the West Bank and — as we are
aware — took a tragic death toll. I wish to reiterate with
the utmost clarity that France emphatically condemns
this attack and the apologia that Hamas has made in its
regard. Violence against civilians is unacceptable and
unjustifiable. In the wake of the attack, Israeli forces
deployed massively in the West Bank, including Zone
A, particularly in Ramallah. A new cycle of violence
followed, marked by numerous clashes with Palestinian
protesters and attacks by Israeli settlers. It peaked
during the day of 13 December, with several attacks
in the West Bank and Jerusalem that killed two Israeli
soldiers. While a precarious calm se3ems to have been
restored on the ground, we call on all parties to exercise
restraint. We regret that the Israeli authorities have
chosen to respond to these events with new decisions in
favour of settlement activities.
My second point concerns the fact that these
developments have unfolded in an environment
marked by the absence of any political horizon and
an acceleration of settlement activity policies. In this
context, I reiterate that France’s position on settlement
activity will not change. Settlement activities are
illegal under international law; they contravene the

Demolitions and forced displacements have also
continued at a steady pace. Almost 200 Palestinian
structures were demolished in the first half of
2018, and more than 40 schools in Zone C and East
Jerusalem have been subject to an order of demolition.
We call on the Israeli authorities to abandon these
demolitions and forced displacements. We have taken
note of the suspension of the demolition orders in
Khan Al-Ahmar and call on the Israeli Government
to definitively abandon the demolition of the village
and the displacement of its population. I join my
British colleague in underscoring the need to support
the maintenance of the Palestinian presence in East
Jerusalem.
Finally, legislative initiatives aimed at regularizing
the so-called outposts — which are illegal not
only under international law but also under Israeli
law — are continuing, with the adoption of a socalled regularization law, covering settlements built on
private Palestinian land, that is the subject of an appeal
to the Israeli Supreme Court. A second law, under
review, concerns the regularization of more than 60
settlements. We call on the Israeli authorities to reverse
these decisions, which seek to normalize or even
intensify a policy that is illegal under international law.

18-4456515/25

S/PV.8429

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In light of this risk — to introduce my last
point — we are obligated under both international
humanitarian law and resolution 2334 (2016) to refuse
to recognize the 1967 border violations effected by
the Israeli settlement policy under paragraph 3 of the
resolution; to acknowledge the distinction between
Israel and the occupied territories, under paragraph
5; and to address the need to identify practical means
to ensure the implementation of relevant Council
resolutions by the parties, under paragraph 11.
We hope that the decisions taken by the international
community that meet these obligations, in particular
those under paragraph 5 of resolution 2334 (2016), will
be systematically reflected in the reports submitted to
the Council pursuant to the resolution, as was the case
today. The European Union has adopted, through the
2013 guidelines on European financing and the 2015
Interpretative Notice on products of the settlements,
several instruments that must be included among the
good practices in this regard.
The reality is that we are close to the point of
no return. The fragmented territorial aggregation
that is taking shape before our eyes is creating an
unequal coexistence of two populations on the same
territory. The culmination of this process will spell,
for the Palestinians, the abandonment of their national
aspirations, which involve the establishment of a State;
and for the Israelis, the renunciation of the democratic
nature of the State of Israel.
As we all know, the destinies of Israelis and
Palestinians are intertwined; neither of the two peoples
will realize their aspirations in the long term at the
expense of the other. As a friend of the Israelis and
the Palestinians, France has only one objective — the
implementation through negotiation of a two-State
solution, which is the only way to bring about a just
and lasting peace between Israel and Palestine. It is
against that yardstick and in the light of respect for
internationally agreed parameters that France will
closely scrutinize, with the resolve to make progress,
the forthcoming proposal of the United States that
has just been mentioned by my colleague and friend,
Ambassador Nikki Haley.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to express my deep gratitude to my colleagues who
will be leaving the Council and thank them for their
outstanding contribution to the work in the Council.
16/25

18/12/2018

I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
briefing.
At present, hotspot issues in the Middle East
are complicated and intertwined. Conflicts and
confrontations are ongoing and the evolution of the
situation is worrying. The issue of Palestine is the
root cause of the Middle East problem and touches on
the long-term peace, stability and development of the
region. The current security and humanitarian situation
in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip is grim, which
is not conducive to regional stability and the peace
process. China expresses its concern in that regard.
Fighting violence with violence will solve no
problem. China urges all parties to bear in mind the
safety and security of the people of the region and the
imperative of peace and stability by exercising restraint
to avoid an escalation of the situation. The Security
Council should adopt a long-term perspective and
make every effort to create the conditions necessary
for stabilizing the situation and resuming dialogue.
Relevant parties should cease all settlement activities
in the occupied territories, lift the blockade of Gaza as
soon as possible, and take measures to prevent violence
against civilians.
The international community should create
increase its support to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, including support for countries hosting refugees.
There is a need to comprehensively implement relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions,
adopt a long-term perspective and jointly promote the
resumption of talks. In that regard, I would like to make
the following observations.
First, there is a need to remain united and
consistent and renew our efforts to promote peace
talks. All parties should meet each other halfway,
avoid any action or rhetoric that would aggravate the
situation and refrain from any unilateral action that
would undermine trust in order to create the conditions
necessary for the resumption of dialogue. Parties that
can bring influence to bear on the question of the
Middle East should play a constructive role and explore
new mediation mechanisms to break the deadlock in
Palestinian-Israeli talks as soon as possible.
Secondly, there is a need to uphold the two-State
solution and address the root cause of the PalestinianIsraeli conflict. The international community should
adhere to the relevant United Nations resolutions,
18-44565

18/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative, and persevere in resolving the issue of
Palestine in a comprehensive, just and lasting manner
through negotiations. Resolution 2334 (2016) should
be implemented in earnest. China hopes that the
Secretary-General will submit a written report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
Thirdly, there is a need to properly address the
final status of Jerusalem. This issue is complex and
sensitive and concerns the situation the future of the
two-State solution and the peace and security of the
region. All parties should proceed with caution and
refrain from imposing a solution that could lead to new
confrontations. Relevant United Nations resolutions
and international consensus should serve as the
basis for finding a solution through negotiations that
accommodate the interest of all parties.
China firmly supports and promotes the Middle
East peace process, the just cause of the Palestinian
people to restore their legitimate national rights, and
the establishment of an independent State of Palestine
with full sovereignty based on the 1967 borders
with East Jerusalem as its capital. We support the
greater integration of Palestine into the international
community.
China will follow the four-point proposal of
President Xi Jinping to promote the political settlement
of the Palestinian issue and continue to work with
the rest of the international community to explore
innovative mechanisms to facilitate of peace in the
Middle East, to promote an early resumption of peace
talks between the two sides and make tireless efforts
to realize comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
region.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): My delegation thanks
Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his
comprehensive and objective briefing and his unfailing
commitment to the region.
First of all, we welcome the decision taken by
Israel and Hamas in Gaza to hold a ceasefire that would
follow the agreement the two sides reached in 2014. We
appreciate the political will of both sides, which has
resulted in concluding a viable truce. We hope that this
will lead to a full-fledged peace treaty between the two
sides and thus prevent a relapse, for which no efforts
should be spared. It is clear to all that in a state of fierce
war or exchange of fire between the parties, which we
should avoid at all costs, all the rest of the issues simply

S/PV. 8429

fade away, including a critical problem like the illegal
settlements in the Palestinian territories.
We sincerely welcome the contribution of Egypt
and the United Nations since the beginning of the
crisis to pull Israel and Gaza back from the brink of
war and bring some calm. Astana also appreciates
the measures of the international community and
different entities to obtain a ceasefire. I need hardly
recall that confidence-building measures and political
and diplomatic measures are at the core of our foreign
policy. We therefore always urge our partners to utilize
them.
Astana expresses its concern over the intention
of the Israeli leaders to legalize thousands of Jewish
settlement homes in the occupied West Bank.
Kazakhstan calls on both sides to honour their respective
commitments, in accordance with all Security Council
resolutions that have been adopted over the 50 years
since 1967. The Council must ensure that resolution
2334 (2016) is complied with, and we urge a complete
freeze on the construction of settlements.
Astana
encourages
Member
States
with
influence — in particular the Arab countries, the
United States and Russia — and the European Union
to urge Israel and Palestine to return to the negotiating
table. This should be aimed at reaching an agreement
upon mutually acceptable principles of the coexistence
of two States based on international law and Security
Council resolutions.
We also need to address the blockade of the Gaza
Strip, where an acute food shortage persists. We share
the concerns of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Process, who said
that further conflict between Israel and Hamas in
Gaza is likely, due to the humanitarian situation in the
Palestinian coastal enclave. It is therefore obvious that
stakeholders should increase the amount of electricity
supplied to Gaza.
Kazakhstan hopes that the work of the unique
Middle East Quartet will be revived and intensified.
We believe that with the assistance of the participants
of the Quartet, the parties will be able to find common
ground for the continuation of a peaceful dialogue.
Astana is deeply concerned about the recent
violent incidents in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem. A very serious security situation still
prevails in the occupied West Bank. We have learned

18-4456517/25

S/PV.8429

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that four Palestinians have been killed by Israeli
forces in separate operations over the past week in the
occupied West Bank, with the Israeli army announcing
the city of Ramallah to be a closed military zone.
We express our sorrow over a shooting attack that
took place near the illegal settlement of Ofra, east of
Ramallah, where two Israeli soldiers were killed by
an unknown Palestinian. The Israeli and Palestinian
security services must work together to restore calm
and avoid escalation. We condemn all acts of violence
and terrorism, in particular against innocent civilians,
and we call on political, religious and community
leaders to speak out clearly against such brutal acts and
those who glorify them.
My country’s position remains unchanged and is
very clear. Kazakhstan is a strong advocate of a twoState solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We
still believe that peace is possible between Israelis and
Palestinians. We believe that Israelis and Palestinians
can live together in peace and security with the rest of
the region.
Kazakhstan ends its term on the Security Council
on 31 December, and this is our last consultation on
the subject. We have invested much effort towards the
rapprochement between the two sides over the past two
years of our term. Even as we step down, our interest
will remain steady and ongoing in the future, and we will
always work towards peace in the Middle East through
the General Assembly and other forums — and even the
Security Council, externally — as a passionate State
Member of the United Nations that is deeply committed
to peace and security. We wish Mr. Mladenov and his
team every success, and hope that Palestine and Israel
can fulfil their aspirations.

18/12/2018

conflict has not seen significant progress towards
achieving peace. On the contrary, we have seen that
the recent security situation in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory has become more tense. Many
times over the past months, we have expressed our
great concern about the tragic loss of civilian lives on
both sides.
Recent developments on the ground clearly point to
a constant need to continue the de-escalation process.
Despite the ceasefire between Israel and Hamas on
14 November, the security situation in Gaza remains
fragile, and miscalculations could result in the outbreak
of violence. In that context, let me underline that all
sides must fully comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law.
Recent reports on the violence in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, are a source of great concern.
We deeply deplore the loss of lives on both sides. We
call upon all parties to exercise restraint and spare no
effort to avoid further escalation.
Our priority is to restore a political horizon for the
resumption of a meaningful peace process. We believe
that a negotiated two-State solution and the resolution
of all final status issues, including Jerusalem,
settlements, the future of Palestinian refugees, borders
and security arrangements remain a realistic way to
fulfil the legitimate aspirations of both parties and
achieve long-term peace. We appeal to both sides to
refrain from taking unilateral steps that prejudge the
outcome of final status negotiations, and expect them
to demonstrate, through their actions and policies, their
commitment to peace.

Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let
me thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
very comprehensive and insightful briefing on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). I would also
like to thank Ambassador Nikki Haley for sharing her
plan for the peace process with us.

In more general terms, let me underline that Poland
supports a two-State solution, under which the national
aspirations of both parties to the conflict would be met,
including the Palestinian right to self-determination
and independence, the Israeli right to ensure its security
and the normalization of relations with Arab States.
Unfortunately, we have so far not seen significant
progress towards achieving that goal.

Exactly two years ago this month, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2334 (2016), reaffirming
its previous resolutions regarding the applicable
international law and the parameters of a peaceful
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. This year
also marks 25 years since the first Oslo Accord. Despite
its many shortcomings, the agreement represented
a historic compromise. Unfortunately, since then the

The situation in the Gaza Strip is extremely
worrying. There is a lack of progress on the political,
security and humanitarian fronts. The prevailing lack
of decisive steps towards a return of the legitimate
Palestinian Government to Gaza, despite Egypt’s
best efforts to revive the process, is detrimental to
Palestinian aspirations to statehood, contributes to
the worsening of the humanitarian crisis and risks

18/25

18-44565

18/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

escalation. Undoubtedly, progress in the Palestinian
reconciliation process would contribute to improving
the situation on the ground. The humanitarian situation
on the ground has continued to deteriorate. In the Gaza
Strip, humanitarian conditions are especially dire.
Basic needs continue to be unmet and many people lack
access to basic services, including health care.
The critical financial shortfalls of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) have also
raised the alarm, particularly as 80 per cent of Gaza’s
population is dependent on the Agency’s humanitarian
services. In that regard, I commend the mobilization of
the donors that helped secure additional funding for its
budget, as well as the imposition of austerity measures
by the Agency, under the leadership of CommissionerGeneral Pierre Krähenbühl. It is vital to continue those
efforts in the coming year so as to ensure sustained
support to UNRWA, as well as the transparency and
accountability of its programmes.
Unfortunately, provocation, incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric continue on both sides. In our
opinion, such acts constitute a significant obstacle to
the reactivation of the peace process. It must also be
stated that we have observed an increasing number of
dangerous incidents as a result of that incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric. Some of those incidents involve
children, who need special protection.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the longstanding position of the European Union that all
settlement activity is illegal under international law.
Settlements continue to undermine the practical
prospects and hopes for peace. In that context, I also
wish to reiterate our call for the plans to demolish
Khan Al-Ahmar/Abu Al-Helu to be cancelled. Not
only is the community at imminent risk of demolition
and displacement, but it would also set a significant
precedent for other Bedouin communities in Area C.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First of all,
let me thank Nickolay Mladenov for his frank and
sobering briefing on the developments of the past
months, including on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). In that regard, let me refer to the letter
(S/2018/454) that was sent to the Secretary-General in
May, signed by 10 Security Council members, in which
we requested written reports on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016). We welcomed the written
report (S/2018/614) that we received in June and would

S/PV. 8429

have appreciated a continuation of that practice in
September and this month. Written reports provide the
factual basis that is needed to fruitfully discuss the
implementation of the resolution in the Council.
Today marks two years since the adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016). And today, we sadly have to
conclude, as others have done, that most parts of the
resolution have not been implemented. Unfortunately,
the situation on the ground is worse than it was two
years ago. Positive steps are urgently needed. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands recalls that each side can
and must take positive steps to bring peace closer, as
the Middle East Quartet recommended in 2016 (see
S/2016/595, annex).
In that context, I will focus on three issues: first,
the undermining of the prospects of peace; secondly,
settlement activities; and thirdly, Gaza.
On my first point, prospects for peace continue to
be undermined through terror attacks, violent incidents
and incitement. We condemn the recent terrorist attacks
by Palestinians against Israelis in the West Bank that
has led to the loss of lives. There is no excuse for
terrorism. Those recent attacks have further increased
tensions in the West Bank. We condemn the statements
by Hamas and other terrorist groups welcoming those
cowardly attacks. Those statements serve only to
increase tensions. We regret that General Assembly
draft resolution A/73/L.42, condemning Hamas, was
not adopted, as we need to speak out as one United
Nations against terrorism in all cases.
At the same time, the attacks in the West Bank
are no justification for the ensuing violent response of
some settlers against Palestinian civilians. We call upon
the Palestinian and Israeli leadership to observe calm
and restraint and to refrain from provocative actions
and rhetoric that could further increase tensions. We
call upon the parties to make every effort to find the
perpetrators of those acts and bring them to justice.
That brings me to my second point, on settlements.
Calls for the annexation, expansion or legalization of
settlements and all actions in that regard serve only
the purposes of the extremists and will create only
more tensions between both sides. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands strongly opposes Israel’s settlement policy,
which we consider to be illegal under international
law. It is a policy that includes actions such as forced
transfers, evictions and demolitions. Settlement
activities have increased since the adoption of the

18-4456519/25

S/PV.8429

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

18/12/2018

resolution. If we look at the past two years, we see that
in 2017 construction was started on almost 1,700 units
and that in the first six months of this year, construction
was started on more than 1,000 units. In addition, the
number of planned and tendered units are a multiple of
that. That shows a substantial increase as compared to
the numbers of 2015 and 2016.

and the international community, as well as Israel and
the Palestinian Authority, to find solutions that bring
tangible relief. Those solutions must also include the
return of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza as the
legitimate Government. Moreover, they must include
the full opening of the crossings, taking into account
Israel’s security needs.

It is not only about the numbers. A new expansion
of settlements has been announced for sensitive areas,
such as Hebron and East Jerusalem. Those are areas
that are of crucial importance to the viability of a
future Palestinian State. In addition, over the past
two years, Israel has continued with the demolition
of Palestinian houses and structures and with the
eviction of Palestinian families from their homes. We
are deeply concerned by the developments in East
Jerusalem, where an unprecedented number of families
face eviction. Although we welcome the fact that the
planned demolition of Khan Al-Ahmar has not taken
place, we reiterate our call upon Israel to withdraw
those plans all together.

My last point is on the need to restart a genuine
peace process. We thank Nikki Haley for the first
glimpse of the United States plan for peace in the
Middle East. We look forward to further information
and consultations in that regard. As was just said in
a press statement of the former, current and incoming
members of the European Union to the Council, “We
see an urgent need for a political horizon to be restored”.

Thirdly, the situation in Gaza remains extremely
fragile. We have seen the tragic results of resorting to the
use of violence in Gaza over the past year all too often.
We condemn the indiscriminate firing of rockets. We
express grave concern about the use of force by Israel
that has led to the loss of life of over 200 Palestinian
civilians. We have called for a thorough investigation
into all cases where lives have been lost and we have
concluded several times that a sustainable solution for
the situation in Gaza is needed. That solution would
include the urgent improvement of the humanitarian
and economic situation.
Thanks to regional and international efforts, the
situation in Gaza has marginally improved. We thank
Nikolay Mladenov and his team for their unabated
efforts in finding solutions to alleviate the humanitarian
and economic crisis, including through the projects of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
the International Assistance to Palestinians.
Another positive development that I want to
highlight is that the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) was able, with the combined efforts of the
Agency itself and many donors, to continue to provide
basic services and to close the financing gap. Continued
support to UNRWA, including next year, is needed. We
will continue to work together with the United Nations
20/25

It is unfortunate to have to sum up the many
developments since the adoption of resolution 2334
(2016) that have undermined the prospects for
peace and of a two-State solution. In addition to the
developments mentioned so far, I also want to express
our concern about the shrinking space for civil society
in both Israel and the Palestinian territories. We are, for
example, concerned by the threats and hostile reaction
to the Israeli non-governmental organization B’Tselem,
which is an organization that rightly won international
praise for its work. The findings by Human Rights
Watch about suppression of dissenting opinions by
both the Palestinian Authority and Hamas, including
by the use torture, are deeply concerning. A vibrant
civil society is essential to long-term sustainable peace
and stability.
In conclusion, two years after the adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016), we have to recognize that
we continue to reaffirm our collective commitment
to a two-State solution, while the situation on the
ground is developing towards a one-State reality.
That development must be reversed. Positive steps are
urgently needed to restart a genuine peace process,
leading to a two-State solution based on internationally
agreed parameters. We should all remain united in our
efforts towards that goal.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his clear and
detailed briefing. I would also like to express to him
and his team our appreciation and recognition of the
continued work carried out and efforts made this year.
18-44565

18/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8429

We encourage them to keep up the same spirit and
dynamism in their work next year.

the parties to respect the provisions of resolution 2334
(2016).

Unless there are further insurgencies, I believe that
this will be the last meeting on the Palestinian question
of this working year. The delegation of Equatorial
Guinea is extremely concerned that, despite all the
support and effort, we have been unable to achieve any
political progress in both the disputes between Israelis
and Palestinians and the intra-Palestinian relationship.

We welcome the efforts of the United Nations that,
together with its partners and donors, has continued to
improve the humanitarian and economic situation in
Gaza. We hope that such inroads can garner further
international support. However, in order to achieve a
secure and sustained settlement in Gaza, it is important
to guarantee a stable security environment, for which
we have always demanded the return of the Palestinian
Authority. That compels us to join Egypt’s actions to
promote reconciliation among the Palestinian parties,
while bearing in mind that security in the Gaza Strip
would help to alleviate the tension with neighbouring
Israel.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is convinced of
the important role that the United Nations has always
played with regard to the Palestinian question, but also
believes that the Security Council and the international
community must conduct a deeper moral and political
examination of what and how much we are doing and
in what way and if we are taking the right approach.
Seventy years is too long to wait for the resolution of a
conflict that is unrelenting in taking human lives on all
sides, keeping millions of Palestinians displaced and
hindering the development of Palestinian society, while
unravelling the basic livelihoods of some localities, as
has been the case in the Gaza Strip. The amount of time
that this sad reality has lingered on is completely unjust
and could create scepticism in international public
opinion about the will and spirit that drives our work
of managing peace and security in the Middle East, in
particular the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Every year, we advocate new draft resolutions to
alleviate the conflict, which is all well and good, but
what about the many resolutions that have already been
adopted? The history of the conflict has proven that it
is extremely difficult to adopt draft resolutions on this
matter in the Council, which demonstrates how rational
and fair the existing resolutions are. We must therefore
all support strict compliance with those resolutions,
which, in our opinion, provide a balanced solution to
the problem.
We regret and strongly condemn the heavy
exchanges of gunfire between Israeli forces and Hamas
militias in November, the magnitude of which caused
severe alarm among the population and led to several
deaths and infrastructure damage. In that regard, we
call on Hamas and other Palestinian organizations
in the area to refrain from any provocation against
Israel. Likewise, we urge the Israeli security forces to
respect international humanitarian law by evaluating
their responses to those threats. We therefore call on

History has starkly taught us that the conflict
has no military solution. The Republic of Equatorial
Guinea therefore reiterates that the political solution
to the Palestinian question must comprise a two-State
solution that is negotiated by the parties, within the
1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The interests of both parties must always be taken
into account. Likewise, we urge the Security Council
not to remain indifferent in the face of the stalemate
in negotiations between the parties and to work to
implement measures that allow for compliance with
its own resolutions. We ask that written reports on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) be published,
as was requested by 10 members of the Council.
Finally, the United States peace plan that has been
initiated by Ambassador Nikki Haley deserves our due
attention, as it currently lacks detail. We welcome the
plan and hope that it will be fair and convincing in
the eyes of the international community. We wish to
take this opportunity to pay well-deserved tribute to
Ambassador Haley for her leadership during her time
here at the Security Council.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to express our
appreciation to Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.
Ethiopia is closely following the situation and is
very concerned about the recent incidents that have
taken place following the renewed escalation of violence
in the occupied Palestinian territory since last month,
particularly in the Gaza Strip. We expressed the same
concern at both emergency consultations that were
convened under the agenda item “Any other business” on

18-4456521/25

S/PV.8429

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the escalation of violence in Gaza and Southern Israel,
when the Council was briefed by Under-SecretaryGeneral Miroslav Jenča, and at the monthly briefing
(see S/PV.8405) and consultations, when Special
Coordinator Mladenov briefed the Council, stressing
the situation’s fragility and underscoring the urgent
need to change the dynamics on the ground and address
underlying political issues. We continue to appreciate
the efforts of the United Nations, in close consultations
with countries such Egypt and other relevant parties, to
help restore calm and on the need to promote political
dialogue between the parties based on a two-State
solution, to which Ethiopia fully subscribes.
Today’s briefing and recent discussion further
show how the latest developments are bound to cause
damage and undermine the long-sought hope for peace
between the Israelis and Palestinians. The deteriorating
political, humanitarian and security situation in Gaza
remains extremely worrisome. Although Special
Coordinator Mladenov pointed to progress in terms
of reconstruction efforts and the provision of water
services, among other things, we believe that the
humanitarian situation cannot be alleviated without
fixing all essential services, as well as easing the
movement of people, goods and services.
We would also like to note the importance of
promoting intra-Palestinian reconciliation, supporting
the efforts of Egypt and bringing the Gaza Strip under
the control of the Palestinian Authority, as per the
Cairo agreement, which have not yet fully materialized.
Therefore, it is vitally urgent that all sides exercise
maximum restraint and that every effort be made to
de-escalate tensions, in order to avoid endangering
the lives of innocent civilians and exacerbating the
humanitarian situation.
All of that makes it self-evident that, unless the
peace process is advanced and the underlying problems
are peacefully solved, the tragedy at hand will only
happen again and again, eventually getting to the point
of no return. That is why it is so critical that ways and
means be found to continue the peace process and save
the two-State formula, which is the long-held position
of the United Nations and the international community.
We all know that those same underlying problems
and known obstacles to peace persist, with no
movement forward to speak of — a situation that is
hardly conducive to sustainable peace and security for
either party. Without genuine efforts to remove those
22/25

18/12/2018

obstacles, there cannot be any meaningful progress
towards realizing the two-State solution. That is why
direct negotiations between the parties should resume
without any preconditions and without any delay. As
we leave the Council next month, we can only hope
that the international community, and particularly
the Council, will be able to take steps in support of
realizing that objective.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the briefing
made by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov on the latest quarterly
report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016)
and the illegality of the Israeli settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories.
I will begin by reiterating what was mentioned in
letter contained in document S/2018/454, of 14 May,
regarding the timely distribution of a written report
on resolution 2334 (2016). We thank the SecretaryGeneral for having heeded our request last June and
we reiterate that that must become common practice,
in accordance with the usual practice stated in the
provisions of paragraphs 62 and 64 of presidential note
S/2017/507.
As a pacifist country, Bolivia has persistently
echoed the innumerable calls of the international
community for Israel — the occupying Power for more
than 70 years — once and for all to stop its expansionist
and annexationist policies, which violate international
law and Council resolutions. Yet once again today we
must express our outright rejection of the manifest
intention demonstrated by the Government of Israel to
impose its illegal policies in the occupied Palestinian
territories through violent actions, in clear violation of
resolution 2334 (2016) and in accordance with the report
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs of 30 November.
Sixty-three structures been demolished in the
West Bank in just the past month, which has resulted
in the displacement of at least 35 people. We reiterate
that the demolition of civilian buildings forms part of
the coercion affecting many Palestinians in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, which also means
restrictions on accessing natural resources. The denial
of basic services and safe housing for Palestinians
is a product of Israeli plans to relocate communities
to urban municipalities, such as the case of Khan
Al-Ahmar/Abu Al-Helu.
18-44565

18/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8429

During the two years that we have occupied a seat
on the Security Council, we have categorically rejected
the criminal actions of the Israel Defence Forces, which
used lethal weapons to end the lives of more than 228
Palestinian civilians, including 43 children, in various
circumstances during what was called the Great March
of Return. We have seen a marked deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip as an explicit
result of the violent incursions of the Israeli army.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our conviction that the
only long-term solution to the occupation suffered by
the Palestinian people is that of the two-State solution,
whereby a free, sovereign and independent Palestinian
State can finally become a full Member of the
Organization, within the pre-1967 international borders
and East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions.

The 11-year-long land, air and sea blockade imposed
by Israel on Gaza has paralysed its economy, resulting
in high levels of unemployment, food insecurity and
dependence on international aid. Gaza’s economy is in
free fall, according to the World Bank. Unemployment
reached 54 per cent in the second quarter of this
year, with more than 70 per cent of young people and
78 per cent of women unemployed, while poverty has
skyrocketed to 53 per cent and food insecurity to 68 per
cent.

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting, and Mr. Mladenov for his important briefing
and dedicated efforts.

There were power cuts in Gaza for between 18 and
20 hours per day during most of this year, which have
prevented the provision of basic services. Productive
activity has also seriously deteriorated, especially in
hospitals, water treatment facilities and sewage and
solid waste collection services, which rely almost
entirely on the emergency fuel provided by the United
Nations.

We must express our deep concern about the situation
described regarding the continued deterioration of the
political and humanitarian conditions underpinning
the question of Palestine and the acute risks that that
represents for a particularly unstable region and the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
note with dismay the complex humanitarian situation
in the Gaza Strip, which has been exacerbated by
recurrent episodes of violence and cuts in funding to
assistance programmes. It is evident that the situation
favours those actors interested in promoting violence
and extremism.

In the multilateral forums to which it belongs,
Bolivia will question how a Member State can be
allowed to infringe upon the human rights of the
Palestinian population in such a way before the
international community. Accordingly, we demand
that Israel fully comply with its legal obligations and
responsibilities under the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
of 12 August 1949. In that regard, we cannot fail to
mention the great spirit of solidarity of the Government
of Qatar, which provided a significant amount of fuel
in October that led to a significant improvement in the
supply of electricity to the population of the Gaza Strip.

We must continue to condemn the recurrence of
indiscriminate attacks against the civilian population
and terrorist attacks by Нamas and other radical
Palestinian actors, the imbalanced Israeli responses and
the confrontational rhetoric of its respective authorities,
which fuel ongoing hostile dynamics. We reiterate that
settlement practices, the demolition of buildings and
evictions in the Palestinian territories occupied since
1967 undermine the possibility of reaching a twoState solution and openly violate international law and
resolution 2334 (2016). We underline the need for the
Israeli authorities to stop and reverse those practices,
and we note with particular alarm the political and
social impact that would be caused by the demolition
of a set of structures in the town of Khan Al-Ahmar.

We again express our firm commitment to all
international efforts that lead to a peaceful solution and
end to the Palestinian occupation. In that regard, we
endorse initiatives such as the Quartet road map, the
Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and others
that constitute guarantees for a just and lasting peace,
so that both peoples can safely live within recognized
borders.

There is a clear need for political gestures to
build a climate favourable to détente, dialogue and
negotiation between the parties, with the support of
the international community and the Council. In that
regard, we have taken note of the information provided
by the United States Ambassador on the peace plan that
her country is preparing. We look forward to further
details on that.

18-4456523/25

S/PV.8429

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We believe that all possibilities of resuming
negotiations aimed at reaching a two-State solution
with secure and internationally recognized borders
must be explored. In line with that objective, we
underline the urgency of alleviating the humanitarian
situation in Gaza and moving forward the process of
intra-Palestinian reconciliation. With regard to the
latter, we would like to highlight the efforts made by
Egypt and the importance that the Council closely
follow them, while providing the necessary support.
I would like to conclude by noting, as other
delegations have done, that we continue to expect a
written report on compliance with resolution 2334
(2016) by the Secretary-General, which was requested
by 10 members of the Council, as that would provide
greater transparency and allow for a deeper discussion
on this sensitive topic. We hope that that practice will
be resumed in the coming quarters.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
My delegation thanks Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing on the recent developments regarding
the situation in Palestine, which once again reminds the
Security Council of the urgent need to mobilize further
around issues of peace and security in the region.
Côte d’Ivoire is concerned about the situation in
the Palestinian territories, particularly in the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank, where tension remains
high despite the many efforts of the international
community to restore peace and stability. My country
wishes to reaffirm its steadfast position in favour of a
peaceful and negotiated solution to the conflict through
dialogue between the parties. That is why we believe,
in accordance with international consensus, that the
status of the city of Jerusalem must be determined
following peace negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians.
Côte d’Ivoire can, under no circumstances, approve
the policies of settlement expansion and intensive
reconstruction that have thrown entire Palestinian
families into complete disarray, which threatens the
urgent need to restore dialogue in the quest for lasting
peace in the region. We therefore call for stringent
compliance with the provisions of resolution 2334
(2016) and call on the various parties to exercise
restraint and urge them to refrain from unilateral
24/25

18/12/2018

actions that could irrevocably compromise the chances
of a peaceful settlement to the conflict.
The Israeli-Palestinian crisis carries with great risk
of deterioration to the socioeconomic and humanitarian
situation in the region. Many reports from United
Nations agencies indicate that unemployment has
reached 27 per cent, the highest in the world. According
to those reports, the state of health of Palestinians
is deteriorating and a significant proportion of the
population does not have access to drinking water or
electricity, despite the substantial assistance provided
by some States in the region, in particular Qatar.
Given the seriousness of the situation, Côte d’Ivoire
reiterates its urgent call for a general mobilization and
collective responsibility on the part of the members
of the Council so that significant humanitarian and
financial assistance is provided to the populations in
distress. In that connection, my delegation urges the
United Nations and international partners to continue
providing financial support to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East. That support will allow it to efficiently
carry out its mission of providing assistance to more
than 5 million refugees whose needs are constantly
increasing.
The end of the humanitarian crisis is highly
dependent upon a settlement of the political and military
crisis that has pitted Palestinians against Israelis for
several decades. Hence the need to put an end to the
cycle of deadly violence and repression. In that regard,
my delegation calls on the Israeli and Palestinian parties
to enter into new peace talks without preconditions, as
part of the good offices of the United Nations. To that
end, the Council should support all mediation initiatives
in favour of reconciliation between Fatah and Hamas,
thereby allowing the Palestinian Authority to recover
all of its prerogatives over Palestinian territory.
My country welcomes and encourages the
mediation conducted by the Egyptian authorities under
the supervision of the United Nations. We also express
our continued support for the two-State solution,
Israel and Palestine, living in harmony, side by side, in
peace and security, in accordance with resolution 242
(1967). In that connection, I welcome the United States
initiative to develop a peace plan focused on improving
the quality of life for people in the Middle East. I am
pleased to note that the plan will be available in the
near future, and I hope it will have the desired impact
on the region.
18-44565

18/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In conclusion, my delegation encourages
Mr. Mladenov to continue his constant efforts to find a
negotiated solution.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

S/PV. 8429

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

18-4456525/25
