S/2021/97

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 February 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 1 February 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, as well as the statements
delivered by the representatives of China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Kenya,
Mexico, the Niger, Norway, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America and Viet Nam in connection with the video-teleconference
on “The situation in Libya” convened on Thursday, 28 January 2021. A statement
was also delivered by the representative of Libya.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, this
briefing and these statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Barbara Woodward
President of the Security Council

21-01365 (E) 030221 040321

*2101365*

S/2021/97

Annex I
Brief ing by the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretar y- General and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, Stephanie Williams
I wish to congratulate Tunisia for assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January.
This month marks one year since Chancellor Merkel of Germany and the
Secretary-General convened the Berlin Conference, on 19 January 2020. The
Conference did not put an immediate end to the conflict and the suffering of the
Libyan people. Nor did foreign support to the warring parties relent, and, indeed, this
blatant foreign interference continues. However, the 55-point communiqué agreed
by the participating States Members of the United Nations and partner organizations
in Berlin articulated a comprehensive framework to address the full range of issues
fuelling the Libyan conflict. Its subsequent endorsement by the Security Council,
through resolution 2510 (2020), anchored our effort aimed at bringing the Libyan
parties to the negotiating table.
One year later, the intra-Libyan dialogues, facilitated by the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) through complementary political, military
and economic tracks, have produced tangible progress: a ceasefire is in place; the
Tunis road map, adopted in mid-November, has charted the course for the restoration
of democratic legitimacy by setting a clear date for national elections and for the
establishment of a unified, temporary executive authority; and long-overdue
economic and financial reforms are well under way. What is now evident is that the
Berlin process did what was envisioned: it created an international umbrella for the
United Nations to work directly with the Libyan parties, military officers, political
forces and thought leaders to seek a Libyan-Libyan resolution.
Today the contours of unity and reconciliation can be more clearly discerned.
Libyans are eager to turn the page and reclaim Libyan sovereignty and ownership
of their destiny as a people after many years of relentless armed conflict, societal
fragmentation and crippling institutional division. This rejuvenation of Libyan
patriotism must be sustained, harnessed and supported by the Security Council
to open a new path for Libya towards democracy, respect for human rights,
accountability and justice under the rule of law.
Ten days ago, I participated in a digital dialogue with 1,000 Libyans from
across the country and abroad. Seventy-six per cent of the participants were in favour
of conducting national elections on 24 December 2021, and the majority called for
an end to the years-long transitional period. Sixty-nine per cent of participants
believed that a unified interim executive authority in the run-up to elections is
needed. However, over 70 per cent of participants feared obstruction from what they
described as the “status quo” party. They also called for a stronger United Nations
role in ending foreign interference in the country and for the continuation of the
United Nations-facilitated dialogues.
I am pleased to report that the ceasefire signed in Geneva on 23 October
continues to be observed and that the 5+5 Joint Military Commission (JMC) remains
active. The professionalism and selfless commitment of its members is exemplary.
Ahead of the 23 January deadline set by the ceasefire agreement for foreign
fighters and mercenaries to depart Libya, the JMC affirmed to the Security Working
Group of the International Follow-Up Committee on 20 January that it will continue
its work to implement all provisions of the agreement. In a public statement, the JMC
reiterated the need for the immediate repatriation of all mercenaries and foreign
fighters from all the Libyan territories.
2/39

21-01365

S/2021/97

I welcome the JMC’s determination, although I am concerned by continued
fortifications and defensive positions set up by the Libyan Arab Armed Forces
(LAAF) inside Ghardabiya airbase in Sirte and along the Sirte-Jufrah axis in
central Libya.
Air cargo activities continued, with f lights reaching Libya’s western region
and the Government of National Accord military bases and airbases. In the southern
region, there was an increase in assets and activities in the airbases seemingly
aimed at strengthening LAAF presence and control. These activities undermine
the 5+5 process.
In Tripoli, in mid-January, the Presidency Council established another
new security structure under its control, composed and led by prominent armed
groups, which could complicate the 5+5-led efforts to help Libya make a transition
towards a State monopoly on security. The multiplication of security agencies under
the leadership of armed groups, with overlapping responsibilities, unclear lines
of command and control, and financed with public resources, further erodes the
State’s security architecture and undermines future security sector reforms and the
demobilization, reintegration and integration of armed groups.
I would like to stress that responsibility for the implementation of the ceasefire
agreement rests not with the JMC but with the political and military leadership of
both sides. I call on the Government of National Accord and the LAAF to fully
assume their responsibilities and fully implement the ceasefire agreement. I also
wish to echo the Secretary-General’s appeal to all regional and international actors
to respect the provisions of the ceasefire agreement. The JMC has repeatedly
requested the enforcement of the United Nations arms embargo and for international
assistance to expedite the departure of foreign fighters, in order to underpin their
valiant efforts to negotiate the opening of the coastal road and reconnect eastern and
western Libya.
The determined and constructive cooperation between the Libyan parties
within the JMC paved the way for the political talks to resume. Since the Tunis
dialogue, after over 50 hours of virtual discussions, the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum established a temporary advisory committee to resolve the deadlock on the
selection mechanism for the executive authority.
I want to commend the crucial role played by women, youth and
representatives from Libya’s south in building bridges and unflaggingly working to
reach a compromise. Based on a proposal elaborated consensually by the advisory
committee on 19 January, the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum voted to approve the
proposed selection mechanism for a new executive authority to govern Libya in the
lead-up to national elections, with 73 per cent of the votes cast.
The one-week nomination period for the submission of candidacies for the
positions of a three-member Presidency Council and of Prime Minister closes
today. The Libyan Political Dialogue Forum will convene outside Geneva, with the
generous hospitality of the Swiss Federal Government, for the voting process from
1 to 5 February.
I strongly welcome the many expressions of international support, and I call
on all Libyan parties and institutions to get fully behind this process in line with the
Tunis road map.
In parallel, UNSMIL has continued to facilitate the deliberations of the
Libyan Political Dialogue Forum legal committee tasked with following up on
the constitutional basis necessary for the holding of elections. UNSMIL has also
supported the meeting of the constitutional committee formed by the House of
Representatives and the High Council of State.
21-013653/39

S/2021/97

That committee met on 20 January in Hurghada, Egypt, and agreed to hold a
constitutional referendum before the national elections in December and to amend
the referendum law reviewed by the House of Representatives at the end of 2018.
While that path is not without challenges, it is positive that they met within the
framework of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum road map, and I welcome the
declared commitment of the committee to hold national elections on 24 December.
I welcome the disbursement by the Government of National Accord
of 50 million Libyan dinars to the High National Elections Commission for
preparations for the national elections scheduled to take place on 24 December 2021.
On 28 December, Commission Chairman Al-Sayeh briefed the legal committee of
the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum on the measures taken by the Commission to
strengthen its institutional capacity as part of planning for different scenarios to
implement elections on 24 December.
Mr. Al-Sayeh reiterated the Commission’s technical readiness to implement
the elections while pointing out that the Commission’s ability to start concrete
preparation for the elections will be dependent on the allocation of sufficient
resources and remains limited until electoral legislation is put in place.
I also welcome the holding of eight municipal council elections conducted
by the Central Committee for Municipal Council Elections in and around Tripoli,
despite the challenges of operating in a post-war context. I appeal to all stakeholders
involved to respect the integrity and inclusivity of electoral processes in Libya.
Three municipal elections were also held in the eastern Wahat municipalities.
All stakeholders must work together to ensure the uniformity of electoral processes
across Libya. The achievement of more than 130 council elections having been
conducted since 2013 must be preserved; it is time to unify the two institutions
under one roof.
Steady progress has been made on the economic track, with significant
economic reforms advanced over the period. If those reforms are fully implemented,
they will smooth the way towards durable economic arrangements, including the
transparent management of oil revenues.
With the holding oil revenues in abeyance by the National Oil Corporation,
the past month has witnessed unprecedented and long-overdue economic reforms,
including the reactivation of the Central Bank of Libya Board of Directors, the
unification of the exchange rate, progress on the financial review of the Bank and
the launching of the first comprehensive audit of the Libyan Investment Authority.
Despite those reforms, two critical measures remain outstanding. The first is
the easing of the banking crisis through the issuance of loans to commercial banks
in order to clear the backlog of cheques issued on credit lines created by the eastern
branch of the Central Bank of Libya.
The other outstanding issue is the consolidation and unification of the national
budget for 2021. Both Ministers of Finance have developed a unified budget, and
UNSMIL has supported the World Bank by convening two meetings in January
between the ministries to work on unifying the charter of accounts.
There are limitations, however, to fully unifying the budget in the absence
of a unified executive. As a result of UNSMIL-facilitated mediation, I am pleased
to report that the relevant Libyan parties have reached essential agreement on the
budget components and arranged for a working-level group to meet to finalize a twomonth budget and the procedures for implementation. Upon conclusion, that process,
now actively under way, is designed to enable immediate implementation.

4/39

21-01365

S/2021/97

While the guns have fallen silent, communities continued to face the
repercussions of war and the convulsions related to the gross violations of human
rights committed during the conflict. In Tarhunah, additional mass graves were
discovered in January, with at least 18 bodies found. Lack of accountability and
justice in Tarhunah led to protests by victims’ families on 23 January, which, sadly,
degenerated into violence, with some protestors setting five homes on fire. The
root causes of the tensions in Tarhunah should be addressed through a multifaced
approach combining human rights protection and the rule of law, security-sector
reform and reconciliation and transitional justice mechanisms.
The situation regarding the uncontrolled proliferation of arms, ammunition
and explosive ordnance continues to pose a major threat. I would like to pay tribute to
the teams who have worked tirelessly to eliminate the threats in the most dangerous
areas, 71 of whom have been killed or injured since May 2020, while also confronting
the added threat from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The ceasefire agreement
presents a critical opportunity to mitigate that threat through the commitment by
both sides to implement the measures outlined in the accompanying mine action
protocol, which will save lives and help restore peace.
Since the suspension of fighting in June 2020, families have continued to
return to Tripoli, with approximately 114,000 people returning since the end of the
fighting. Across Libya, there has been a 26 per cent reduction in the number of
displaced people, from a high of 426,000 people in June down to 316,000.
Those who remain displaced face many perils and great uncertainty. On
19 January, an ammunition depot exploded at the Naval Academy in Janzour,
Tripoli. The Naval Academy is home to more than 600 displaced families that f led
Tawergha in 2011. Among the casualties were four internally displaced persons,
one of whom died instantly. Many other displaced families face evictions from the
places where they have been living. We continue to work with the authorities to
ensure that people who have been displaced from their homes are provided with
dignified and durable solutions.
The United Nations and its partners continue to advocate for and support the
release of migrants and refugees from detention and the closing of detention centres.
We welcome the release of the remaining 121 migrants and refugees earlier this
month from the Zintan detention centre into the community in Tripoli. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food Programme
and partners are providing released detainees with assistance. Despite those positive
developments, as of 19 January more than 900 migrants and refugees remained in
official detention centres in Libya.
We were also saddened to learn that on 19 January, at least 43 people drowned,
and 10 survivors were rescued, in the first shipwreck of 2021, off the coast of Libya.
In 2020, more than 11,900 migrants and refugees trying to reach Europe were
intercepted at sea and returned to Libya, which by all definitions is not a safe port
for return.
The impact of COVID-19 continues to make life more challenging for some
of the country’s most vulnerable people. The number of COVID-19 cases and deaths
continues to increase month-on-month. As of 23 January, there had been 113,688
confirmed cases and 1,763 deaths.
Prices for food and basic supplies remain well above pre-COVID levels, while
many people have lost access to their livelihoods. In 2020, 1.3 million people were in
need of some form of humanitarian assistance. The United Nations and humanitarian
partners, through the 2021 humanitarian response plan released this month, is
requesting $189 million to reach 451,000 of those with food, health, protection,
shelter and education, as well as water, sanitation and hygiene.
21-013655/39

S/2021/97

As I head to Geneva tomorrow for a decisive round of intra-Libyan talks that
is expected to result in the creation of a new temporary unified executive, I remind
all prospective candidates that high office comes with high responsibilities. In this,
my last briefing to the Council, I also remind all parties, States with vested interests
in Libya and, importantly, those Libyans who seek executive office that Libya’s
future is in their hands.
I want to pay tribute to all the Libyans who have worked courageously and
in good faith to plant the seeds of reconciliation and fulfil the aspirations of their
fellow citizens.
I also want to thank the Council for its support for my efforts as Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General over the past 11 months and to the
members of the Berlin process and the many generous donors that have accompanied
and sustained the United Nations-facilitated intra-Libyan dialogue. The Council
should signal its clear support for the new Libyan unified Government through the
issuance of a resolution that also calls for the dissolution of all remaining parallel
executive entities.
As incoming Special Envoy Ján Kubiš, Coordinator Raisedon Zenenga and
Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator Georgette Gagnon take over the reins of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, I wish to pay special tribute to former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ghassan Salamé for his inspired
leadership, mentorship and guidance in laying the solid foundation upon which this
process rests and to former Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Humanitarian Coordinator Yacoub El Hillo for his distinguished service.
Last but not least, I wish to thank the entire United Nations team working on
Libya, who are working tirelessly to make this process possible, for their dedication
and commitment,

6/39

21-01365

S/2021/97

Annex II
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Dai Bing
[Original: Chinese]
I thank Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General Stephanie
Williams for her briefing and appreciate her tremendous efforts to bring about a
political settlement to the question of Libya. I welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Libya, Ambassador Elsonni.
With the joint efforts of the international community and the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), there is hope on the horizon for the
political process in Libya. With the hard-won positive momentum, we hope that
the international community and the parties concerned will seize this opportunity
to make, as soon as possible, peace and development a reality in Libya and its
neighbouring countries. In that context, I wish to touch on the following four points.
First, we are heartened to see a ceasefire achieved in Libya; it should be
observed by all. China highly commends all the parties in Libya for bearing national
interests in mind and thus reaching a ceasefire agreement, and also for demonstrating
determination in observing that ceasefire. The next crucial step is to ensure the full
implementation of the agreement and the early withdrawal of all foreign fighters.
China has taken note of and is carefully studying the suggestions on a ceasefiremonitoring mechanism contained in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/62).
The success of the implementation of the ceasefire will depend on the parties
to the conflict. Therefore, in the process of establishing such a mechanism, the views
of the parties concerned must be fully respected and the objectivity and impartiality
of the mechanism ensured. Involvement in ceasefire-monitoring by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya must be based on adequate mandate, resources
and security guarantees.
Secondly, the recent political dialogue in Libya has registered significant
achievements, which must be vigorously consolidated and pushed forward. China
welcomes the active participation of the parties concerned in the dialogue and
commends Tunisia, Morocco, Egypt and other countries in the region for the major
role that they have played. China calls upon all the parties to speedily advance the
political process in accordance with the existing road map, properly address some
critical issues, including the selection of candidates for the new executive authority
so that the general election can be held on December 24 as scheduled.
We welcome the work done by the Advisory Committee of the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum in forging consensus. We support UNSMIL lending the necessary
assistance to the implementation of the road map.
In terms of economic development, Libya also faces grave challenges. It is
our hope that all parties in Libya will make sustainable development a priority while
advancing the political process and striving to improve people’s living conditions
and well-being through socioeconomic development.
Thirdly, we remain concerned about the sustained threat from terrorism and
violent extremism in Libya. Terrorism is the common enemy of humankind. China
calls upon the international community to step up coordination and cooperation in a
joint effort to combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. Comprehensive
measures, including in the political, economic, judicial and social fields, must be in
place so as to thoroughly eradicate the breeding ground for terrorism and extremism.
In so doing, a top priority is to prevent the cross-border movement of foreign terrorist
21-013657/39

S/2021/97

fighters and prevent a spillover effect and threat to the security and stability of
neighbouring countries and the Sahel region.
Fourthly, on the question of sanctions, China’s position has been consistent.
Sanctions are only a means, not an end. Under current circumstances, the arms
embargo on Libya must be strictly enforced. At the same time, it is important to
prevent any negative impact due to the sanctions in other areas on Libyan civilians
and third countries and prevent any damage to the overall national interests of Libya
and ensure a normal life for its population while meeting its humanitarian needs.
Libya is concerned about losses relating to frozen assets. The Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya — the sanctions
Committee — should speed up its consideration of an appropriate response to Libya’s
legitimate concern.
With Libya’s peace process at a critical historical juncture, joint international
support is required to maintain it and move forward. China remains committed to
an objective and impartial position and will contribute to the early achievement of
lasting stability, prosperity and development in Libya.

8/39

21-01365

S/2021/97

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I would like to thank Acting Special Representative Stephanie Williams for
her briefing. Since this is her last briefing to the Council in that role, I would like
to offer my sincere gratitude to Ms. Williams for the tremendous work done in
facilitating the contacts and mediating between the Libyan parties. We welcome
the appointments of the new Special Envoy of the Secretary General, Mr. Ján
Kubiš, and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) Coordinator,
Mr. Raisedon Zenenga. We offer both of them our full support and look forward to
working with them.
We are encouraged by the progress that the Libyan parties have made in the
political dialogue process, including reaching agreement on the selection mechanism
for the new transitional Government. We urge the parties to continue that steady
pace in the run-up to the elections in December this year. In that regard, I would like
to stress the importance of the inclusion of women throughout the entire political
process. We commend Libyan women for being active in the political dialogue
and urge all relevant actors to enable and ensure the full, meaningful and equal
participation of women in the decision-making process.
The permanent ceasefire agreement signed on 23 October last year was a
concrete step towards achieving lasting peace in Libya. We welcome the process that
ensued and the meetings of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission and their contacts
with the security working group of the international follow-up committee for Libya.
At the same time, we need now more than ever to direct our focus to the
implementation of the permanent ceasefire agreement. The 90-day deadline that
was set in the agreement for ending all foreign interference in Libya passed just last
weekend and significant progress still needs to be made in fulfilling this obligation.
I underline once again how important international support is in achieving lasting
stability in Libya. I urge all those involved to put an immediate end to the blatant
violations of the Libyan sanctions regime and to call off all foreign fighters and
mercenaries from Libya. All actions that violate the Libyan arms embargo must
immediately stop.
The Security Council has tools at its disposal to support the implementation of
the arms embargo through the relevant authorizations. We welcome the efforts of the
European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI that acts strictly under
those authorizations, is impartial in its activities and offers an important contribution
to the implementation of the sanctions regime that the Council has put in place.
It is important for the Security Council to continue supporting Libyans in
their efforts towards achieving lasting peace and contribute to this process when
possible. In this regard, we support the establishment of a credible, realistic and
effective ceasefire monitoring mechanism that acts under United Nations auspices.
I would also like to stress the importance of confidence-building measures,
such as the recent prisoner exchanges that have taken place. It is important that
concrete steps are taken to further build trust between the Libyan parties and in
Libyan society. That includes thoroughly investigating all alleged human rights
violations, mass killings, torture, enforced disappearances and ensuring justice for
the victims. A society without accountability will not be able to find lasting peace
and reconciliation.
We note that there has been some progress in terms of the access for
humanitarian aid and staff, and we encourage this progress to continue. However,
21-013659/39

S/2021/97

the humanitarian situation on the ground, further exacerbated by the coronavirus
disease pandemic, remains alarming. The frequent and often deliberate disruptions
to the water and electricity supply, the extremely dire situation and the constant
exposure to violence that migrants and asylum seekers endure are of great concern.
We call on the authorities to pay close attention to those issues and to take concrete
steps to alleviate the suffering of civilians.
Finally, I would like to reiterate Estonia’s full support to UNSMIL, as well
as to the follow-up mechanism of the Berlin Conference. It is important to note
that the political process under the umbrella of the United Nations and the Berlin
process remains the only acceptable international framework to support Libyans in
achieving lasting peace.

10/39

21-01365

S/2021/97

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I thank the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Stephanie
Williams, for her intervention. Once again, I commend her outstanding work in
promoting a political solution in Libya. I also welcome the appointments of Ján
Kubiš as Special Envoy and Raisedon Zenenga as Mission Coordinator of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
The Security Council must keep strongly supporting the ongoing
political process.
Together with several of our partners, we have welcomed the adoption by the
Libyan Political Dialogue Forum of the mechanism to select a new executive for
the transition towards the elections. This represents a major step towards the unity,
sovereignty and stability of the country. We call on all Libyan parties to support this
Forum and the United Nations mediation to enable the establishment of a unified
and inclusive executive authority. We will follow the meetings in Geneva from 1 to
5 February very closely.
The 24 December elections will be held in good conditions only if the ceasefire
agreement concluded last October is respected. Although the ceasefire agreement is
generally respected at this stage, the coastal road has not yet been reopened. This
is not acceptable, and we have made this point clear to the Libyan Government.
The foreign forces are violating the ceasefire agreement by maintaining their armed
elements, 90 days after the Libyans reached the ceasefire agreement and almost a
year after the Berlin Conference on Libya.
We must walk the talk. The Council must respond to the request of both the
Libyans and the Secretary-General to authorize the swift deployment of a ceasefire
monitoring mechanism under the aegis of the United Nations. This mechanism must
be credible and effective. Our Council must adopt a resolution giving a full mandate
to UNSMIL to monitor the implementation of the 23 October 2020 agreement. This
is the best guarantee of a lasting ceasefire.
The time has come for the Security Council to enforce the resolutions it has
adopted when it comes to the compliance with the arms embargo, the departure of
foreign fighters from Libya and the dismantling of militias.
The European Union Naval Force in the Mediterranean Operation IRINI has
already been a valuable contribution to that end. It implements the arms embargo on
the high seas, impartially and in strict compliance with the resolutions of our Council.
Last September, the European Union adopted sanctions against several
entities responsible for breaches of the arms embargo. We will resort to them again
if necessary.
On the economic front, there have been several positive developments: the
first meeting in five years of the Board of Directors of the Central Bank of Libya; oil
production, which has returned to its preterminal blockade level; and unified exchange
rates for East and West. But the essential question of the establishment of a transparent
mechanism for the management of economic resources remains unresolved.
Finally, the fight against migrant trafficking must continue. France is
committed to this fight. It had proposed, jointly with Germany, to place Osama
21-0136511/39

S/2021/97

Ibrahim Al-Kuni, a trafficker guilty of human rights violations, on the United Nations
sanctions list. We hope that such intervention will happen as soon as possible.
There will be no military solution in Libya. Only a political process under the
aegis of the United Nations will result in lasting peace. You can count on France to
give its full support to the new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and to the
ongoing processes. It is high time we put an end to this conflict.

12/39

21-01365

S/2021/97

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T. S. Tirumurti
Let me begin by extending our appreciation to Ms. Stephanie Williams for her
untiring work as Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya carried out under the most challenging
and difficult circumstances. We wish her well in her for her future endeavours. I also
thank her for today’s briefing.
Libya is at a critical juncture, both in terms of political process and military
conflict. It has been three months since the ceasefire agreement was signed between
the Libyan parties in Geneva in October last year, which was welcomed by the
Council; the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum has also made notable progress and
has agreed on timelines for elections. We have also noted the progress made in
the political and military track during the past two months, including municipal
elections, the holding of a constitutional committee meeting in Egypt, the progress in
the Berlin process, agreement on a unified exchange rate and exchange of detainees.
India was a member of the Security Council when resolutions 1970 (2011) and
1973 (2011) on Libya were adopted in 2011. We had then conveyed our reservations
on the way those two resolutions were rushed in the Council. India had called for a
calibrated and gradual approach and stressed the importance of political efforts to
address the situation. Ten years later, enduring peace still remains a dream in Libya
and the Libyan people continue to bear the brunt of actions taken by the Council and
the international community.
The Council today has an important task cut out for itself — how does it
support the ceasefire and what measures does it take to advance the political process
that is currently under way and ensure lasting peace and stability in Libya?
In this context, let me underline the following observations.
First, it is evident that there can be no military solution to the conflict in
Libya. This is very clear from the decade-long turmoil in the country. A peaceful
settlement through inclusive and broad-based dialogue and consultations, taking
into account the legitimate concerns and aspirations of all stakeholders in Libya, is
the only way forward.
Secondly, the peace process should be fully Libyan-led and Libyan-owned,
safeguarding the independence, unity and territorial integrity of Libya.
Thirdly, it is also important that the international community and the Security
Council fully support the efforts geared towards peace and stability in Libya and
ensure full commitment to all aspects of the ceasefire agreement. In this regard, we
have noted the report of the Secretary-General of 30 December 2020 highlighting
the requirements from the perspective of the United Nations for a Libyan ceasefire
monitoring mechanism (S/2020/1309) and have also heard the Special Representative
on this topic. India supports the role of the United Nations in implementing the
Libyan ceasefire monitoring mechanism, as requested by the Libyan parties. We
will work with other members of the Security Council in determining the best way
to move this forward.
Fourthly, a lasting ceasefire in Libya and lasting peace will not be possible
without strict compliance with the sanctions regime, as well as the departure of
foreign fighters from Libyan territory. We are well past the deadline of 90 days set
by the Libyans themselves when they signed the ceasefire agreement for departure
of all foreign fighters. The credibility of the sanctions regime depends on the strict
21-0136513/39

S/2021/97

compliance of its provisions. Blatant violations of the arms embargo are a serious
threat to peace and stability in Libya and need to be condemned. The Council should
also look at options to address the issue of the management of frozen assets.
Fifthly, we must also ensure that terrorist forces do not take advantage of the
move for a peaceful, negotiated settlement. There are several forces within Libya
that have the potential to spawn and strengthen terrorism and conflict in the region,
especially in the Sahel. The international community must speak in one voice against
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
Finally, while the political process and conduct of elections are the immediate
goal for us, it is important to further note that sustainable peace and stability require
national reconciliation. We should not lose sight of this larger goal in our desire to
get a quick-fix solution to the crisis. The international community must be prepared
to provide any assistance which Libya may ask for in this process. The ongoing
selection mechanism to set up a temporary executive authority must ensure genuine
and true representation of the Libyan people, in order to take the right decisions and
measures for a credible electoral process. The timelines for elections are ambitious
and achieving them will not be easy.
It is indeed unfortunate that peace and stability have remained elusive in Libya
primarily owing to the interference of foreign countries and the presence of foreign
mercenaries and terrorist fighters. The opportunity that has been presented by the
signing of the ceasefire agreement and the events in the aftermath need to be seized
by the Libyan parties and we hope that the international community will render all
support to them. This has also become relevant in the context of the coronavirus
disease pandemic and related humanitarian issues.
India’s relations with Libya have always been close and mutually beneficial.
Indian companies and Indian expatriates have had a large presence in Libya in the
past, numbering at times nearly 100,000. Indian public sector and private companies
have contributed significantly to critical infrastructure projects, such as roads and
highways, power plants and transmission lines in Libya. The presence of Indian
professionals in the critical oil sector, steel manufacturing, as well as in the education
and health sector, helped the Libyan society and economy tide over the difficulties of
international isolation in the past. The steel plant, power stations, transmission lines
and oil pipelines built by Indian companies are positively contributing to the Libyan
economy to this day.
India genuinely wishes to see enduring peace and stability return to the
country. India remains committed to supporting Libya and the Libyan people in
this endeavour.

14/39

21-01365

S/2021/97

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
I want to thank the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Williams for her excellent briefing this morning.
I want to start by congratulating you, Stephanie, and your team for the critical
work that you have been doing and are doing on the ground in Libya. Your tireless
efforts and those of course of all the Libyan partners have paved the way for the
significant progress we are hearing about today. As this is your last briefing to us on
this issue, I wanted to express our sincere gratitude, and also to both professionally
and personally to wish you well, Stephanie.
It is rare enough at this table that we remark on what is definitely described
as tangible progress in a complex situation. Today is one of those rare occasions,
so I want to recognize all those who have contributed to the concrete progress that
we have heard today right across the political, security, economic, international
humanitarian law and human rights tracks. We believe that this progress has helped
move Libya further along the path to peace, stability and development. Frankly, it
gives us hope for the Libyan people.
Let me assure our Libyan friends that Ireland, the European Union and
the international community will remain committed to accompanying you, to
accompanying Libya, along that path, as we move into a critical phase leading up to
elections next December.
Ireland sincerely welcomes the appointments of Ján Kubiš as Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, of Raisedon Zenenga as Mission Coordinator and of Georgette
Gagnon as Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator. Under this new leadership, we
see three main priorities.
First is the establishment of a credible, realistic and effective ceasefire
monitoring and verification mechanism. We welcome the parties’ continued resolve
to implement the provisions of the ceasefire agreement and to agree on the operation
of a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned ceasefire monitoring mechanism. Ireland also
strongly supports the Secretary-General’s request to the Security Council to give the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) a clear but flexible mandate to
enable the Mission to support the mechanism.
We welcome the continued and more positive engagement of Libya’s
neighbours and regional partners in support of the United Nations-facilitated intraLibyan dialogue tracks. We reiterate the need to ensure a single and coordinated
international approach in Libya. Frankly, the task of building peace is complex
enough. We need a coherent approach.
Ireland echoes the Secretary-General’s appeal to all regional and international
actors to respect the provisions of the ceasefire agreement. That includes ensuring
the complete departure of all foreign fighters and mercenaries from Libya. More than
90 days after the signing of the agreement, that requirement remains unfulfilled. As
we have heard, that is simply not acceptable. It must change. The continued threat
of terrorism and violent extremism in North Africa, as set out in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2021/62), is deeply concerning.
Serious violations of the Security Council arms embargo have been
documented, both in the report of the Panel of Experts on Libya (S/2019/914) and
in the information provided to the Panel by the European Union (EU) Naval Force
Mediterranean Operation IRINI, whose work Ireland and its EU partners strongly
21-0136515/39

S/2021/97

support. Such violations must cease. We call on all actors to now heed the call in the
ceasefire agreement for full and unconditional respect for the arms embargo. The
Council has a responsibility to ensure that.
The second priority is the need to secure a vote of the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum on an executive authority to prepare for the elections to be held
on 24 December. Ireland welcomes the 19 January decision to adopt a selection
mechanism for a temporary executive authority. That is a means to an end. It is
now important that agreement on the three-member Presidency Council and on the
Prime Minister be reached quickly, not least to enable adequate preparations for the
December elections.
Ireland commends the Libyan electoral authorities for their successful conduct
of the municipal council elections despite the challenging security environment and
the coronavirus disease. We welcome the Government of National Accord’s decision
to allocate funds and resources to the High National Elections Commission. Ireland
is also studying the Government of National Accord’s request for United Nations
support for the December elections with interest, and we look forward to the Council
taking up the matter at the appropriate time.
We remain concerned about the human rights situation on the ground in
Libya. Without guarantees for the fundamental rights of the Libyan people, the
democratic transition will be incomplete. In that regard, I would like to acknowledge
the efforts of UNSMIL and the International Humanitarian Law and Human Rights
Working Group.
My third point is the need for progress on the economic and financial prospects
for Libya, including the reform agenda, and, in particular, to address the crisis in the
banking sector and the mechanism on oil revenue management. Ireland welcomes the
recent economic reforms, including the reactivation of the Central Bank of Libya’s
Board of Directors and the unification of the exchange rate, as well as progress in the
financial review of the Central Bank and the recent announcement of the audit of the
Libyan Investment Authority. That is progress. Those reforms should help to create
a more durable, transparent and equitable economic arrangement for the benefit of
the Libyan people themselves.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate Ireland’s steadfast support for the work of
UNSMIL and for all the efforts under way in the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum.
We believe that this is a critical moment in Libya’s history. It is a moment for
optimism and for hope. We must not underestimate the challenges ahead, one of
which is the need to invest in the national reconciliation that will underpin work
for sustainable peace. The Council has a responsibility to prevent spoilers, be they
foreign or domestic, from reversing the Libyan people’s hard-won peacebuilding
gains. We must be ready to take concrete measures, with actions that back up our
words, to ensure that happens. We owe at least that to the people of Libya.

16/39

21-01365

S/2021/97

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Martin Kimani
Before I start my statement, I would like to say how much we have appreciated
the presidency of Tunisia and the leadership that has been shown throughout
the month. I know that the wrap-up session is tomorrow, but I wanted to say
congratulations as well as to recognize that, as we are discussing the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and Libya, two of the three African members
of the Security Council have direct exposure to that country. Their experiences are
very relevant and, indeed, the opportunities available to them as a result of the work
that the Security Council does to support UNSMIL and Libya are directly linked to
their well-being and security.
The Kenya delegation thanks Ms. Stephanie Williams for her briefing today.
I must commend her for her passion and commitment to the course for a secure
and peaceful Libya since taking over as Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
We take this opportunity to also laud the Secretary-General for the appointment
of Mr. Ján Kubiš as his Special Envoy for Libya and Mr. Raisedon Zenenga as
Assistant Secretary-General and Mission Coordinator of UNSMIL. We congratulate
them on those appointments, and we wish them success and offer our support.
We celebrate the gains that the people of Libya are making in strengthening
national reconciliation, as reflected by the agreement for a complete and permanent
ceasefire in Libya of 23 October, the successful first round of the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum in November and the continuing deliberations.
Kenya reaffirms the importance of ensuring that this remains a Libyan-led and
Libyan-owned process. We welcome the inclusive approach that the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum road map took, including recommendations on gender equality as
an important step towards women’s meaningful participation in the peace and the
political processes.
We will continue to strongly support a peace process that offers the Libyan
people sustained security. Speaking of sustainability, besides the commendable
efforts within the political, security and economic tracks of the dialogue, there is a
need to infuse other critical tools into the peace process. Those include reconciliation
and other sociopolitical aspects, such as inclusivity, which is central to any lasting
peace outcomes.
Even as we do that, Kenya remains acutely aware of the profound threat
that remains from global terrorist actors, as well as their facilitators and support
infrastructure, not only to the people of Libya but also to neighbouring States and
the region. We believe that actions against the remnants of the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Sham, including its ideology, financing and recruiting infrastructure, should
be strengthened and reflected in every resolution and decision of the Council. In that
regard, measures against terrorism financing, radicalization and recruitment should
be built into the post-reconciliation governance systems and processes.
It is imperative to ensure that the Libyan peace process and other processes
elsewhere should be net exporters of predictable security to neighbouring countries
and the international community. It is for that reason that we call for a deliberate plan
for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration to be implemented concurrently
with the withdrawal of troops, mindful that a withdrawal without disarmament
is tantamount to expressly exporting destabilization into the exit destinations
within the region. Therefore, subject to a clear mandate, we support the 5+5 Joint
21-0136517/39

S/2021/97

Military Commission’s request for unarmed, non-uniformed individual international
monitors to be deployed under the auspices of the United Nations. In addition to
their deployment, their mandate should include monitoring and reporting of terrorist
activity, trends and threats.
In conclusion, I wish to underscore the imperative for strong cooperation
and coordination with the African Union throughout that process. We believe that
the breakdown in such coordination by the African Union was responsible for a
significant part of the suffering that the Libyan people have experienced. Going
forward, therefore, the voice and reasoning of Africa should be an important point
of reference for action.

18/39

21-01365

S/2021/97

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramirez
[Original: Spanish]
I thank Acting Special Representative Stephanie Williams for her detailed
briefing on the situation in Libya. I take this opportunity to acknowledge the quality
of her work during her time in charge of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) and wish her every success in her future endeavours. We welcome
the presence of the representative of Libya at this meeting.
Like other delegations, Mexico welcomes the agreement reached in the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum on the mechanism to form a transitional Government. We
welcome the decision to ensure that at least 30 per cent of the posts are occupied by
women. We hope that that proportion will continue to increase.
Despite the many unresolved challenges, the validity of the October ceasefire
agreement opens up spaces to continue working towards a negotiated solution to the
conflict. The reactivation of the oil sector and the unification of the exchange rate
are examples of concrete results of the agreements reached. They may be fragile, but
they are also decisive.
Mexico believes that the Security Council should fully support the
intra-Libyan process, while ensuring that progress at the negotiating table translates
into better living conditions for the population. In that regard, it is of concern that
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/62) points to deficiencies in basic services
for the population, in particular health services, amid the health crisis caused by
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We therefore call on all parties to the conflict
to ensure unrestricted access to humanitarian support and to comply with all their
obligations under international humanitarian law.
My country is concerned that some key aspects of the ceasefire agreement
have not been implemented within the agreed time frame. In particular, we call on
the parties to the conflict and their international partners to engage in a mature
dialogue so as to agree on a mechanism for the withdrawal of foreign fighters. Mexico
believes that actions aimed at strengthening the military capacity of the parties to
the conflict undermine the credibility and possibilities of the political process and
are an obstacle to peace. We therefore call for respect for the arms embargo imposed
by the Council itself. Mexico also supports the deployment of the flexible ceasefire
monitoring mechanism requested by the Libyan parties.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention to the difficult conditions faced
by migrants and refugees in Libya. We urge the relevant authorities to release those
who are arbitrarily detained and to guarantee them a safe haven so that they are duly
taken into account in the national efforts to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.
On gender issues, it is worrisome, as the Secretary-General’s report indicates, that
cases of sexual and gender-based violence are not reported for fear of reprisals or the
stigma involved. UNSMIL must be provided with the necessary resources to carry
out its mandate to monitor sexual violence in conflict and deploy women and child
protection advisers, in accordance with resolution 2542 (2020).
In conclusion, I believe that it is important to recall that the Libyan-led and
United Nations-facilitated political process must prioritize ending the suffering of
the victims of the conflict above all other interests. It is therefore incumbent on
the Security Council to support all initiatives that allow the Libyan people to have
access to better and fairer living conditions.
21-0136519/39

S/2021/97

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
I would like to begin by extending our sincere congratulations to Ms. Stephanie
Williams, who has successfully served as the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Libya. Her personal efforts and commitment have contributed
to the progress of the intra-Libyan dialogues. We welcome the recent appointment
of Mr. Ján Kubiš as the new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, and we wish
him every success in his new role. The progress we welcome today is also due to the
initiatives taken by Libya’s neighbours, including Tunisia. It is therefore imperative
that, in any search for a solution to the Libyan crisis, those countries be duly included,
along with the African Union and the League of Arab States.
Despite the current volatile situation in Libya, there are signs of hope. The
Niger notes with satisfaction the recent political developments, including the
approval, on 19 January, of a mechanism for the selection of future leaders. That will
now allow Libyans to choose a provisional Government to reunify the nation and its
institutions thanks to the national elections scheduled for 24 December, which we
hope will be free, democratic and transparent.
The process currently under way in Geneva should be an important milestone
in the Libyans’ quest for democracy, peace, security and justice — an ideal for
which they have made enormous sacrifices. In that regard, our collective support,
in particular that of the United Nations and other stakeholders, is crucial. The
international community’s assistance should go beyond the logistical aspects and
encompass all other dimensions in order to ensure the transparency and credibility
of the electoral process. That is the way to send the strong signal that the Libyans
are expecting.
On the security front, while significant progress has been made, particularly
with the signing of a ceasefire, we remain concerned about the presence of mercenaries
and other foreign fighters, some of whom may try to return with their war machinery
to the Sahel, which has already been weakened by this crisis since it began in 2011.
In line with the relevant Security Council resolutions and the conclusions of the
Berlin Conference on Libya, the arms embargo must be fully respected.
In their quest for peace, the Libyan parties, for which they should be
commended, have agreed on confidence-building measures, including the
resumption of commercial flights from eastern and southern airports to the capital,
the resumption of oil production and the opening of roads. In that context, the same
efforts should be made for the reunification of the Central Bank of Libya so that the
revenue from oil production can benefit the Libyan people.
We support the Secretary-General’s proposal to establish a ceasefire
monitoring component within the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, which
should be provided with the necessary resources to carry out that task.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, which has been exacerbated by the
rising number of coronavirus-disease cases, we are particularly concerned about
the fate of migrants held in overcrowded and unhealthy detention centres. While
we welcome the very positive role played by the International Organization for
Migration and by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
my country urgently demands the immediate release of refugees and asylum seekers
subject to arbitrary detention in Libyan prisons.
20/39

21-01365

S/2021/97

While we welcome the implementation of the European Union Naval Force
Mediterranean Operation IRINI, we are of the view that the Secretary-General
must review the policy of disembarkation on Libyan soil of migrants and refugees
intercepted at sea. In this regard, it is regrettable that the number of persons returned
since the Secretary-General’s previous report (S/2020/1309) has gone up, from 11,000
to 11,900. The volatility of this security situation and the vulnerability in which such
people find themselves once they have disembarked should compel us all to action.
For my country, particular importance must be attached to issues of justice
and accountability, which are essential components of any peace process. No effort
must be spared in documenting the serious human rights violations that took place in
Libya, including the troubling matter of disappeared persons, those responsible for
which, and their accomplices, must face justice.
In conclusion, following the 10 years of unspeakable chaos and suffering
endured by the Libyan people, it is high time we overcame our differences and
shouldered our responsibilities by focusing our efforts on the only objectives that
matter for Libya and its people today: reconciliation, peace, justice and prosperity.

21-0136521/39

S/2021/97

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
Norway joins the Security Council’s discussions at a time of hope for progress
towards a Libyan-owned political solution that can bring about peace and stability.
We would like to thank Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Williams for her impressive efforts. The United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) has played a decisive role in the achievements made. And, as this is her
last briefing, we wish her the best of luck in her new endeavours.
We are encouraged by the progress in the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum
(LPDF), building on the ceasefire agreement of 23 October 2020, which is still
holding. The recent agreement on a mechanism for selecting a unified executive
authority is an important step forward towards implementing the road map,
reunifying the Government and institutions of Libya and holding credible, inclusive
and democratic national elections on 24 December.
We commend the members of the LPDF for their constructive approach and
willingness to reach compromises across dividing lines. Furthermore, we urge all
Libyan parties to commit to the implementation of the road map and to respect the
outcome of the selection mechanism for a temporary executive authority. A peaceful
transfer of power to a new Government of national unity would be a significant step
towards long-awaited peace and stability for Libya. A lot of hard work remains to be
done, and we encourage all parties to act urgently and in good faith to finalize the
adoption of a unified and inclusive Government.
There are, however, many spoilers and unresolved questions. At this crucial
stage of intra-Libyan efforts, there should be no doubt about the Security Council’s
strong and clear support of the political process. Libyans themselves have made it
clear that they want change — they want peace. We as Council members should
therefore do our part to give them the support they need. We are encouraged by the
work in the 5+5 Joint Military Commission and its concrete progress in implementing
the ceasefire agreement.
Norway supports a role for UNSMIL in monitoring the ceasefire in Libya, as
laid out in the Secretary-General’s interim report of December (S/2020/1309). Such a
monitoring mechanism should be Libyan-led and Libyan-owned. We must seize this
opportunity and provide the support that the Libyan parties have asked for.
However, we remain concerned by the widespread foreign interference in
Libya, as well as the continuing breaches of the arms embargo. Those acting in
violation of the arms embargo should be held accountable. We also acknowledge
the important contributions of the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean
Operation IRINI in monitoring the embargo. We are disappointed by the lack of
respect for the provisions of the ceasefire agreement shown by some members of the
international community, in particular the unwillingness to ensure the departure of
all foreign fighters and mercenaries from Libya, as called for by the Libyans.
We value Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General Williams’s
focus on consulting civil-society representatives throughout the process. That has
resulted in the inclusion of key human-rights principles in the LPDF political road
map. We are especially pleased to see that 17 of the participants in the LPDF are
women. We are impressed by the constructive contributions, and the decisive role in
forging consensus, played by these women delegates to the LPDF. There is no better
proof that the full, equal and meaningful participation of women — at all levels — in
Libya is necessary to ensure lasting peace. This includes in all aspects of political
life, conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
22/39

21-01365

S/2021/97

We support the Secretary-General’s call for all Libyan actors to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. We also note and appreciate
that UNSMIL has established the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on
conflict-related sexual violence in Libya. Improving documentation is an important
contribution to ensuring accountability for violations and abuses of human rights
and international humanitarian law.
However, we remain concerned about ongoing violations and abuses of human
rights in Libya — for example, the large number of people in unlawful and arbitrary
detention. We urge UNSMIL to continue to work with Libyan national institutions to
strengthen the rule of law and accountability for human rights violations and abuses.
Let me highlight an issue related to the protection of civilians. The reported
situation in detention centres is worrisome, especially the detention of children and
the multiple allegations of sexual violence and abuse. The International Committee
of the Red Cross must be given access to these centres, and efforts made to prevent
disappearances and restore family links.
Let me conclude by again thanking Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Williams for her efforts. We congratulate Ján Kubiš on his
appointment as Special Envoy and Head of UNSMIL and look forward to working
closely with him going forward. He will have Norway’s full support.

21-0136523/39

S/2021/97

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
We thank Stephanie Williams for the information on the situation in Libya.
We consistently advocate a peaceful settlement of the Libyan crisis by political and
diplomatic means.
We are convinced that all international players who have influence on the
various Libyan forces should urge them towards constructive interaction seeking
compromise solutions to the compound problems. This is the approach we were
guided by when visited in Moscow in November 2020 by the President of the
House of Representatives of Libya, Aguila Saleh Issa, and in December 2020 by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Government of National Accord, Mohamed Siala.
We reaffirmed our position that the settlement process should be Libyan-owned and
Libyan-led, and our high-ranking guests fully supported this. This applies to the
political, military, economic and other tracks.
We welcome the fact that the period of armed confrontation gave way
to negotiations. At the same time, the situation remains fragile. The process of
implementing the terms of the agreement on the cessation of hostilities, signed in
Geneva on 23 October 2020, in the framework of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission,
is faltering. We call on all Libyan parties to show restraint and to uphold their
obligations.
In the interests of strengthening the dialogue, the military is pursuing
discussions of mutual confidence-building measures, including the civilian matters.
We welcome the steps taken to unblock air and road traffic between different regions
of the country. These decisions will help to normalize the lives of ordinary citizens
and provide humanitarian assistance.
We are following the progress in the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum (LPDF)
closely. We would like to reiterate that any steps in various areas of settlement should
not only be formally agreed upon, supported and approved by the Libyan parties, but
should incorporate the implementation of the principle of inclusiveness. Only this
principle can ensure the stability and effectiveness of the peace process. It is from
this point of view that we will evaluate the results of the work of the LPDF and the
5+5 Joint Military Commission.
Achievements on paper may look impressive, but the most important thing is
to organically integrate the plans that have been developed into the highly complex
reality on the ground in Libya. Taking into account the leading role of the United
Nations in international efforts to promote a Libyan settlement, we sincerely wish
success to the new Special Envoy, Ján Kubiš, who will need all of his rich diplomatic
experience. We believe that his main task will not be to achieve formal planning
or benchmarks, but to create an atmosphere of trust among the broadest range of
Libyan political forces, especially since some of them, including LPDF participants,
are critical of the current state of affairs. We believe there is a need to grant the
Special Envoy a certain “free hand”, especially since the post of the Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya has been empty for almost a year.
An important element in stabilizing the situation is dialogue on ensuring
the stable functioning of the oil sector, with the understanding that the country’s
natural resources belong to all its citizens. It is necessary to put things in order in the
financial and economic area, again guided by the principle of Libyan ownership of
24/39

21-01365

S/2021/97

financial resources, including those in “frozen” accounts. In this regard, we express
our concern at reports of Western, in particular European, companies enriching
themselves at the expense of Libya’s assets they are responsible for safeguarding.

21-0136525/39

S/2021/97

Annex XII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines to the United Nations, Halimah DeShong
At the outset, I thank Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Stephanie Williams for her leadership and tireless efforts in the intra-Libyan dialogue
process under the auspices of the United Nations. I also appreciate her briefing and
welcome the Permanent Representative of Libya.
Approximately a decade following the eruption of violence in Libya, the
country continues to face myriad challenges. Recent developments, however, provide
reasons to be optimistic, although cautiously so.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines notes that the truce in Libya continues to
hold following the signing of the ceasefire agreement in October 2020 and welcomes
the accompanying reduction in civilian casualties. It is critical that the parties
comply fully with that agreement.
We maintain that Libyan sovereignty and territorial integrity must be
respected. As such, Member States should strictly abide by their international
obligations, including adhering to the arms embargo under resolution 1970 (2011)
and subsequent resolutions on Libya.
Politically, we applaud the progress within the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum (LPDF), including the decision on the selection mechanism for the formation
of a new interim executive authority. The Libyan parties’ determination, spirit of
compromise and consensus on this mechanism epitomize the resolve required to
unite the country. Accordingly, we encourage stakeholders to finalize arrangements
within the LPDF in accordance with the political road map. We also emphasize the
significance of a Libyan-owned and Libyan-led dialogue and are hopeful for national
elections in December this year.
The participation of women and youth in the LPDF is positive and indicative
of the inclusivity required in political processes. We therefore implore Libyans to
continue along this path, mindful of the transformative roles of women and youth.
The socioeconomic and humanitarian situation remains worrisome. We
appreciate the lifting of the force majeure on oil facilities and urge the Libyan
authorities to address lingering economic shortcomings. We also support the efforts
within the Libyan Economic Dialogue process and the Economic Working Group of
the International Follow-up Committee to assist in this regard.
As highlighted in the Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2021/62), an
estimated 1.3 million Libyans require humanitarian assistance. The deaths and
difficulties facing millions, specifically those groups made most vulnerable, are
deeply disturbing. The coronavirus disease pandemic has further compounded an
already-troubling situation. We therefore call on the international community to
urgently respond to these difficulties through the Libyan humanitarian response plan.
Additionally, my delegation calls for full respect of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. There should be no impunity in Libya for the
atrocities committed over the years. We reiterate our support for the international
fact-finding mission to investigate atrocities and ensure accountability. In this
context, we call for an investigation into the mass graves in the city of Tarhunah.
We also share the Secretary-General’s perspective that unlawful detention
remains a driver of the Libyan conflict and urge the authorities to identify and close
all illegal detention facilities. Similarly, we acknowledge that Libya remains an
unsafe port for migrants and refugees and emphasize the need to ensure their safety.
26/39

21-01365

S/2021/97

The situation in Libya is complex, and the peace process delicate. The year
2021 will be pivotal. We encourage all stakeholders, especially key influential States,
to inspire ongoing negotiations and protect the peace process.
We reaffirm support for the constructive role of the African Union (AU) and
anticipate the convocation of the national reconciliation conference in accordance
with the road map adopted by the AU’s High-Level Committee on Libya. We also
reiterate our support for the efforts of the European Union, the League of Arab
States and neighbouring countries.
Finally, we remain committed in our support for the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and welcome the new leadership team, including Ján
Kubiš, Special Envoy; Raisedon Zenenga, UNSMIL Coordinator; and Georgette
Gagnon, Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator. We look forward to
working with them as we endeavour collectively to assist Libya in overcoming its
obstacles in pursuit of sustainable peace, stability and prosperity.

21-0136527/39

S/2021/97

Annex XIII
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Tunisia

to

the

[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, we would like to thank Ms. Stephanie Williams for her valuable
briefing and her exceptional and commendable efforts to advance a political
settlement in Libya.
I would also like once again to congratulate Mr. Ján Kubiš on his appointment
as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Libya. Tunisia stands ready to
support him in his new duties and is eager to continue facilitating the work of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and other United Nations and
international entities based in Tunisia and operating in Libya.
I welcome the report (see S/2020/1256) of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya. I wish India success
in presiding over the Committee, and I would like to express our appreciation for
the efforts made by Germany during its tenure as Chair of the Committee in 2019
and 2020.
Once more, my country hails the success of the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum, held in Tunisia in November 2020 under the auspices of UNSMIL. We
appreciate the important consensus that was reached and the progress made towards
arriving at a comprehensive political settlement in Libya, which enabled the parties to
develop a road map for resolving the crisis, reach an agreement on holding elections
on 24 December 2021 and define the powers and structure of the executive branch.
In that context, Tunisia stresses that it is important for all parties to commit
to organizing legislative and presidential elections on schedule in order to ensure
that the transition to permanent institutions in the country goes smoothly in an
environment governed by freedom, democracy and the rule of law. Tunisia urges all
the parties concerned — local, regional and international — to provide the necessary
support to the Libyan people in order to ensure that the national elections are a
success. In that regard, we appreciate the Government’s willingness to provide the
necessary support to the High National Electoral Commission so that it can make
adequate preparations for the elections.
Tunisia also expresses its satisfaction with the Libyan parties’ shared resolve
to continue working in the same positive spirit that characterized the rounds of
dialogue and consultation that took place following the Forum held in Tunisia, with
a view to fulfilling the aspirations of the Libyan people to end the crisis, restore
security and stability and achieve national reconciliation.
In that context, Tunisia welcomes the adoption of the selection mechanism
for the interim executive authority and expresses the hope that the issue will be
resolved successfully at the Political Dialogue Forum during the forthcoming round
of dialogue, which is set to be held in Geneva in early February 2021.
Tunisia applauds the progress made in the Working Groups of the International
Follow-up Committee on Libya that were established following the Berlin
Conference. It also emphasizes that all the tracks emanating from the Conference
should be coherent so as to create the conditions for the new phase to succeed and
avoid a reversal of the gains made in the political process.
Tunisia notes with satisfaction the commitment of the Libyan parties to the
ceasefire that was signed on 23 October in the context of the work of the 5+5 Joint
28/39

21-01365

S/2021/97

Military Commission. It urges all stakeholders to continue working to implement
all the provisions of the agreement, including the stipulation that all mercenaries
and foreign fighters shall leave Libyan territory. Tunisia welcomes the report
(S/2020/1309) of the Secretary-General on ceasefire monitoring measures in Libya
and looks forward to accelerated consultations to reach agreement on an effective
Libyan-led and Libyan-owned monitoring mechanism.
Tunisia once again calls on all parties to commit fully to complying with the
arms embargo on Libya and to refrain from interfering in the country’s internal
affairs. It is imperative that the Security Council support these various tracks.
Tunisia emphasizes the need to comply with international humanitarian law
and international human rights law in Libya. It calls for the situation of migrants and
refugees to be duly addressed and for enhanced accountability in order to ensure that
the grave violations and crimes committed in Libya do not go unpunished.
Tunisia also calls on all international stakeholders to support the efforts of
the Libyan authorities to address the repercussions of the coronavirus disease and to
ensure that humanitarian assistance is delivered to beneficiaries.
In conclusion, Tunisia renews its commitment to support the aspirations
of the Libyan people to establish democracy, security and stability and to rebuild
their country, and to continue to support United Nations and international efforts to
achieve a peaceful and lasting political settlement of the crisis in Libya.

21-0136529/39

S/2021/97

Annex XIV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, Jonathan Allen
Let me start by yet again thanking Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Stephanie Williams for her leadership of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). Stephanie, I want to thank her for your
dedication to the Libyan people and to achieving peace. And, through her, I want to
thank all of those working in UNSMIL.
Let me also take this opportunity to welcome the appointment of Ján Kubiš
as the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for Libya, and Raisedon Zenenga as
UNSMIL Coordinator. We are delighted that they will be bringing their formidable
experience and expertise to bear at this critical time for Libya, building on Ms.
Williams excellent work.
The United Kingdom welcomes the progress made by the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum in recent weeks, with the agreement on a selection mechanism for a
new interim executive authority being of particular importance. We urge the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum and all Libyans to make the most of this opportunity to
appoint a new unified, inclusive Government. I think we all recognize how crucial
this period is, and that we must give our full support to UNSMIL, making sure that
everything we do clearly contributes to Ms. Williams’, and then to Mr. Kubiš’, efforts
to help Libyans work together towards a new Government and successful national
elections on 24 December of this year. Ensuring that the High National Electoral
Commission receives the correct support to facilitate those elections should be a
priority for the interim executive.
I would like to underline the importance of the Libyan Joint Military
Commission’s work on the ceasefire and wider security issues. We support the
Commission’s 24 January statement reaffirming its commitment to the ceasefire
and again calling for the withdrawal of foreign fighters and mercenaries, noting with
disappointment that the 23 January deadline passed without any sign of progress.
Foreign military interference remains a blight on Libya and a brake on progress.
Let us be clear: there is no place for foreign fighters and mercenaries in Libya,
whether those working for the Russian Wagner Group, the thousands of fighters from
Syria or any other external actor infringing Libyan sovereignty, failing to implement
the 23 October ceasefire agreement and breaching the United Nations arms embargo.
It is crucial that all actors, Libyan and international, take all the necessary measures
to accelerate the implementation of the ceasefire, while prioritizing the opening of
the coastal road between Abu Grein and Sirte and the immediate repatriation of all
foreign fighters and mercenaries.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s interim report on United Nations-led
ceasefire monitoring (S/2020/1309) and support his proposal rapidly to deploy
an advance team to Tripoli, reflecting a clear appetite from the Joint Military
Commission. We look forward to hearing from the advance team on how UNSMIL’s
mandate might be amended to further support the implementation of the 23 October
ceasefire agreement.
We remain deeply concerned by the economic situation in Libya and noted the
Secretary-General’s sobering warning in his report that the “Libyan economy is at a
precipice” (S/2021/62, para. 44).

30/39

21-01365

S/2021/97

We welcome recent meetings by the Central Bank Board of Governors and the
ongoing talks on budget unification. Those are important steps to building united,
inclusive economic institutions that serve all of Libya’s people. But there is a long
way to go, and delivering a unified budget needs a unified Government. This is
urgent work, and we welcome UNSMIL’s commitment to driving it forward.
Libyans have taken important steps over the past few weeks and months towards
putting in place a new, unified transitional executive. They want to re-establish their
sovereignty and to choose their own future through successful national elections.
There are still many steps to go, but the direction in which Libyans wants to go is
clear. We, the international community and the United Nations, must do all we can
to support them on that path towards peace and security. We must live up to the
promises that we made one year ago at the Berlin Conference and that we endorsed
as a Council in resolution 2510 (2020).

21-0136531/39

S/2021/97

Annex XV
Statement by the Acting Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations, Richard Mills
I thank Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General Williams for
a very useful briefing.
So, where are we big-picture? The United States believes, as we just heard
in Acting Special Representative Williams’ briefing, that Libya faces a critical
turning point. A viable path to a unified Government, national elections and an
end to the conflict lies ahead of us. The Libyan parties themselves must now seize
the opportunity before them to select an interim national executive authority that
moves beyond the status quo and answers the Libyan people’s call for transparent
and effective governance.
Likewise, all external actors involved in the conflict, as we heard from
the colleagues who spoke before me, must cease their military intervention and
withdraw from Libya immediately, as the Libyan people themselves demanded in
their 23 October ceasefire announcement. The Security Council and the international
community must remain engaged to ensure that Libyans can proceed peacefully and
unhindered down a path towards national elections in December, so that they can
reclaim sovereign control over their entire country.
What happens next? Let me begin by commending, on behalf of the United
States Government, Acting Special Representative Williams for her extraordinary
leadership in guiding the United Nations political process over the past several
months and generating the momentum that we are witnessing today on all the
different tracks — political, economic and security. Her commitment and creativity
have consistently found a way around the obstacles on the path to peace and security.
We are also confident that her diligent work allows the incoming Special
Envoy for Libya, Ján Kubiš, to quickly step into his new role and continue the critical
progress that Ms. Williams began. The United States welcomes Mr. Kubiš, and
we offer him our full support. We also welcome the appointment of Mr. Raisedon
Zenenga as the Coordinator of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, of Ms.
Georgette Gagnon as Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator. We are
confident this team can provide firm and steady guidance for the process ahead.
The United States commends the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum for
adopting its Advisory Committee’s recommendation of a formula for selecting a new
executive authority. We now call on all parties to work with urgency and with good
faith through the Forum to establish a new unified Government, whose mandate
will be to implement national elections on 24 December this year, provide public
services and transparently manage and distribute Libya’s wealth to the benefit of
all its citizens. It is critical that the Libyan people and the international community
take all the necessary steps to prevent spoilers from standing in the way of the
political transition.
We believe that the Libyan nationwide ceasefire agreement that was signed in
October remains the foundation for sustainable progress on the security, political,
and economic tracks. The Libyans called for the removal of all foreign fighters and
mercenaries from Libya within three months of the signing of the agreement. That
period, as we have heard, expired last week, and the external actors who have militarily
intervened in the conflict have wholly, completely, ignored Libyan demands.
We call on all external parties, to include Russia, Turkey and the United
Arab Emirates, to respect Libyan sovereignty and immediately cease all military
intervention in Libya. Per the October ceasefire agreement, we call on Turkey and
32/39

21-01365

S/2021/97

Russia to immediately initiate the withdrawal of their forces from the country and
the removal of the foreign mercenaries and military proxies that they have recruited,
financed, deployed and supported in Libya.
The United States welcomes the Secretary-General’s 29 December report
(S/2020/1309) on the ceasefire monitoring arrangements, which we believe set out the
parameters for the United Nations to play a very facilitative role. The United States
urges the United Nations to identify all the necessary and appropriate means to fully
support the Joint Military Commission (JMC) efforts to safeguard the ceasefire and
coordinate with Security Council members as appropriate.
All parties to the conflict should fully back the JMC’s efforts to monitor and
verify compliance, as well as to implement further confidence-building measures,
starting with the reopening of the coastal road. We call on the Prime Minister and
the Libyan National Army (LNA) to take the steps necessary to reopen the road as
soon as possible.
The United States also calls attention to the culture of impunity that has
prolonged the conflict in Libya, which Acting Special Representative Williams just
eloquently described. The continued discoveries of mass grave sites in areas vacated
by the LNA has raised concerns of the extent of human rights abuses and violations
of international humanitarian law across Libya during the civil war. In order to
conduct independent investigations, the international Fact-Finding Mission to Libya
needs safe and unhindered access to all Libyan territory so that its members can visit
sites and speak freely and privately with anyone in Libya.
One year has passed since the Berlin Conference. The United States joined the
United Kingdom, France, Germany and Italy last week in a statement acknowledging
the anniversary as well as the progress we have made and the work still left to do.
We continue to call on members of the Security Council to adhere to their Berlin
process commitments and genuinely and actively support the United Nations political
process, the ceasefire’s implementation, accountability for human rights violations,
and the United Nations arms embargo.
The circumstances from one year ago have changed dramatically. After
beginning 2020 on a war footing, the Libyan parties ultimately sought opportunities
to chart progress in the political, security and economic negotiations, despite what
has been a year of unfulfilled commitments by some Berlin process members. We
enter 2021 with considerably more hopeful prospects than we did in 2020, but full
support for the United Nations process and the conclusions of the Berlin Conference
are essential for there to be successful national elections by the end of the year.
Let me end by saying that the United States believes that it is incumbent upon
all of us to use fully the tools that we have at our disposal to affect the change we
want — and need — to see in Libya. That includes giving our full support to the
United Nations sanctions regime, particularly to the arms embargo, and the Panel
of Experts.
As we have said many times before, an inclusive, negotiated political solution
is the only means to end the conflict, and validation of the United Nations political
process is the only viable platform to achieve peace and national reconciliation
in Libya.

21-0136533/39

S/2021/97

Annex XVI
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Pham Hai Anh
I thank Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for her insightful briefing. I also welcome Ambassador Taher
Elsonni, Permanent Representative of Libya, to this meeting.
The significant progress on the political, security and economic fronts in Libya
in recent months has created hope for long-term peace, stability and development in
the country after a decade-long conflict.
We welcome the historic agreement for a complete and permanent ceasefire
signed by the Libyan parties on 23 October 2020, as well as their agreement on
a road map leading to the holding of national elections on 24 December 2021.
We are also pleased to learn that the parties have decided to establish the Libyan
ceasefire monitoring mechanism and the selection mechanism for a new interim
executive authority.
We reiterate our consistent support for an inclusive Libyan-led and Libyanowned political process on the basis of respecting the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the country as the only viable solution for the crisis in Libya.
However, we note that the situation remains fragile. Many of the provisions in
the ceasefire agreement have not been fully implemented. Further concrete efforts
are very much needed to preserve the current momentum. In that regard, allow me to
highlight the three following points.
First, on the political front, we call on the Libyan parties to make further
progress on the formation of the Government of national unity to start the transitional
period leading to national elections and make all the necessary preparations for
them. It is important for the Libyan parties to put the country’s and people’s interests
first and demonstrate a spirit of mutual understanding and trust to overcome
the differences.
To that end, the collaboration among the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL), regional organizations, neighbouring countries and other
international partners will remain critical to foster dialogue and build confidence
among the Libyan parties. We recognize and commend the neighbouring countries,
particularly Tunisia, Morocco and Egypt, for their continued efforts in promoting
the peace talks. We also commend the work of the international follow-up committee
of the Berlin Conference on Libya in providing support for the three-track dialogues.
Secondly, on the security front, we urge the relevant parties to fully respect
and implement the provisions of the ceasefire agreement. That must also be in line
with the commitment to uphold the arms embargo in line with relevant Security
Council resolutions on Libya, in order to create a conducive environment for the
peace process in the country.
We reiterate our view that the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned ceasefire
monitoring mechanism should be objective, effective and efficient. It should be able
to ensure close cooperation between all relevant parties and verify the situation on
the ground in a timely manner. In that regard, we support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to enable UNSMIL’s support to the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned
ceasefire monitoring mechanism, in line with relevant Security Council resolutions
on Libya.

34/39

21-01365

S/2021/97

Thirdly, on the humanitarian front, Viet Nam urges all relevant parties to
continue to fully respect international humanitarian law and allow unhindered
humanitarian access to effectively combat the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Further attention and measures should also be taken to better protect vulnerable
groups, particularly women, children, migrants and refugees, from the negative
impact of both the conflict and the pandemic. We express our deepest condolences
to the families of the victims of the tragic incident off the coast of Libya on 21
January, which claimed the lives of 43 migrants. We call on all international partners
to continue to provide technical and financial support for Libya and countries in the
region in that regard.
We would also like to commend the tireless efforts of the United Nations Mine
Action Service in helping to address humanitarian challenges in Libya.
In conclusion, Viet Nam reaffirms our strong support for the pursuit of peace,
stability and development of Libya. We reiterate our full support for the work of
UNSMIL and our gratitude to Ms. Williams for her tireless efforts in promoting the
peace process in Libya in the past months, and look forward to actively supporting
Mr. Jan Kubiš, the new Special Envoy for Libya, beginning next month.

21-0136535/39

S/2021/97

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Libya to the
United Nations, Taher Elsonni
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you and Tunisia on your presidency
of the Security Council this month. We also welcome Kenya, India, Ireland, Mexico
and Norway to the Council.
I wish to thank Ms. Stephanie Williams for her briefing and for the work that
she and her team have done. I take this opportunity to welcome the appointments of
Mr. Ján Kubiš as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Raisedon Zenenga as
Mission Coordinator of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and
Georgette Gagnon as Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator. I wish
this team success in performing their mandated tasks in spite of all the challenges.
Here we are, welcoming the seventh United Nations envoy to Libya in 10
years. This number, if nothing else, indicates that the problem has nothing to do with
who the envoy is or his or her capabilities. Rather, the real problem is that harmful
international interference continues, that the Council remains divided and that Libya
is being used as an arena to settle scores by proxy. All that notwithstanding, we note
with optimism recent developments in the various dialogues, as it is dialogue, not
fighting or the clamour of guns, that will ultimately resolve the Libyan crisis.
In that regard, we are pleased that several States have changed their positions,
shown goodwill and reached out to all Libyans, instead of fuelling or supporting
the conflict. We would also like to thank the friendly and brotherly countries that
have proposed several initiatives to unite Libyans, particularly the neighbouring
countries of Tunisia, Algeria and Egypt, as well as Morocco before them, which
served as the incubator for the Libyan political agreement and which continues to
host many different meetings.
These efforts are consistent with our view that choosing peace is the only way
to resolve the crisis and build the civil democratic State to which Libyans aspire.
Aware of that objective, we welcomed the work of the Joint Military Commission
to establish a permanent ceasefire. However, ensuring that the agreement brokered
by the Commission is implemented hinges first and foremost on strengthening
and building confidence and demonstrating goodwill. Trust has been lost as a
result of the events in Tripoli and its environs, all international guarantees and
promises notwithstanding.
The demand that foreign forces, mercenaries and armed groups of all kinds
that are not under the control of the State should withdraw is an unequivocal,
sovereign national demand. They must also be disarmed in order to prevent them
from becoming a threat elsewhere, particularly in neighbouring countries and the
countries of the African Sahel. Therefore, the States that intervened and tried to
support a coup against a Government that you recognize are the first that must heed
this demand. Those States dragged us into proxy wars in which our youth have been,
and continue to be, used as fodder.
We are trying now to embark upon an important and definitive new phase
that requires the Security Council to be fully invested in supporting the ceasefire
agreement so that it is sustainable and based on a solid foundation. Acts of
provocation, such as building fortifications, digging trenches and planting mines,
must not continue. As the saying goes, “once bitten, twice shy”.

36/39

21-01365

S/2021/97

We reaffirm our support for the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum in Tunis and
for other dialogues and hope that they succeed. Despite the reservations of some,
what is important is that the voice of dialogue drown out the clamour of the guns.
All these dialogues must be complementary, not in conflict or competition with one
another They must facilitate comprehensive, viable and consensual political solutions,
and they must not be based on confrontation, exclusion and misrepresentation. In
addition, the mistakes of the past must be avoided.
Everyone knows that the Libyan crisis has nothing to do with changing and
rotating people. Libya is too great to be reduced to mechanisms for appointing people
to posts, voting percentages and virtual meetings. All the tracks that we have been
following for years, although important, are essentially fragile because we are still
lacking what continues to be the most important dialogue of all, namely, a dialogue
of national reconciliation, which would ensure the sustainability of any outcome and
facilitate the adoption of a permanent constitution for the country.
That raises the question: what guarantees are there that any new authority
will succeed, and how does the Skhirat dialogue differ from the Tunis dialogue?
Have the fundamental problems that hindered the Libyan Political Agreement and
the Government of National Accord been discussed?
The problem in Libya is neither power-sharing nor who holds office. The real
problem is that the wounds suffered in 2011 have not yet healed. That is why the
solution must begin from the ground up, by promoting social peace. In that regard,
we once again call on the African Union to sponsor the national reconciliation track
immediately and not to wait for permission to do so, because only Africa can play
that role, owing to its previous experiences and its familiarity with the situation in
Libya and its particular characteristics.
We call on the Security Council to send a clear signal to all that the priority
of any new authority is to implement the outcomes of the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum and the consensus welcomed by the Libyan people and the international
community to set next 24 December as Libyan Independence Day, as the date to hold
general, presidential and parliamentary elections simultaneously. The Libyan people
will thus be able to choose its leaders and representatives freely, and legacy political
bodies, division and the crisis of legitimacy will all end, allowing State institutions
to unite and make the transition to peace, stability and reconstruction.
Therefore, we ask that you commit to honouring the pronouncements that you
made today, the most significant of which is that the solution must be Libyan-owned
and Libyan-led, and that you prove your commitment by implementing what was
decided at the Political Forum. We ask that the Council adopt a resolution in which
it establishes the ceasefire, endorses the political process, holds the obstructionists
accountable, supports the holding of elections on the specified date and gives the
United Nations a mandate to support the entire electoral process in order to ensure
transparency and integrity and guarantee that the results are respected, that all
Libyans at home and abroad, including the displaced, are able to participate freely
and that those who seek to spoil the national elections are held accountable.
Adopting such a resolution will attest to the goodwill of the international
community, atone for past mistakes, restore some confidence and answer the question
on many Libyans’ minds, namely, are they really serious about holding the elections
on schedule? Despite the conflict and the controversy over the establishment of a
new authority, we must not forget that the deadline is only a few months away.
We therefore ask Special Envoy Kubiš to make this popular demand a top
priority when he takes up his post early next month, because there is no more time
to waste. We also ask UNSMIL to correct the timetable for the previously agreed
21-0136537/39

S/2021/97

road map at the upcoming Forum in Geneva. According to the timetable, the term of
the new authority is 18 months, but that does not square with the number of months
remaining in this year. In addition, we demand that the candidates pledge in writing
to hold the elections on 24 December, the appointed date.
We all know that elections alone will not resolve the Libyan crisis. The
proliferation of weapons and armed groups and foreign interventions are some of
the major obstacles to stability. Nonetheless, elections are a start, as well as the
best way to lay the foundations of the democratic process and restore legitimacy to
the people, so that these and other challenges can be met. We therefore call on the
Legal Committee of the Political Dialogue Forum and the Constitutional Committee
formed by the House of Representatives and the High Council of State to work
together and urgently perform their mandated duty of establishing the constitutional
basis for the holding of elections and of putting in place the necessary electoral laws
so as to reach agreement on them without delay.
When we speak of harmony and reconciliation, we must always remember the
question of human rights and the war crimes that have been committed throughout
Libya. You have listened to and read many reports that clearly indicate the scale
of the violations perpetrated against civilians, foremost among which are the mass
killings and the graves discovered in Tarhunahh to date. Just days ago, the bodies
of entire families, men and women, were identified. They had been restrained and
tortured, and some of them had been buried alive, only because they or their relatives
had refused to participate in the attack on Tripoli.
Tell me, what will you say to 12-year-old Walid, whose father and six uncles
were kidnapped and killed, their bodies identified days ago? What are you going to
say to the Harudah family, three sisters of which were killed in retaliation against
the men of the family? They killed Layla, Rima and Hawa, and many others besides
them. For God’s sake, how can we ask the families of those victims and others to
respond to calls for dialogue and reconciliation when they see no practical steps
being taken to seek justice?
Several fact-finding commissions, dispatched either by the International
Criminal Court or by human rights organizations, have documented what happened
and know who committed these crime and who gave the orders to commit them. In
spite of all that, the Council remains incapable of even condemning the perpetrators
directly, and still there are those who are asking for more evidence.
But I assure you that the statute of limitations will not expire on these crimes,
and we will not wait for your justice. Sooner or later, the national judiciary will
attend to them. This is only another test of how serious you are about upholding the
human rights principles about which we are bombarded with slogans.
The way to recover from wounds and establish peace is to reveal the truth
and hold perpetrators accountable. There can be no peace without justice, no peace
without justice.
On another equally important subject, we are indignant about the state of
Libyan funds and assets frozen pursuant to Security Council resolutions 10 years
ago. We are indignant because the wealth of Libyans has been eroded, contrary
to the claims made in those resolutions that the freeze is intended to preserve that
wealth. We have repeatedly provided evidence of these successive losses, whether
documented in our national reports or in impartial international reports. Each time,
we are given excuse after excuse to prevent us from managing that wealth.
We will therefore submit a specific request in the coming days to expedite
adjustments to the sanctions regime in order to prevent the continued erosion of those
38/39

21-01365

S/2021/97

funds and to address the damage done, as well as to enable the Libyan Investment
Authority to manage funds and assets without lifting the freeze now.
We hope to rectify this matter immediately, and we believe that the silence
regarding this issue only makes sense when one considers how eager certain
countries and financial institutions are to politicize it, take advantage of the situation
and plunder the wealth of Libyans. In that context, we will not stand idly by while
certain countries attempt to tamper with those funds, as was the case recently when
some Belgian Government institutions tried to seize €14 billion of Libyan sovereign
funds and lay claim to nearly $50 million in compensation for Government cases.
Therefore, we hold the Council responsible for taking a firm stand against this
serious violation, if indeed it cares about protecting Libyans’ assets. We also stress
that if this state of affairs continues, and if our request to manage our frozen assets
is blocked, we will be forced to refer the matter to the International Court of Justice
in order to seek redress for this unjust situation, and we will demand that the Libyan
people be compensated for these losses.
In conclusion, we call on all Libyans to work together to ensure that the peace
process succeeds, turn the page on the past and forswear violence, conflict and
hateful rhetoric. Together let us overcome this crisis and take pride in our history and
our cultural, social and geographical diversity. Let us put aside talk of east, west and
south, and let us not establish a custom, lest it become a belief, one that our forebears
already overcame. Do not give foreigners the opportunity to divide us, fragment us
and create chaos among us, for that is what they aim to do as they attempt to control,
exploit and plunder our land.
And to the countries that are lying in wait for us, I say to you what our recently
deceased Libyan poet Abdulmawla al-Baghdadi said:
“He who sows thorns, thorns shall he reap, and he shall choke on the fruits of
his harvest. God and history shall reveal who the traitors are, who the lamb is
and who is the wolf preying upon it”.

21-0136539/39
