A/RES/70/57

United Nations

Distr.: General
11 December 2015

General Assembly
Seventieth session
Agenda item 97 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 7 December 2015
[on the report of the First Committee (A/70/460)]

70/57.

Universal Declaration on the Achievement of a NuclearWeapon-Free World

The General Assembly,
Recalling its longstanding support for the total elimination of all nuclear
weapons,
Recognizing the need to achieve a world without nuclear weapons,
Emphasizing, in this regard, the fundamental role of the agreement on the
Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly of 30 June
1978, 1 in which it is stated, inter alia, that “effective measures of nuclear
disarmament and the prevention of nuclear war have the highest priority”,
Emphasizing also the crucial role of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons2 in achieving nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation,
and recalling in particular the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon
States to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals, leading to
nuclear disarmament, in accordance with commitments made under article VI of the
Treaty, agreed to at the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and reaffirmed by the 2010 Review
Conference,
Bearing in mind the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on
the legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons, issued on 8 July 1996,3 in which
the Court concluded unanimously that there exists an obligation to pursue in good
faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its
aspects under strict and effective international control,
Acknowledging the significant contribution made towards realizing the
objectives of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, pending the total
elimination of nuclear weapons, through the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free

_______________
1

Resolution S-10/2.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
3
A/51/218, annex.
2

15-16811 (E)

*1516811*

Please recycle

A/RES/70/57

Universal Declaration on the Achievement of a Nuclear-Weapon-Free World

zones, although they are not an end in themselves, and reaffirming the political
decision of 115 States parties to the treaties that establish nuclear-weapon-free
zones and Mongolia to reject nuclear weapons,
Recalling the relevant principles and agreements of international humanitarian
law and the laws of war, and noting the expression of deep concern by the 2010
Review Conference at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of
nuclear weapons,4
1.
Adopts the Universal Declaration on the Achievement of a NuclearWeapon-Free World annexed to the present resolution;
2.
Invites States, agencies and organizations of the United Nations system
and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to disseminate the
Declaration and to promote its implementation;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-third session a report on the implementation of the Declaration;
4.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session,
under the item entitled “General and complete disarmament”, a sub-item entitled
“Universal Declaration on the Achievement of a Nuclear-Weapon-Free World”.
67th plenary meeting
7 December 2015

Annex
Universal Declaration on the Achievement of a Nuclear-WeaponFree World
1.
We, the States Members of the United Nations, declare our shared
commitment to the goal of achieving a nuclear-weapon-free world.
2.
We reiterate our grave concern at the danger to humanity posed by the
existence of nuclear weapons, and reaffirm that their total elimination remains the
only absolute guarantee against their use or threat of use.
3.
We call upon all States to promote an atmosphere of confidence and trust
to further comprehensive, sustainable international security and stability so as to
contribute to a nuclear-weapon-free world.
4.
We reaffirm that any use of nuclear weapons will be in contravention of
the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations and will be a violation of international
law, in particular international humanitarian law, and also reiterate that nuclear
weapons pose a serious threat to the very survival of humankind.
5.
We emphasize the need to ensure that national policies and practices are
consistent with the goal of achieving a nuclear-weapon-free world.
6.
We reiterate our deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian
consequences of any use of nuclear weapons, and in this context call upon all States
at all times to comply with applicable international law, including international
humanitarian law.
_______________
4
See 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Final Document, vol. I (NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)), part I, Conclusions and recommendations for
follow-on actions.

2/4

Universal Declaration on the Achievement of a Nuclear-Weapon-Free World

A/RES/70/57

7.
We reiterate our concern at the human and economic resources that
continue to be dedicated to the development, maintenance and modernization of
nuclear weapons, and stress the need to invest those resources in strengthening
peace and security and sustainable development and lifting the lives of millions of
people out of poverty.
8.
We reaffirm the central role of the United Nations in the field of
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control processes.
9.
We reaffirm multilateralism as the core principle in negotiations in the
area of disarmament and non-proliferation and recognize the urgent need to achieve
progress towards multilateral negotiations on nuclear disarmament, in particular to
enable the Conference on Disarmament to perform its mandate as set out in the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly of 30 June 1978.5
10. We reaffirm that nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are
mutually reinforcing processes.
11. We stress the need for effective measures of nuclear disarmament, which
have the highest priority, and call upon all nuclear-weapon-possessing States to
eliminate all types of their nuclear weapons and in the meantime diminish the role
of nuclear weapons in security policies and avoid activities that hamper the
achievement of a world free of nuclear weapons.
12. We reiterate that each article of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons 6 is binding on its States parties at all times and in all
circumstances and call upon the nuclear-weapon States to implement their
obligations under the Treaty and commitments made at the 1995, 2000 and 2010
Review Conferences.
13. We reaffirm our determination to implement nuclear disarmament
commitments and obligations and to advance additional measures to strengthen the
rule of law in disarmament, including the negotiation and adoption of a global,
non-discriminatory, multilateral, legally binding instrument for the total elimination
of nuclear weapons.
14. We recognize that achieving a nuclear-weapon-free world will be
realized through a phased process that should have an agreed timeline.
15. We call upon all States to take further practical steps leading to nuclear
disarmament in accordance with the principles contained in the Final Document of
the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly of 30 June 1978.
16. We reaffirm that disarmament measures concerning nuclear weapons
should satisfy multilaterally agreed criteria of strict verification, irreversibility and
transparency and be undertaken through legally binding commitments to achieve the
total elimination of all nuclear weapons.
17. We encourage all States concerned to establish further nuclear-weaponfree zones in accordance with the Disarmament Commission guidelines of 1999, 7
and strongly call for the full and speedy implementation of the General Assembly
resolutions on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East.
_______________
5

Resolution S-10/2.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
7
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/54/42),
annex I, sect. C.
6

3/4

A/RES/70/57

Universal Declaration on the Achievement of a Nuclear-Weapon-Free World

18. We commend the contributions made thus far, and call upon all States,
the United Nations system, regional organizations, parliamentarians, civil society,
academia, the mass media and individuals to take further actions aimed at achieving
a nuclear-weapon-free world, inter alia, through promoting the International Day for
the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons.
19. We encourage all States, the United Nations system, intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations and civil society to promote disarmament and
non-proliferation education aimed at achieving a nuclear-weapon-free world.

4/4
