IJNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

25701”

MEETING:

NEW

7 MARCH

1985

YORK

CONTENTS

Page
Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2570)
of the agenda

.. .. ... ... .. . ... ... .. ... .. .. ... .. .. ..

I

*,.....,.......,..**.......,,....**...*.*....*..

The situation in the Middle
Letter dated 25 February
to the United Nations

I

East:
1985 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
addressed to the President of the Security Council

(S/16983) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

S/I’V.2570

I

NOTE
Symbols
with ligures.
document.

of United
Mention

Nations
of such

documents
a symbol

are composed
of capital
letters combined
indicates
a reference
to a United
Nations

Documents
of the !%curity
Council
(symbol
S/ . . . ) are normally
published
in
quarterly
Supplements
of the Official
Records of the Security
Council. The date of the
document
indicates
the supplement
in which it appears or in which information
about
it is pivcn.
‘l’hc resolutions
of the Security
Council,
numbered
in accordance
with a system
;al~~pted in 1964. are published
in yearly
volumes
of Resolutions
and Decisions
of the
.Smrrit.r
Council.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively
IO resolutions
;xlop~ctl
hckre
I January
1965. became
fully operative
on that date. ,

2570tb MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
Pres&&nr Mr. Blake RABETAFIKA

(Madagascar).

without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule37 of the provisional rules
of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France.
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland. United States of America.

1. Adoption

At the invitation of lk President, Mr. Djoudi(Algeria), Mr.
Wasiuo& (Ban&&sh),
Mr. Oramas Oliv@ (Cuba), Mr. AC
Al@ (DemoCrarrc Yemen), Mr. Ott (German Democratic
Rep&&
Mr. Rq/ait+Khorassani (Istamic Republic of Iran),
Mr. Salah (Jo&n), Mr. Al-Shaali (United .irab Emirates),
Mr. Le Kim Ch3mg (Viet Nam) and Mt. Golob (Yugoslavia)
took tk phzces reserved for rkm at tk side of rk Council
chamber.

of the agenda

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 25 February 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16983)
Tk meeling was cal&d to or&r

7 March 1985, at 3 pm.

3. The PRESIDENT (inreqwetation from French): Members of the Council have before them document S/l7ooO,
which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by
Lebanon. I should also like todraw theattention ofCouncil
members to the following documents: S/169!Ut and
S/16997, which contain the texts of two letters dated 26
February 1985 and 4 March, respectively, addressed to the
Secretary-General
by the representative of Lebanon;
S/17007, containing the text of a letter dated 6 March
addressed to the Secretary-General by the representative of
Ismel; and S/17008, containing the text of a letter dated
6 March addressed to the !Iecretary-General by the reprosentative of India.

at 4.k p.m

Tk agenda was &pted

4. The first speaker is the representative of Lebanon, upon
whom I now call.

I. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation front Frerwh): In
accordance with decisions taken by the Council at its
2568th meeting. I invite the representative of Lebanon to
take a place at the Council taMe: I invite the representatives of Israel, Qatar and the Syrian Arab Republic to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

5. Mr. FAKHOURY
(Lebanon) (Inrrrprerrrlin
from
Arub&) Since theCouncil held its first meeting on 28 February last lo consider the complaint submitted by Lebanon
against Israel [2%8th IIIcollng, there has been, as we
expected, such inhuman escalation of Imel’s practices and
policies that maasaacs have been committed in holy places.
as indicated in my letter dated 4 March lo the SecretaryGeneral [S/16997). The Israeli occupying authorities have
launched a major R;ilitary operation involving almost 800
sddiers and over 50 armoured vehiclattanks,
personnel
carriers. bulldozers-and
surrounded and stormed the viilage of Ma’rakah, locatal sooth of the Litani River, where
the French unit of the United Nations Interim Force in

AI Ik WiIOlhm of Ik P&&I,
Mr. F&hotoy (L&i+
noor) :twk o phzce at tk Coundl rabk Mr. Netanyahu
(lsr&
Air. AbKawari (Qaur) cad Mr. E&Fattal (Syrian
Arab hywblk) wok rk pbwes reserved$~ tkm at tk st&
qf tk Cowcil ckmkr.

2. Tbc PRESIDENT
(interprets/ion jiwn Fren&
I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
ah/m nf AImAm Rnnoln
~~4umh!C!kE-=dah*
cuba* Democrralic ~----;,*;~-~~&--l;e

I rhmum
-_-_..-

\ ia Anhum
..\--tl INIF.__ _-,.-L-T--,--‘-

fhwino
-- . ..~ &QI
-_.-. -tinn
-r _.__._..,---

I#

citizens were arrested and, after interrogation, I7 of them
were taken to an unknown destination. The Israeli forces
also destro!cd fir houses and one vchick. The operation
lasted for 24 hours, during which searches were carried out
in and attempt to find weapons and explosives. and those
searches were carried out by the Israeli authorities with all
the rigour to which we have become accustomed.

Republic. the Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, the United
Arab Emirates, Viet Nam and Yugmlavia in which they
request to be invited lo participate in the discus&n of the
item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose. with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,
1

6. Before leaving the village, the Israeli forces placed
explosives in the Husseynieh Mosque and detonated them
on 4 March, when about 200 people were inside. That
explosion killed 16 people, including a small boy, and
wounded 100, some of whom are in critical condition.
After that explosion, the Israeli forces prevented ambulances and other lust-aid vehicles from entering the village
and surrounded the hospital of Jebel Aamel in the city of
Tyre, which is the closest to Ma’rakah, and lired into the
air for intimidation. When the French forces tried to give
humanitarian aid by transferring the wounded to hospital,
the Israeli forces forced their way into the hospital and
struck doctors, nurses and patients.

Press correspondent, on the pretext that they had already
forbidden journalists in Lebanon to enter occupied areas.
12. What remains of human rights if people are not
allowed to go to holy places, if people are not allowed to
go to hospitals to receive care? What remains of freedom
of the press and freedom of opinion if they are subjected to
controls and if journalists are arrested?
13. The Council con no longer fail to discharge its
responsibilities and to do justice to the Lebanese demands
contained in the draft resolution we submitted the day
before yesterday [S/17&M]. If the Council does not condemn the massacres in holy places and places of worship, if
it does not condemn arbitrary and inhuman practices like
killing, arrest, deportation and destruction, what then
should it condemn?

7. We hold Israel and its occupying forces responsible for
this massacre. It is a direct responsibility which they cannot shirk, as the representative of Israel has tried to do in
document S/I7007 of 6 March. It is hard to believe that
these forces, in carrying out 24hour searches for weapons
and after having discovered. as they claimed, an arsenal
that would be big enough to supply an entire military unit,
did not find one large explosive such as that which destroyed Husseynieh Mosque. They even searched children’s
beds. Indeed. a baby had its two legs broken while sleeping
in its bed when a soldier hit his crib with a rifle. The
responsibility they hear is all the more serious since the
explosion and the ensuing massacre were aimed at a holy
place. This is a IIagrant violation of the most elementary
standards of international morality and of international
law and instruments.

14. Each member of the Council has an obligation to the
people of the world and to history. The Government and
the people of Lebanon want the Council to adopt a draft
resolution in keeping with its responsibilities and to follow
the example of the non-aligned countries, which have fully
and unhesitantingly supported our claims.
15. The PRESIDENT (interpretution
from French):The
next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
16. Mr. DJOUDI (Algeria) (interpretdonfrom French):
First of all. Sir, allow me on behalf of the Algerian delegation to express to you warmest congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month
of March. We are particularly pleased to see you presiding
over the work of the Council because you represent a
country, Madagascar. which has always distinguished itself
by its unswerving support of just causes throughout the
world. It is a countrv with which mine has narticularly
close relations that ar;! all the stronger becat& we belong
to the same continent. Africa. and to the same political
movement, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
Your great competence, your knowledge of international
affairs, your wisdom and your long experience guarantee
that the Council will move in an enlightened direction.

8. In condemning this atrocious crime and massacre,
which is one more in a long list of Israeli massacres, Lebanon once again asks the Council to condemn these actions
and practices and to take effective steps to put an immediate end to them. Once again Israel has shown that it does
not respect holy places and their inviolability, and once
again it has proved that it scorns the resolutions of the
Council and the presence of UNIFIL in Lebanon, which is
the tangible expression of those resolutions.
9. At 6 p.m. on 5 March. an Israeli armoured unit consisting of three tanks and other vehicles entered the village
of Sila. where the Ghanaian UNIFIL contingent was
located. The force assembled the inhabitants-men,
women and children-in
the village school, interrogated
them, searched their homes, arrested three persons and
killed one citizen. Another unidentified body was found in
the same area a little later.

17. I should like to take this opportunity to extend the
congratulations of the Algerian delegation to your predecessor, the representative of India, Mr. Krishnan. who last
month conducted the work of the Council with skill and
knowledge that earned him everyone’s respect and
admiration.

IO. Yesterday again, news was confirmed by the UNIFIL
spokesman that Israeli forces invaded the village of
Rediyas, east of the town of Tyre, and searched houses,
interrogated the inhabitants and detained 30 persons in a
road block they .ut up near this town on the road between
Tyre and Tayr Dibbah.

18. Rarely six months have passed since the last meeting
of the Council on this subject [25sbrh meeting],and now
the Council must once again deal with the same problem:
an aggravation oi the situation in I&anon due to an escalation of Israeli violence.

I I. The Israeli forces at the same time used tank guns.
mortars and heavy automatic weapons against a unit of the
Lebanese army in the town of Arzai to the north of the
Litani. a region which had been vacated by Israeli forces a
few weeks ago. Israeli forces arrested five foreign journalists
and two Lebanese journalists. including the Associated

19. Once again the victim and the aggressor are well
known; once again the Council must face up to its responsibility; once again it is called upon to act in accordance
with its mandate under the Charter of the United Nations.
2

20. The rcprusentative of Lebanon, who spoke in the
Council last week [2568&meeting] and has today adorcssed
it again, has described to the Council the untold hardship
afflicting his people in the south of the country since the
Israeli invasion and in particular since the Zionist f&ccs
announced their redeployment plan.

grave .concern over the lsracli military operations and to
demand that Israel put an end to those operations; to
condemn lsracl and denounce its acts, which are contrary
to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and international conventions. in particular the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War, of I2 August 1949,’ to reaflirm the importance of
implementation of its resolutions, beginning with resolution 425 (1978) and 426 (1978). as well as its subsequent
resolutions, in particular resolution 508 (1982) and SO9
(1982); to reaftirm the provisions of the fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 and their applicability to the territe
ries occupied by Israel in southern Lebanon and the obligation of the occupying Power to respect it and to aliirm
respect for Lebanon’s sov reignty. independence and
integrity. Those are legitimate requests. in view of the
necessary restoration of ali the sovereign rights of an independent State.

21. In occupied southern Lebanon, horror has become a
daily reality. Every day brings with it a toll of dead,
wounded and deported. Every day there are frightening
images of killing and/or destruction. Every day peaceful
villages are attacked and besieged, houses searched, plundered or destroyed, the inhabitants-men.
women, old
persons and children-mistreated,
tortured, arrested or
summarily killed.
22. Barely had one meeting of the Council ended on this
subject when the Zionist occupying troops-knowing
it
could do so with impunity-raided
the small village of
Maarakah. sowing death and destruction, brutally opposing the soldiers of UNIFIL. who were literally threatened
and prevented from helping the wounded, and forbidding,
for very good reasons. the presence of journalists.

29. For its part, Algeria has never withheld its support
for the Lebanese Government and people in their hardships during these many years. We fully support these
claims, and we wish to express here all our admiration and
respect for the heroic resistance of the Lebanese people,
who, like the Palestinian people, have given the Israeli
occupier unforgettable lessons in courage and bravery.

23. Two days later, a new stage in the escalation of provocation was reached: the Mosque of Maarakah was blown
up at the very time when inside it women, children and old
people were receiving food after days of going without
food as a result of the invasion. Fourteen were killed, and
about 100 were wounded. That is the terrible toll of the
massacre, which nothing could justify and which only illustrates, if that were necessary, the savagery of the Zionists.
That is the iron fist of which, with their customary arrogance, the aggressors themselves often boast.

30. Algeria here and now also reaftlrms its tirm attachment to Lebanon’s independence. sovereignty, national
unity and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized boundaries.
31. Lebanon’s full authority over its entire territory must
be restored, which in turn requires the total. immediate
and unconditional withdrawal of Israeli forces to the internationally recognized boundaries of Lebanon, in keeping
with Council resolution 509 (1982).

24. This is undoubtedly a new challenge to the authority
of the Council and, beyond the Council, to the whole
international community.

32. The daily plight of the Lebanese people, who have
been subjected to foreign occupation for many painful
years now, could have become insufferably and tragically
banal if the occupier, by the very nature of its policy and
the ferocious means by which it puts that policy into effect.
had not been bent on exceeding ever more each day the
limits of the intolerable. Israel, through the shedding of
blood and the force of its weapons, was able to occupy
some territory lbr a time. but it could not, either by sword
or by fire, subjugate the people of th t territory. Hence. it
was recently obliged IO abandon that territory, which it
was never able to subject to its will. That failure is the
lesson to be drawn from this exemplary struggle which the
Lebanese have waged for themselves and for us all. .4s it
withdraws. the occupier attempts to exorcise this failure by
large-scale, deadly reprisals carried out blindly.

25. This is a tragic and revolting situation to which Israel
has added an astonishing dimension with its boldness and
its lack of decency: as it announces the withdrawal of its
occupying troops, it also tries to regain the support of
world public opinion by claiming that this decision to withdraw is an act of goodwill for which the international
community should be grateful to it. But the massacre of
Lebanese people shows that the occupier may be prepared
to leave in defeat just as it entered as an invader: over the
bodies of the anonymous heroes of an indomitable
resistance.
26. It is therefore to be hoped that the Council will take a
clear approach to the situation and decide on appropriate
means to deal with the aggressor and, fmally, to put an end
to its undertaking.

3.
%JS, the i&anese. who have endured mdescnbable
suffering, who have lost their property, who have undergone untold hardship in attempting to practise their religions, wlio hate been the victims of one of the most
aggressive mechanisms of oppression in modern times, are
agal.. rr;itncssing horror pushed to the extreme limit. This
is the horror we feel at !he assassination of women, old
people and children and the destruction-with
the same

27. The Council, the primary body having the formidable responsibility for the maintenance of peace. is once
again called upon to act because of the seriousness of
events in southern Lebanon.
28, The representative of k%IInOn
has demanded that
the Council ensure justice. He has asked it to express its
3

inhuman insensibility-of
houses and places of worship. It
is horror exercised against large numbers of people, in the
shadow of international paralysis. It is horror which moral
condemnation alone cannot affect. It is. finally, horror
which should evoke. without any delay, a vigorous reaction by the international community, and particularly
those among it on whom membership of this organ
confers primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.
34. The ~‘rightful logic of Israeli expansionism, inspired
I-I) ;ui uuhritllcd &sire tar power, has taken concrete form,
wc’c II\ ;Ippilrance in the Middle East region, in an appeIIIC 101 torritort
that has been nourished by the heady
knowlcdgc ol’ the many fairs uccompks carried out with
Impunity. It is this impunity, as well as the blocking of all
political d&ions
within the United Nations, that has
undcrmincd the very credibility of the Organization. and
particularly of the Council.

has been done under various pretexts which are unjustitiahle. More than six months have passed since the Council
considcrcd lsracli practices in occupied southern I.cbanon.
Six month\ is il long time iii&cd for the pL’ol~Ic under lhe
yoke of loreign occupation.
41. Numerous written complaints by Lebanon have been
distributed as ofticial documents of the General Atiemhly
and the Security
Council.
l’hc Government of Lebanon
has provided in these letters a detailed and tragic chronicle
of violations of clemcntary human rights and of inhuman
practices against civilians, including the siege of villages
and towns. acts of oppression. killing. detention, breed
exile, demohtion of house% and schools, humiliation ol
inhabitants, and kidnappings.
42. There is no justification for these practices, which
were reported by the representative of Lebanon in his letters of 21.25 and 26 February and 4 March [S//6974and
A&l,
s/16990, annex, and s/I6994 and again today at
this meeting of the Council.

35. Israel of course exploits this paralysis in order to
pursue the aims of its lust for power, which seems to incite
it to ever greater massacres, because of its failute to break
the Lebanese people’s national will of resistance. Indeed,
at Israel’s instigation, all the elements forecasting the direct
events are making their voices loudly and openly heard.
That is a situation which the Council cannot but view with
the greatest concern. it is politically its responsibility to
decide on measures to be taken, with the greatest urgency,
to prevent the irreparable from happening,

43. In June 1982, the Council unanimously adopted a
resolution demanding that Israel withdraw forthwith and
unconditionally to the internationally recognized boundaries of Lebanon [resolution 509 (1982)]. This resolution and
others adopted since June 1982 on the issue of the Israeli
occupation of Lebanon are, inter alia. ample proof that the
international community refuses to reconcile itself and to
become used to the use of force and to the policy of occupation and aggression.

36.

Morally, it has no other choice, for yesterday’sevents
Subra and Shatila seem to have made the world suddenly discover with stupefaction and fright that, through
the dimensions of this massacre, the insane advocates of a
genocidal plan had brutally revealed the barbarism that we
had thought for ever banished from an international arena
where peace and security could decidedly never accept the
sucrilice of a pcoplc. of any people.
iIt

44. In our view, the occupation does not bestow any
rights upon the occupier, but rather the occupier has a sole
duty: to withdraw immediately and unconditionally from
the territory of another sovereign State. Any other
approach undermines the basis of international peace and
security as envisaged in the Charter of the United Nations.
45. Let me recall here that this and other general
approaches apply to the situation in Lebanon as well. One
is that there can be no justification for any act which in any
way limits or threatens the territorial integrity. independence and sovereignty of another State. Another is that it
is .not for a neighbour to judge whether or not a Government has under control the situation in a country and to
use that as an excuse for intervention. Furthermore, no
country can strengthen its security by using force against
another or by occupying foreign territory. And. linally, no
matter what an aggressor or occupier claims, r&stance to
occupation and aggression is legitimate and justiticd.

37. The PRESIDENT (inrprpre/a~kmfiom
Frenchk The
next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. 1 invite
him IO take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
38. Mr. GOLOB (Yugoslavia): At the outnet. I should
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your accession to the
presidency of the Council for the month of March. We
have full confidence in you, the distinguished representative of non-aligned Madagascar, and we are familiar with
your experience, wisdom and dedication to peace, reflected
so fully in the policies of your country.

46. The peoples of Yugoslavia remember well the occupation of their IanJ and the war they waged against the
i-:-.--.
--A
-c .I..oia.g~Kts. ii ts LuGi”* cjf tii OVii nmtw~
a8464 VI wc
future of all peoples that we are giving full and undivided
support for the peoples fighting against aggressors.

39. I should like IO congratulate also Mr. Krishnan. rep
resentative of India. on the knowledge and patience he
showed in guiding the work of the Council during the
month of February. His performance was in the best tradition ol’ non-aligned India and in the best spirit of the policy
of non-alignment
and of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
of which
India is Chairman.
40.

47,
WC of Yugoslavia
share
the demands
of the Government
man
ptxtices
be stopped
forthwirh.

For almost three years. Israel has been occupying

p;lrt> of Lchanon.

a sovereign

and independent

State.

This

4

in the wide support given to
of Lebanon
that the inhuand that
Israel
withdraw

4g. The non-aligned
countries have a distinguished
record in their dcfcnce of the sovcreignry and independence of Lebanon, itself a non-aligned country. Let me
recall that the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at New
Delhi in March 1983 [set S/1567.5 and Corr.! und 2.
annexJ. the Ministerial Meeting of the Mediterranean
States members of the Non-Aligned Movement, held at
Vallctta in September 1984 [see S/16758 and Corr.I] and
the Meeting of Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Heads of
Delegation of Non-Aligned
Countries to the General
Assembly at its thirty-ninth session, held in New York in
October 1984 [see S/16773. unsex] have all called for the
immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Israeli forces
from Lebanon. They have also called for the implementation of Security Council resolutions, condemned the inhuman practices and pillaging of the occupation tbrces, and
reiterated their support for the sovereignty, independence.
territorial integrity and unity of Lebanon.

village of Maarakah. which resulted in numerous casualties and injuries. The actions of the Israeli occupying
authorities are in clear violation of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, the provisions of the Gc
neva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. of I2 August 1949,’ and the norms ot
international law.
53. It is indeed appropriate that the Council, which is
entrusted under the Charter with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security,
should take upon itself the task of finding ways and means
of ameliorating the serious situation which could have
wider repercussions for peace and stability in the region.
54. The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has been
deeply cottczmed over the grave situation prevailing in
southern Lebanon. The Seventh Conference of Heads of
State or Govimment of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
New Delhi in March 1983, reafftrmed its support for the
safety of Lebanon. its territorial integrity, independence
and its right to exercise its sovereignty throughout its territory within its intemaiionttlly recognited boundaries. The
Conference also called upon all States to support Lebanon
in the implementation of Security Council resolutions SC%
(1982) and 509 (1982) in order to ensure the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from all Lebanese territories. Those principles were reaffirmed at the Meeting of Ministers for Foreign Alijirs and Heads of Delegation of Non-Aligned
Countries to the thirty-ninth session of the Genrral Assembly. held in New York III October 1984 [see S/f/16773,
UtttWX].

49. It was only yesterday that the Coordinating
Bureau
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries met here in
New York and rcallirmed all those positions [see S//7008
annne.rl. At the same time, the Bureau stressed the need to
cnhurc the safety and security of civilian populations in
those areas, including the Palestinian refugees. The Ce
ordinating Bureau thus reaffirmed the repeated warnings
and justilied requests issued by the Palestine Liberation
Organisation (PLO) and its Chairman, Yasser Arafat. as
well as by the non-aligned countries, that the lives and
well-being of the Palestinian refugees should be safeguarded. Finally, and most significantly. the Bureau made
an appeal to the Security Council to implement urgently
the provisions
of its resolutions
on Lebanon.

55. The Co-otdinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Countries held an urgent meeting in New York yesterday,
6 March, to consider the Israeli praetiees in the areas occupied by Israel in southenr Lebanon, the western Bekaa and
the Rashaya district. The Bureau unttnimously adopted a
eommuniqttC expressing its grave eoncem at the deteriomting situation. which threatens peace and security in the
area as a ret& of Ismel: practices against the civilian pop
tdation. I should like to quote the following extracts from
that communiqti

50. We reiterate that appeal and believe that the Council
will fulfil its duty and take all necessary measures to ensure
that the sovereignty
of a Member State is fully respected
and the withdrawal of occupation forces effected without
delay.
51. Mr. VERMA (India): At the outset I should like to
extend my felicitations to you. Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of March. It
gives us particular pleasure to see in the Chair the rep=sentative of Madagascar, a friendly and fellow nonaligned
country. We share the conviction that this Council is richer
for your varied diplomatic
experience, your personal qualities and your wise counsel, and that, under your able leadership.
it will
question
now

be able to addrcxs
before us.

itself

effectively

“The Bureau condemned the Israeli practices and measures against the civilian population in southern Lebanon, the western Bekaa and the Rashaya district which
are in violation of the rules and principles of international l-tw, in particular the provisions of the fourth
Geneva Convention.

to the

“. . . IIte Bureau called on the Security Council urgently
to implement its resolutions on Lebanon, particularly
resolutions 425 (1978). 508 (1982) and 509
. . (1982), to
clm.-ir L-AL
aa*oc, a L--AA.*,
II,,‘,Dw1oIc od tmcorii;tiorG!
with
drawal from the Lebanese territories to the internationally recognized borders. The Bureau reiterated its
support for Lebanon’s sovereignty, independence. territorial integrity and unity.

52,
The Council
is meeting
once again to consider
the
tragic situation
prevailing
in southern
Lebanon.
the west-

ern &iaa

and ibc Rashayii &s&i.

‘GC ilavc iisiciicd wiiii

close attention
to the statement
of the representative
of
Lebanon.
He has given us a moving
account of the untold
sufferings
of the hapless civilian
population
in the Lebanese territories
occupied
by Israel. He has also brought
to
the notice of the Council,
in numerous
communications
addrex.ged
to the Secretary-General.
information
on the
continuing
Israeli operations
and practices
in the area. We
have been shocked
to hear of the latest Israeli acts in the

‘The Bureau expressed its support for the efforts of
the Gowzmment of Lebanon to extend its authority
over all of its territory
and for its determination
to
S

restore peace and order in the areas to be evacuated by
Israel and to ensure the safety and security of the civilian populations in those areas, including the Palestinian
refugees in the camps.

with a sense of purpose to halt Israeli aggression and
intransigence. We hope that the Council will discharge this

“The Bureau affirmed that the provisions of the
fourth Geveva Convention applied to the territories
occupied by Israel in southern Lebanon, the western
Bekaa and the Rashaya district and that the occupying
Power is duty-bound to respect and uphold the provisions of the said Convention and of other norms of
international law. It demanded that Israel, the occupying Power, desist forthwith from its illegal and abusive
practices against the civilian population in these areas in
violation of the fourth Geneva Convention and other
norms of international law and immediately lift all restrictions and obstacles to the restoration of normal conditions in the areas under its occupation.‘* [S/17008,
tvmex.]

61. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretution
from Russiun): First of all, Sir, I
want to stress that it is truly a great pleasure for us to see
you, the representative of the friendly State of Madagascar, recently elected to membership of the Council,
occupying the presidential Chair. We have no doubt that
your well-known professional qualities and your high
degree of authority will enable you to guide the work of
the Council in an exemplary manner.

responsibility
of Lebanon.

64. I should like tinally to welcome to our midst the new
representative of France, Mr. Claude de Kemoularia, and
the new representative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Mr. Oudovenko, and to wish them all success in
their endeavours.
65. The Soviet delegation fully supports the urgent
request made by Lebanon to the Council in connection
with Israel’s provocative actions in the southern regions of
that country, which it now occupies. The persuasive statement made here by the representative of Lebanon and the
facts which he adduced may with full justice be termed a
powerful indictment of the Israeli occupiers.

58. The continuing contlict in the Middle Past remains
the most serious threat to peace. The tragedy in Lebanon is
a symptom of that malaise. No solution of the problem of
Lebanon can be divorced from our search for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle Past, which
must h based on the exercise by the Palestinian people of
their inalienable national and human rights.

66. For three years now, Israeli troops have held sway on
Lebanese roil. The Israeli occupation has already caused
incalculable suffering and privation for hundreds of thousands of Lebanese and Palestinians.

59. The Government and the people of India have been
profoundly anguished over the tragic events in Lebanon.
On the basii of the fa& which tuave ktr! p!lred b&r? !.he
Council, it is beyond douht that responsibility for the hardships of the civilian population in southern Lebanon rests
with the Israeli authorities.
fully
supports
Lebanon’s
in the draft resolution
submitted
The Council
must act decisively

an end to the tragedy

63. Since this ls the Soviet delegation’s first statement
this year, we wish to offer our congratulations to the newly
elected members of the Council. We are certain that they
will make a worthy contribution to carrying out the
responsible functions vested in the Council by the Charter
of the United Nations. We wish at the same time to express
our gratitude to our five colleagues who have completed
their two-year terms as members of the Council, and to
wish them every success in their further activities, both
within the United Nations and outside it.

57. On 14 January 1985, Israel announced its unilateral
three-phase plan for the withdrawal or redeployment of
Israeli forces in Lebanon. It is important that Israel indicate the exact and full time-frame for its complete withdrawal plan, to permit the resumption of the Naqoura
talks under United Natiom auspices with a view to securing, without further delay, a peaceful and orderly withdrawal of Israeli forces from all of Lebanon. In this
context, I should like to express our appreciation of the
Secretary-General% initiative for the Naqoura talks, and of
the role of UNIFIL in the area.

Government
as outlined
JS/f7ow].

a view to putting

62. We wish also to convey to the representative of India,
Mr. Krishnan. our gratitude for the very skilful way in
which he guided the Council’s work in Pebruary. His
tenure as President coincided with the shortest month of
the year. but that month was by no means an easy one
from the point of view of the problems which had to be
dealt with.

56. Since the Israeli aggression against Lebanon in 1982,
the situation in Lebanon has come up for consideration by
the Council on several occasions. Memories of the atrocities committed by Israel against the innocent Lebanese and
Palestinian peoples and of the genocidal massacres of
Sabra and Shatila still haunt our minds. It must be ensured
that there is no repetition of such acts. Israel should be
made to discharge its obligations under the Geneva Conventions* and the norms of international law. We call for
the speedy implementation of Council resolutions 508
(1982) and 509 (1982) in order to ensure the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from all Lebanese territories.

60. My
demand,
Lebanon

with

67.

A day does not pass without

news reaching

us from

southern Lebanon about the acts of outright violence and
tp~nr which
arc ‘,“.‘.“Y....a..>
cudrmo~;rrrll~* -&.,.%a
rrriA
Ire4 YJ
La* LB,&
*L- -up,-------.
-_..-.
.. . ..-. . e.““6
ing forces against the local civilian
populations,
and the
already
long list of casualties
continues
to grow.
68.
Recently,
massive repression
against
the Lebanese
population
has been greatly escalated. The occupiers
have
imposed what is nothing less than a blockade
of Lebanon’s
southern
regions and have perpetrated
there a bloody mas-

just
by
and
h

sacre, in full accord with their publicly proclaimed “iron
fist” policy. Available information shows that dozens of
local inhabitants have fallen victim to Israeli violence, The
number of inmates of but one concentration camp-the
notorious Ansar camp-already
exceeds 1,500. In essence,
Ismel has turned the whole of southern Lebanon into a
vast dungeon where every day, every hour, more and more
crimes are committed: opening fire on local inhabitants,
mass searches and arrests, collective punishment and
deportation, the blowing up of houses, and mocking the
national and religious feelings of the Lebanese. Obviously,
it would be hard to tind any provisions or norms of international law. or of the (ieneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. of 12
August 1949,’ which have not been violated~systematifally
and deliberately, by the Israeli forces of occupation in
Lebanon.

is quite clear to any unbiased observer. Ismel is reaping in
Lebanon the fruits of its own adventurist, near-sighted and
dangerous policy. Time is the most impartial and objective
judge, and time has completely removed the camoullage
under which Israel has attempted to conceal its aggressive
designs in Lebanon. It is quite natural and logical that
Lebanese patriots should valiantly rise up to protect their
homeland,
and today the soil of Lebanon is literally on tire
beneath

75.

76. It should be recalled that six months ago the Council
had occasion to consider the question of Israel’s unlawful
activities
in southern Lebanon [2552& fo 2556th meefings].
We all recall quite clearly that that series of meetings concluded with the American veto cast against the minimal
draft resolution submitted by the delegation of Lebanon
[s/&573& which proposed that Israel should comply with
the provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention, as well as
with other basic norms of international humanitarian law.
The present Israeli reign of terror in Lebanon is, to a large
extent. a direct consequence of the attitude taken by the
United States, as well as of the entire policy of Washington, which is aimed at giving every encouragement and
support to its junior strategic partner.

71. Israel’s comportment
vised-vis UNIFIL
has been
equally provocative. We fully share the concern expressed
in this connection by the Secretary-General.
Quite
recently, Israeli forces have frequently employed force
against UNIFIL personnel that were merely attempting to
put a stop to the lawless acts of the occupiers-in
other
words, to carry out the functions directly entrusted to
them by the United Nations. It will be reealled that in the
summer of 1982 Israeli tanks ostentatiously drove over the
Ilag of the United Nations; we also know what scant
respect the Israeli forces have paid to the personnel of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, subjecting hundreds of that
Agency’s employees to lengthy detention. In the light of
those actions, the most recent episodes are further illustration of Tel Aviv’s attitude towards the United Nations.

77. There is only one way to settle the Lebanese problem,
and that is clearly set forth in the unanimously adopted
Security Council resolutions-i
repeat. unanimously
adopted-508
(1982) and 509 (1982). by which the Council
demanded that Israel withdraw all its military forces forthwith and unconditionally to the internationally recognized
boundaries of Lebanon,
78. In this connection, the Soviet delegation would like
to emphasize once again that the implementation of the
resolutions
of the Council
is a matter of principle if we
truly desire this body effectively to perform the functions
entrusted to it under the Charter of the United Nations. It
is no secret that from time to time certain delegations have
not been averse to thinking aloud about possible ways and
means to enhance the effectiveness
of the Council’s
work
and about their own dedication to the Charter. However,

72. The Council should secure respect for the flag and
the forces of the United Nations in Lebanon and insist that
there be no interference in their activities, as stated in earlier resolutions, and particularly in resolution 523 (1982).
UNIFIL should finally be given a chance to perform the

it can I think be said that Lebanon
is a very striking
example of how such statements
fade into mirages as soon as a
real need to ensure the implementation
of our resolutions
arises. The immediate
and unconditional
implementation
of resolutions
508 (1982)
and 509 (l982)-unanimously
adopted
by ihe Council-is
ihe uniy r&i&
key iu a soiution of the Lebanese problem.
It k only in that way that we
can or should put an end to the protracted
Israeli occupation of Lebanon.

to it by the Council;
otherwise,
it is legitithe purpose
of its presence
in that

mate to wonder what
country

is.

73.
The Soviet delegation
believes it would be desirable
for the Secretary-General
to keep the Council
informed
on
a regular
basis with regard to the state of affairs in the
UNIFIL deployment
area and of all instances
in which
that Force is not in a position
to perform
its functions
74.
What
the civilian

has caused
population

this wanton
in southern

Judging by the facts, however, this elementary lesson

as “terrorism”, although it is clear to everyone that terrorism, particlarly on a State-wide level, State terrorism, is
precisely what Israel is practising on Lebanese soil.

70. The Council is duty-bound to demand that Israel
cease forthwith its policy of terror and violence against the
population of those parts of Lebanon it occypies and that
it comply with its obligations pursuant to the relevant
international conventions.

entrusted

feet of the usurpers.

has not yet been fully absorbed
in Tel Aviv. There, they
continue to juggle worn-out
labels, writing offal1 problems

69. The most recent link in the concatenation of Israeli
crimes are the recent events in the village of Ma’rakah,
which have given rise to indignation both in Lebanon and
throughout the world.

duties

the

79.
Mr. BASSOLE
(Burkina
Faso) (inrerprtvalion from
Frt+rrch): Mr. President,
the delegation
of Burkina
Faso is
pleased to see an eminent
son of a fraternal
and friendly
country.
Madagascar.
with which my country
has special

orgy of violence against
Lebanon?
The answer
7

ties of friendship and co-operation, guiding the meetings of
the Council during this third month of the year. Your very
rich experience, your wisdom and your qualities as an
experienced diplomat, tihich are recognized by all, ensure
the full success of our work.
80. I should also like, through you, Sir, to thank YOUI
predecessor, Mr. ‘Krishnan, the representative of India.
who conducted the Council’s work with his characteristic
competence.
81. Once again the Council and the international community as a whole are faced with a challenge from Israel.
Israel is not only refusing to submit a comprehensive plan
for the withdrawal of its troops from South Lebanon, a
Egion it has illegally occupied, thereby raising doubts
about. its true intentions; it is also massacring the civilian
populations and destroying entire towns and villages.
82. The international community and the Council must,
first and fonzmost, vigorously condemn this vandalism by
the Israeli troops and, above all, take the action necessary
to put an end to such barbaric acts forthwith. Facts
brought to the attention of the Council show that these
Israeli troops have no respect for the elementary principles
of human rights.
83. As I said on 4 September 1984 in the Council [255ir
mpoting, the Israeli authorities must scrupulously respect
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
other international instruments, in particular the Geneva
Convention relative to the Rotection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of I2 August 1949,’ the Hague Conventions II of 1899 and IV of 1907 respecting the laws and
customs of war on land’ and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.
84. It fs time for Israel to abide by the relevant resolutions and decisions of the Security Council and of the
General Assembly by withdrawing from southern L&anon and by facilitating the peaceful and comprehensive
settlement of the general issue of the Middle East, under
the auspices of the United Nations.
85. The international community has the duty tirmly to
support
the efforts of the Secretary-General, and in particular UNIFlL, so that it can fulfil its mandate lo maintain
peace and security in the region. A great responsibility
rests with the parties concerned, particularly the occupier.
which must ensure the achievement of this objective.
86. The resumption of the Naqoura talks, under the auspices of the Secretary-General, has become necessary. In
or&r io bring this about, the isracii side wiii have 10 submit a compkte and comprehensive plan for the withdrawal
of its forces from southern Lebanon with the necessary
guarantees
for respect for these commitments.
87. The Government
of Burkina
@o
pays a tribute lo
the Secretary-General
and his s@ial
representatk
for
their tireless efforts
to bring about
a peaceful
and final
settlement
of the question
of the Middle
East.

88. My country is among those that believe that the
return of peace and stability to the Middle East depends on
the following factors: unconditional withdrawal of Israel’s
occupying troops from southern Lebanon and from all
occupied Arab areas; a comprehensive settlement of the
Palestinian problem;’ and respect for the internationally
recognized boundaries of all States in the region. Burkina
Faso will spare no effort in contributing to the quest for a
settlement that takes into account all these fundamental
elements.
89. Mr. MAXEY (United Kingdom): Mr. President, I
should like first tocongratulate you upon your amumption
of the presidency of the Council. March is barely a week
old, but it has been a busy week and we have had ample
confirmation aheady of the great personal and professional qualities which you bring to your task.
90. Our thanks are due too to your predecessor, the representative of India, Mr. Krishnan, for the wise and skilful
manner in which he conducted the affairs of the Council
last month.
91. Since this is my delegation’s first intervention in a
&bate in the Council in 1985, I should also like to take the
opportunity
of extending a warm welcome to those
members who joined us at the beginning of the year. At the
same time, we thank their predecessors for their cooperation and for their contribution to the work of the
Council owr the previous two years.
92. My delegation listened with dismay to the exchange
of accusations btlueen the panies in the Council last
IIu&ay
[2515&h tneerhgJ. It was evidence of yet another
sad and violent chapter in the continuing tragedy of
Lebanon.
93. Our dismay was compounded because all this had
long been predicted, and responsible people had made a
considerable etTort to avert it. In his report of 9 October
1984, the Secntary-Ckneml warned eHtyone of the need
to act expeditiously to take advantage of what then
appeared to be a relatively favourable situation for securing the withdrawal of Israeli forces from southern J&anon. He said:
“lf this opportunity is missed, I fear that other factors
will come into play which will once again inhibit progress and that another opportunity may not present
itself again soon. This, in turn, will cause a further deterioration in the situation in southern Lebanon, with
disastrous consequences for the inhabitants of the
region and also, in all probability, for the longterm
prcspccts for peace in the area.” [S/f6776, pme 26.1

94. This warning has now proved all too regrettably correct. Instead
of agreed arrangements
for a peaceful
and
orderly
Israeli withdrawal.
we now see increasing
violence
and bloodshed.
One act of violence leads to another. As
always.
it is the civilian
population
who suffer.
My
Government
wishes to reiterate
its deep concern
for that
population.
They have suffered
grievously
from continual

violence over many years and their longing for a return to
peace and normality deserves the fully sympathy of the
Council.

cumstances. They and their Governments
thanks and support of us all.

99. 1 should like to recall the efforts which were made Sy
the Secretary-Ccneral last year, with the support of my
Government and that of other Governments, to lind a
mechanism to avert the present violent situation
in southern Lebanon. We continue to believe that. given the necL+
sary will and determination on all sides, a diplomatic
solution can still be found to the problems of that area. The
Governments concerned should co-operate with the
Secretary-General to this end. The Naqoura talks should
be reconvened without delay and every effort made to
attain as soon as possible the objectives set out by the
Secretary-General in his October report, of Israeli withdrawal, peace and security in the region and the restoration of Lebanese authority and sovereignty up to the
internationally recognized boundary. Everything possible
should be done to ensure that the withdrawal of the
remaining Israeli forces is orderly and co-ordinated. The
machinery of the United Nations, including UNIFIL, can
play an important role in assisting this process. In the
mean time, all concerned need to exercise maximum restraint so as not to impede complete Israeli withdrawal.

95. The SecretaryGeneral in his press statement of 27
February drew attention to the new situation which had
developed in southern Lebanon since early February. He
said that, apart from the restrictions impd
upon the
civilian population by the Israeli occupation, the increasing number of attacks on the Israeli forces by Lebanese
resistance groups had led to a series of strong Israeli
countermeasures, including cordon and search operations.
The Commander of UNIFIL has reported nine such Israel
Defence Forces (IDF) operations in the UNlFlL area
since 6 February.
95. The representative of Lebanon, in his statements and
letters to the Council, has charged that Israeli forces have
laid siege to individual towns and villages, inllicting casualties and considerable sulTering on the inhabitants and
destruction of property. The representative of Israel, in his
response, has not denied that such operations have taken
place. but has sought to justify them by reference to the
need to protect Israel’s withdrawing soldiers. The full facts
are not yet known, but we cannot but express our deep
concern over this new twist to the cycle of violence in
southern Lebanon. We believe that such actions will only
serve further to inflame the situation and are against
Israel’s own long-term interests of achieving peace and
security for its northern border.

100. I believe that there is widespread support for such
an approach in the Council. We should use this debate to
advance this process, not to stoke the tires of violence in
southern Lebanon. A diplomatic solution is still both right
and possible. We should encourage the parties to strive for
it.

97. My Government’s views on the question of southern
Lebanon are clear. We condemned Israel’s invasion of
Lebanon in June 1982. We have called for the early, complete and orderly withdrawal of all Israeli forces to the
south of Lebanon’s international border. We have called
for the early withdrawal of all foreign forces from Lebanon, except those present at the request of the Government
of Lebanon. The sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon within its internationally retognized boundaries must be strictly respected. As we told
the Council last September [255&h meet@], it is imperative that the Israeli occup$ng forces scrupulously respect
the international conventions on humanitarian law applicable to armed conflicts. In particular, they must respect
all the provisions of the Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
01’ I2 August 1949.’ Such security measures as Israel may
lind it necessary to institute must be designed to have the
minimum effect on the lives of local inhabitants and must
be strictly within the framework of the fourth Geneva

101. Mr. BIERRING (Denmark): First of all I should
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
pm&-lency of the Council for the month of March. Your
long experience at the United Nations, as well as the diplomatic skills you have already amply demonstrated, make
us confident that your presidency wi!l be a success.
102. I also want to pay tribute to the representative of
India, Mr. Krishnan, for the excellent way in which he
presided OMT the Council during the month of February.
103. Since this is the lirst time I have spoken in the Council, I should like to express my sincere thanks for the words
of welcome to my country as a newcomer to the Council.
It is with a sense of humility that we assume our responsibilities in the Council, but also with a strong conviction of
its indispensable role in the promotion of international
peace and security and with a firm resolve to render our
contribution to this end.

Convention.
98.
It is incumbent
on Israel _ ._
and
_--. all other3 Eonocrned
aiso to show iuii respect ior UNII-IL and to -perate
with the Force. We share the Secretary-General*s concern
in this respect and his view that UNIFIL must continue to
perform
its present functions.
We have noted with much
regret the recent reports of incidents affecting the French
contingent
in UNIFIL.
We should
like to express our
appreciation
of the steadfast
efforts made by the French
contingent
and the other officers and men of UNIFIL
prevent
violence
and protect
civilians
under difficult

deserve the

104. My delegation listened with great attention and with
deep understanding to the representative oi Lebanon as he
described yet another chapter in the human tragedy which
still alllicts his country [2568/h me&fig]. My Government
has consistently
supported
Rstotation
of the full sovereignty.
independence
and territorial
integrity
of Lebanon.
These principles
were reiterated
at the meeting of the European Council
at Dublin
in December
1984. and the Ten
recalled their belief that this can be effected only in circumstances in which all foreign
forces are with&au-n
from the

to
cir-

9

country except those whose presence is requested by the
Lebanese Government.

of the region
integrity.

105. Denmark hrs always maintained that the Israeli
invasion of Lebanon is ia ctintravention of the fundamental principles of the Charter of the United Nations and that
Israel should withdraw its forces forthwith and unconditionally in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
Council. My Government therefore welcomed the decision
of the Government of Israel to withdraw its forces from
Lebanon, thus bringing to an end its prolonged occupation
of Lebanese territory.

112. We have taken note with great concern of the statement by the Secretary-General on 27 February that the
position of UNIFIL is becoming increasingly difficult. We
should like to pay tribute to the dedication with which the
Commander, officers and men of UNIFIL carry out their
tasks in an extremely dimcult situation.

115. I should like also, of course. to congratulate the
representative of India for the extraordinary skill and
energy with which he conducted our Council’s affairs last
month and to express our confidence that the representative of Madagascar will do no less.
116. The United Statesalso takes pleasure in welcoming
the other new members of the Council-Australia,
Denmark, Thailand and Trinidad and Tobago, and the new
representatives of continuing members of the Council.

108. It is indeed imperative that the Israeli occupation
forces uphold the provisions of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Rote&on of Civilian Pemons in Time of
War, of I2 August 1949,’ as well as of other norms of
international law. Any security precautions which Israel,
as the occupying Power, may find it necessary to take must
be designed to have minimum effects on the local inhabitants and must in no way conflict with Israel’s obligations
under the fourth Geneva Convention.

117. Today we in the Council a= asked to address our
attention to the realities of the situation in Lebanon posed
by the violence and counter-violence associated with the
continuing conIlict inside that country among the various
groups of its citizens, and also associated with the withdrawal of Israeli forces and the continuing presence of
other foreign forces. These are matters of great concern to
all of us. But, as the representative of the United States,I
must call to the attention of the Council a matter of very
special concern to my country.

109. Developments over the last few weeks clearly indicate that the situation is rapidly deteriorating for all parties
concerned. My Government therefore considers that both
Lebanon and Israel should give priority to promoting an
orderly and complete withdrawal of the Israeli forces. In
our opinion, the main objective of the Council’s deliberations should be to assist in this process. We believe that the
United Nations can play an important role in this respect.

IIS. My Government has been subjected
in the past
week to direct threats against its nationals in Lebanon,
nationals serving in peace-keeping functions for the United
Nations. lhose threats have been specifiilly
linked to our
actions in the Security Council, in a gross and vile attempt
to influence the participation and vote of the United States

110. Denmark welcomed the negotiating process with
United Nations involvement initiated at Naqoura and the
efforts .of the Secretary-General in implementation
of
Council resolution
555 (1984). We believe that the framework
of rhe ‘u’aqoura taiks wouid be usefui in securing
arrangements
for a complete Israeli withdrawal
and early
Lebanese

Government’s

authority

territorial

114. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(Uhlited States of America): I
too should like to begin by congntulating you, Sir, both as
a representative of Madagascar, a State which has newly
arrived in the Council, and as a representative of Madagascar who now serves as President of the Council, on your
accession to the Council and to the presidency.

107. After the completion of the first phase of the Israeli
withdrawal, on 16 February. we have witnessed a WOE=
ened cycle of violence in the areas still under Israeli occupation. Apart from the restrictions imposed on the civilim
population by the Israeli occupation, the increasing number
of attacks on the Israeli forces by Lebanese resistance
groups
has led to a series of strong Israeli countermeasures.
including cordon and search operations, with tragic loss of
lives as a conse’quence. Denmark strongly deplores these
developments. It reiterates the need for a speedy and total
Israeli withdrawal and urges all parties to show the utmost
restraint.

of the
Lebanon.

Lebanon’s

113. While deeply sympathidng with the continuing
plight of the Lebanese people, Denmark would find it
difiicult to support any Council action which could
hamper our common objective: the speedy and orderly
termination
of the Israeli occupation
of southern
Lebanon.

106. We have urged the Lebanese and Israeli Governments to show flexibility in establishing security armngements in southern Lebanon and to do everything possible
to prevent new acts of violence in the whole area of the
Israeli withdrawal.

restoration
southern

and guaranteeing

in this

body.

119.

The

United

States

of course
welcomes
the assurot Lebanon
that It does not
encourage
reckless behaviour
of this kind but seeks, rather,
to discourage
it. But none of us in the Council,
and no one
who values the work of the Council,
can ignore the realities posed by these facts. Prior threats to the United States
concerning
a prior
Council
meeting
in a not dissimilar
context
resulted in the grievous
loss of American
and Lebanese lives. I should like to remind
the Council
briefly
of
these facts.

ances of the Government

in

I I I. We also think
that the Secretary-General
and
UNIFIL
will. in accordance
with the Council
resolutions,
bc able to play a valuable
role in the zones to be evacuated.
cspccially
as regards ensuring
the safety of the inhabitants
IO

120. A telephone message was received by the Agence
France-Resse oIlice in Beirut on 8 September 1984. The
caller, claiming to be the representative of the so-called
Islamic Jihad organization, said that that organization
would strike very shortly at key American interests in the
Middle East. The caller said that his organization’s
members were prepared to sacrifice their lives to destroy
American or Zionist institutions of even secondary importance. The caller also said that President Reagan’s Administration had demonstrated its contempt for Moslems
when it had vetoed, on 6 September [2556rh meering], the
drift resolution that had been submitted by Lebanon
[s/l6732J.

126. The bitter legacy of the previous experience with
violence in Lebanon, linked explicitly by threatening
callers to Security Council action, lingers-presumably
for
all members of the Council and for all persons concerned
with world order.
127. I think it is important that the Council take a
moment to consider the ingredients of minimal world
order. The Charter of the United Nations tells us that its
central tenet must be freedom from fear, freedom from
threats against the territorial integrity or political independence of a State, freedom from threats against any
Member of the United Nations-certainly
against any
member of the Security Council. This, one would have
thought, is axiomatic, since the peril that arises from violations of this basic rule is readily apparent. Obviously, the
Council cannot function effectively to maintain international peace and security, or even to seek to do so, if its
members are subjected to the use and threat of violence.

I2 I. On 20 September 1984. at I ! .30 a.m. Beirut time. ;I
van approilchcd the norlhrrn cntrancc uccc.ssroad to the
Amcricim Embassy annex in the suburb of Awkar. northeast of Beirut. The annex is located on a residential street
blocked at both ends by barricades. The driver of the van
opened fire on the guards at the barricades,disabling some
of them. Under tire from other guards, the vehicle
manoeuv&
through the barricades and proceeded
towards the Embassy building, where it was stopped by
firing u) feet short of the northern end of the building, still
outside the compound proper, and at that point it detonated. The building was severely damaged. Two American
employees of the Embassy and 10 Lebanese employees
were killed in the explosion. Some 59 employees and visitors were injured, 18 of them seriously enough to require
hospitalisation.

128. It has been suggested informally in recent days by
certain persons in the Council that such threats are of little
consequence and should not stand in the way of the pressing business of the Council. But I should like to suggest
that the Council has no more pressing business than maintaining its own processes, free from intimidation
and
violence.
129. I should like to be clear: the United States does not
seek a pretext to raise the issue of terrorist threats. The
United States does not seek to avoid discussion of the
situation in Lebanon. Quite to the contrary. the United
States stands ready to discuss and to join in constructive
action on Lebanon’s problems. For this reason, we urged
at the last meeting of the Council on this item [2s68rlr
met@] a resumption of direct talks between military
representatives of Israel and Lebanon at Naqoura. in order
to facilitate a more peaceful Israeli withdrawal. For this
reason, we have strongly supported the SecretaryGCnCdS fCC0lllHlendations concerning the restoration of
peaceinthearea.

122: This time, in this not dissimilar context, as thecouncil considers once again a complaint of the Government of
Lebanon against Israel, the United States has received three
specilic threats, which I should like to review with the
Council.
123. On 8 February 1985, Observer Group Lebanon
(OGL) Headquarters received a report from a senior
United States United Nations military observer of a threat
against United States ollicers serving with the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organisation (UNTSO) in
South Lebanon, if the United States vetoed the Lebanese
draft resolution.

130. On instructions from my Gomment,
I brought
our concerns about threats to American personnel to the
attention of the Scre~ry-General,
and the United Nations
Headquarters saw tit, on the basis of its own review of the
situation, to call for the withdrawal of United States personnel from United Nations peace-keeping forces in wnon. I should like to emphasise that the United States has
been and continues to be a warm and active supporter of
United Nations peace-keeping functions in Lebanon and
outside it, and wt have consistently sought in the past two
years to enlarge the role of United Nations obsewem and
II-LA
L--.2-- A----- 1“
:- *YW‘W‘,.
-L ---“I”IH( wL..:--I.P”“UD --^p&.uw-aapaa’&
h”‘Lca

124. On I March, a United States officer servingwith the
OGL informed OGL Headquarters of a second threat to
American oflicers serving with the ilnited Nations force in
South Lebanon. This threat was passed on to American
members of the ‘I’cam Tyre” by a regular contact, whose
reporting was considered to be generally reliable. We have
no evidence that this threat and the previous threat were
connected.
125. On S March, United Nations officials in Lebanon
received a threar from an important Amai representative
against Security Council members who used their veto on
the Lebanese draft resolution. Specifically, a United
Nations military official in Lebanon was told that countries which use their right of veto in the Council will “face
strong problems”. The United States and the United Kingdom
were specifically
threats have also been
week.

131. We cannot imagine a greater chilling effect on the
peace-keeping functions of the United Nations or on the
free exchange of ideas, the discussion, debate and decision
processes of the Council than tbrcats and use of violence.

mentioned.
Other,
les5 specific,
received in the period
of the past

No process of discussion.
debate, compromise
and rational
decisions-making
can possibly
take place under the threat
of vidence.
This body is therefore
dire4
t threatened
by
II

threats against any member of the Council in relationship
to any process of the Council.

also express similar sentiments to our other Indian Gcean
colleagues, Mr. Krishnan of India.

132. The United States remains committed to rational
discussion, debate and decision-making by the Council.
We remain committed to the Council’s work in seeking u
solution to Lebanon’s continuing agony. Our own goals
with regard to Lebanon are clear: they are the withdrawal
of all foreign forces-for which we have voted repeatedly.
and which we have Rpeatedly urged; a stable and secure
Lebanese-Israeli border-for
which we have worked from
the time of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) down to
the present day; and the extension of Centtal Government
authority over all Lebanese territory, including the south.

138. I should also like to take this opportunity to thank
the members of the Council for their warm words of wclcome which have been addressed to us in recent weeks.
139. Let me assure representatives that Australia takes
its responsibilities as a member of the Council very
seriously. AustralQ is concerned that the Council should
play as effective a role as possible in discharge of its
responsibilities as the organ with primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security. We
believe that the Council should play a constructive role in
anticipating problems and working to avert or to.solve
them. To this end, we believe that resolutions adopted by
the Council should deal with issues in a balanced, constructive and forward-looking
manner.

133. The t!nited States welcomed theannouncement ofthe
second plu~w of the Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon,
which marks a further step in Israel’s plan for Cull withdrawal. The United States is convinced that the hrst hope
for peace and security for the people of southern Lebanon
will be a rapid and co-ordinated Israeli withdrawal, resulting in the restoration of Lebanese Government sovereignty
and control over the region and. indeed, the withdrawal of
all foreign forces from Lebanon and the restoration of the
full sovereignty of the Government of Lebanon in all its
territory.

140. Our approach to the problem before the Council
has been guided by these general ConFiderations as well as
by some particular considerations which apply to the situation now before the Council. These am: there should be
strict respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Lebanon, within its internationally
recognised boundaries.

134. In this regard, the United States has repeatedly
called on all parties to exercise restraint and to seek to
break the violent cycle of action and reaction that has
resulted in the loss 0T life and destruction of property, to
end this human tragedy that has racked Lebanon in these
recent years. We have especially urged the parties to take
advantage of the Naqoura process as the best means of
arranging these desirable ends.

141. Australia deplores all acts of violence in Lebanon,
especially those with endanger civilian lives; Australia has
consistently called for the withdrawal from Lebanon of all
foreign forces, except those in Lebanon at the request of
the Lebanese Government-and
that ~mains
our
position.
142. Australia welcomes the intention of Israel to begin
to withdraw its forces and believes that a complete withdrawal according to an agreed timetable is essential. Australia the&ore supports the Seeretary~neral’s
call for
the reconvening of the Naqoura talks as a means of achieving this objective.

135. There is a cycle of violence in Lebanon. That cycle
of vioknce is fed by uttbalaneed, unfair resolutions, as by
terrorism, a-on,
ntribution
and hate. The most
pressing question before the Council today is whether the
cyzk of vioknce that has racked Lebanon will be permitted to spread to the Council itself, endangering this last
en&~ in which the parties to conflict may come and seek
a hearing from the nations of the world.

143. Australia Rcognizes that Israeli forces in withdrawing have been subject to attacks and that some Israel
Defence Forces actions might have been undertaken in
selfdefence. On the other hand, other of their actions
appear to have been severe, and cause us concern because
of their severity. In this regard,
there should be strict
Rspect for the provisions of the Geneva Convention I&tive to the Protection of Civilian Rersons in Time of War,
of I2 August 1949,’ and for the rights of the civilian
population.

136. The C4umcil c8n function only if the parties to conflict respct the right of all members to speak and vote
according to their besl interests and their best judgement.
No member of the security Council, of the General
Assembly or indeed of any United Nations body is safe if
intimidation, coercion and violence are admitted into the
deliberations of our institutions. The United States therefore calls on all memturs of the Council to repudiate the
threats 8gahtsi the clclliti~
process of the &u&i
itself.

in the diflkult environment in which it is requhed to function. All acts of violence against UNIFIL, from whatever
quarter, are to be deplored.

137. Mr. HOGUE (Australia): Since this is the first occasion on which Australia has addressed the Council in its
capacity as a member for 1985 and 1986. I should like at
the outset to erpress our pleasure at having in the Chair
such a capabk individual and the representative of a country whose people swim in the same ocean as we do. Let me

145. The PRESIDENT (inrerprP/arion from f+e&): The
next speaker is the representative
ol the Islamic Republic
of Iran. I invite him to take
and to mskc his statcmcnt.
12

a place

at the Council

table

146. Mr. RAJAIE-KHORASSANI
(Islamic Republicof
Iran): 1 take refuge in God from Satan, the Accursed. In
the name of Cod, the Compassionate, the Merciful,

152. Mary Curtius reported
Mmiror of I February that

153. As the Zionist atrocities continue to increase, the
scenes of the crimes show the further uncontrolled madness
of the Zionist criminals. In another article published in The
Chris&ta Science hfodtor of 25 February, Jim Muir
reports that

1 should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency and particularly on the masterly manner
in which you have been conducting the affairs of the
Council.
147. 1 would also congratulate Mr. Krishnan of India
who, during the month of February, carried out the heavy
responsibilities of President of the Council with gmat et&
ciency and diplomatic skill.

“Any houses where arms or suspetis are found are bulldozed. Several dozen villagers are usually taken tbr
questioning. None has yet returned . . . They came in
with tanks and troops, shooting everywhere.’ one said.
All the men between I4 and 60 were taken to the village
school for interrogation. They took police do@ into the
houses where the women were.”

148. Once again comes the Council to Lebanon, which
was the vic:im of Zionist air raids, acts of aggression, crimes
and atrocities even long before its occupation by the Zionist army. Lebanon is now the holy land of struggle and
msistance. Moslem people of Lebanon-absolutely
disap
pointed with all the pompous labels of such paralysed
international bodies as the Security Council, and knowing
that the Council is no less a victim of Zionist idlttation
and hegemony than Lebanon itself-have
d&fed
to
&fend themselves both against internal default elements
which have been collaborating with the aggressor enemy
and against the aggressor Zionist army, all, at the same
time.

The same article reports that*
“When the village sheikh tried to explain to the Israelis
that itney wete turning the whole people against them.
they shouted at him to get back in line . . . ‘The lsraclis
were weighed down with arms, but they wera more
frightened of us than we wen of them. We laughed at
them’.”
154. In an article in 7&e New York Iljrtes of 25 February,
John Kifner reported that

149.
The task of the Lebanese people-of
I&anon’s
champions--who
are the pride of the history of Islam and
of the contemporary Islamic movement in the region, then,
must be very heavy indeed. The Zionist army has always
ken the best quipped with the most recent war technology of the west, especially with that of the united States.
It has always been well fed with billions of dollars, taken in
pennies from American taxpayers, many of whom have
from time to time gone on strike because of low pay, and
all of whom have to carry the burden of the United States
budget d&it,
not knowing how much d that d&it
comes from unmserved American suppott for the Zionist
aggressor army.

“Israeli soldiets besieged at laast nine sltiite Moslem
villages in southern Lebanon today, continuing their
crackdown on the undergrourtd msistance.
e4. . .
**Ismel initiated what its Dafencc Mlnlster,
Rabin, called an ‘iron fBt policy’.”

Yitzhak

To show their “iron fist”,
“Columns of Israelis backed by armoured personnel
carriers and tanks have surrounded and entered a string
of Shiite villages just east cf Tyre that have been centres
of rebellion. They rounded up all the men of the villages
for questioning, carried OR suspected Shiite guerrillas
and bulldozed or blew up houses”.

150. The Zionist army has always been thought of as
invincible. But the peopk of Lebanon have given it such a
maddening lesson that it does not know what it is doing
when it kills innocent worshippers in their sanctuaries--or
why it is doing it. Where are the honest, adamant sup
porters of human rights when it comes to commenting on
the many Sabras and Shatitas and Deir Yassins being
chalked up by the Nazi army of Israel?
four of 21 February.

Science

“Israeli military authoritiesareusingaWes1
Rank prison
as an ‘intimidation
centre* where prisoners are some
times beaten and tortured. lawyers have alleged”.

“Oh, my Lord! Open my heart and ease my task for me,
and loose a knot from my tongue so that they may
understand my saying.“’

151. In the Warhinglon
Homan says that

in l%e Christ&n

u. . .
“Details of the Istaeli action are coming out slowly
because the Israelis have kept BeirutfomignjourMI&S out d the area and have ciosai the smaikr reads
between
the tillagcs. hindering local communications.”

Richard

The scope of Zionist crimes continued to widen. according
to Mr. Kifner’s at-tick:

“The
International
commission
of Juris!s charged
yesterday
that the Israeli army has harshly
mistreated
prisonem
at its detention
centre in the occupied
West
Bank and is using it as an ‘intimidation
centre’ in which
‘confessions
are manufactured’.”

put
I3

“The Red Cross said
112 new prisoners

today that the Istaeli forces bad
into the Ansar prison camp in

southern Lebanon since the middle of this month, raising the number held there to 1,602. Under normal practices, however, prisoners are often held and interrogated
in several other places before being transferred to
Ansar.
‘The Shiite imam. or religious leader, of the village of
Burj al Shemaii. who was seen being carried off by
Israeli soldiers during a raid last week, was found today
by a shepherd in an abandoned well. He was taken to a
hospital run by United Nations forces.”
155. Following an article by ihsan Hijazi entitled “Rl;lst
in Lebanon Kills I5 in Mosque”, Thp /Ve,cnYork Times 01
5 March reported a piece of news from Reuters about a
hospital in Tyre, southern Lebanon, saying
“Hospital of?icials here asserted today that Israeli
troops stormed this city’s main hospital, beat its director and seized people waiting to give blood for victims
of the explosion in Marakah.
‘They said Israeli troops seized at least eight people
at gunpoint as they were about to give blood for those
wounded by the blast in the village.”
156. Such ravaging and murderous atrocities made the
Lbanese Moslems hold a procession, about which a
reporter of me New York T&m wrote on 6 March:
“Chanting ‘Death to Israel!’ and ‘America, the Great
Satan!’ thousands of Moslem demonstrators marched
through the streets of West Beirut today to protest the
death of I5 people in a bomb blast in a Shiite village in
southern Lebanon.”
157. Since the Council is supposedly so committed to the
maintenance of international peace and security, the Council must have been following the development of such
ewnts in Lebanon with serious concern and moment by
moment. Therefore, to quote much more of the criminal
record of the Zionist entity in this chamber is unneassary
and redundant. It is particularly so because some conscientious States members of the Council know petty well that
their own bands too are deep up to tJte elbows in the blood
of the Lebanese Moslems.
158. The basic question before the Council is not why it
has been watching all these terrorist criminal acts in cold
blood. The answer to that question, considering the pre%
ena of the Zionist supporters in the Council. is quite clear.
The basic and enlightening question is whether, during the
two years of occupation of Lebanon by the Zionist forces,
anything has happened to international peace and security
or not. Was the sleeping wnsciena of the guardians of
-.-a YIN
a.4 .-e-u
-...A.,..r, h.4a. Mu.
r,Y) ..x
.r .L
:* I,“,
-,.a
.ir.r-.h...nl
...-..mY”.L. pavvu...- u,
the case that each one of us has been sleeping fairly well
despite the blatant and continued violation of intemational peace and security? Is it not true that for all these
two painfully slow-moving years, every hour of which has
lasted longer for the Moslems of Lebanon than a jear for
the Council. only the brave Moslems of Lebanon have
ken
sacrificing
to the last drop of their blood
in the

defence of international peace and security? Do you not
agree that, ever since the enemies of mankind installed this
dirty boil af a Zionist base in the bottom of Palestine.
international peace and security have vanished from our
region, and that therefore those who have come together
here to defend the safety of the expanding borders of Israel
have continuously ken betraying the cause of peace and
violating the Charter of the United Nations? Do you therefore not agree that they arc bloody liars who have sent
their Zionist agents to our region in order to devastate.
occupy and plunder?
159. Among the millions of Arabs and hundreds of millions of Moslems, only the people of Lebanon. thanks to
their genuine commitment to the liberating faith of Islam.
have taken it upon themselves to demonstrate a historic
record of resistance, determination and struggle. For the
first time, they have defeated the champion of the 1967
Six-Day War.
160. The representative of Egypt, who is now attending
the Council and who remembers the size of the Arab army
in the 1967 war, can well appreciate how great the achievement of the Moslem people of Lebanon is. Of all national
and international entities which have been somehow pertinent to the Arab-Israeli conflict and who have wished to
be known as adversaries of the Zionist invaders, only the
Moslem people of Lebanon have proved victorious under
the banner of Islam.
161. We think the international Organimtion-and
particularly the Security Council-is
deeply indebted to the
people of Lebanon for their struggles against Zionist invasion. They have fought bravely for the callse of peace and
independence. They are the supporters of the Charter, not
those who produce rhetoric here. With an Islamic determination they have punished the Zionist aggressor and those
behind it. They are thus paying the heavy price of that
lawful punishment they have brought, and that they shall,
by the grace of God, continue to bring to the Zionist
enem’. And, at. the peak of this struggle of crime and
punrs4 ment, we all of a sudden observe a desperate dip16
matic move by dignitaries of Arabia towards further surrendering to the Zionist enemy. Instead of allowing the
Arab Moslems under their yoke to be free to join the
resistance forces of Lebanon, they move about from one
capital to another like idiots to spread further and strengthen the miserable Camp David Accords. In a recent declararation the Foreign Ministry of the Islamic Republic of
Iran, while forewarning the international community of
the potential dangers involved in the recent moves made
by the r&gime governing Jordan and other reactionary
Arab r&g&s of the region, expressed the belief that the
slogan being publicized by those reactionary figures of
peaa in Rtum for a piece of land is but a c-a
lie and --?
an open
- _.
--A sAput.lc
-_.- ,!-I- ,#&(I
-.I... I”_ Lu‘llpcl
_..... 4 UK
-a.- n.-(II&u
DfaLea 01 UK rsgw1 w
negotiate with and recognize the Zionist enemy r&me.
162. The long history of aggression and massacre of the
regime occupying
AI-Quds
clearly indicates
that this ripime
is content
with nothing
less than total domination
over all
the lslamic
lands. from the Nilr IO the Euphrates.
and
complete
eradication
01 cvcr)- Mamic
m;mifmtation
in the

region, and it also indicates that no solution but force can
return even one lbot of Islamic land to its real owners, who
are the oppressed Moslem people of Palestine.
163. It is most regrettable that many Arub rulers have
chosen to cope peacefully with the evil of Zionism instead
of returning to and relying on their Islamic heritage and
identity. Otherwise, many of those whose mercenaries
have been helping President Saddam Hussein against us
would not have left the Moslem people of Lebanon alone.
164. I would like to address myself to all the Arab delegates present in this &mber
and ask: are the people of
Lebanon not fighting the historically and internationally
recognizcd enemy of the Arabs? Are the people of Lebanon not Moslems, and is tlieir enemy not the Zionist K&
far who have occupied the Moslem land of Palestine and
the Islamic sanctuaries? Why then do the Arab rulers,
instead of helping them, conspire against them and work
for the expansion of the Camp David Accords? Does it not
mean that together these rulers are acting like enemies of
Islam? And, furthermore, does it not make it evident that
the entire struggle in the Middle East is a confrontation
between Islam and Ku&?
165. The records of the Council and its governing principles show that those who can maintain their interest outside the Council in the real world can also maintain their
interest inside this chamber, and those who are blindly
fascinated by the material glamour of satanic worldly Powers, and have therefore adopted servility to them outside
the United Nations, remain surrogate and tributary to
those Powers inside this chamber too.
166. Therefore, until and unless the Moslem nations bring
together all their potential in a united Islamic front, they are
bound to be scared of Islam-as the enemies of Islam
are-and will not be able to contribute to +uman society all
the good and happiness that Islam requires them tocontrib
ute. When Moslems identify themselves with anythingother
than Islam. then their new, artificial. insecure identity fearfully departs from Islam and anything Islamic. It is this fear
of Islam and the Islamic revolution-as
today’s article by
Karen Elliot in The Woshingo~ Post says-that encouraged
certain Arab nations, including Iraq, to hearken to Egypt’s
call for a broader ArabIsraeli peace.

try to take sides with the Arabs. who have both plenty of
cheap oil and a lucrative market, and not with the Zionist
base, which up to now-apart
from a very heavy load of
military and linancial bills-has brought nothing to the
United States other than deep animosity and hatred by the
people of the Middle East.
169. Finally, the Islamic regime in Iran, owing to its
Islamic quality, is always blamed for all the Islamic developments in the region, and particularly in Lebanon. In
putting the blame on the Islamic Republic of Iran, they do
not intend to make propaganda for Iran as a powerful
Islamic State on which the oppressed can rely and which
the arrogant Powers fear. They wish rather to discredit the
Moslem people of Lebanon, as if others besides Iran are
neither entitled nor committed to Islam.
170. Let me assure those concerned that, first of all,
Islam is nobody’s monopoly. All people, including our
brothers in Lebanon, are equally entitled to Islam.
Secondly, as soon as a nation like Lebanon refreshes its
commitment to Islam it will continue its constructive liberating role, independently of the Islamic Republic of Iran
and immediately on the basis of Islam and according to it.
Those who rhink otherwise are ignorant of Islam. What we
are observing in Lebanon is simply the light of Islam.
which has happily enlightened a portion of the tiny population of Lebanon. who have resolutely decided powerfully
to cleanse their Islamic homeland of the darkrtess of zionism and imperialism. Nothing can stop them. I am afraid
the more one tries to extinguish this light, the more it flares
up. The best advice to the enemy is to leave the area
peacefully-though
it is not very easy to carry out this
advice.
171. I am told that the Israeli currency is in this situation:
one fourth of it used to be equal to one dollar, but nowadays more than 9,ooO of it hardly makes a dollar. Airline
tickets in Israel are to be paid for in dollars, and that is a
problem. It means that if the Ashkenali Jews sell all their
property and real estate, they can hardly get a return ticket
to Brooklyn. It also means that even for those return
tickets the poor American farn%r has to pay.
172. Secondly, to my Arab brothers I wish to reiterate
that the Zionist base is a balloon-beast, full of air. Do not
fear it. It is nothing. It is already beaten and defeated. An
American professor of politics who once came to see meand permit me not to give his name-commented
that the
United States could never understand how weak and
defeatable this petty Satan was.

167. My first proposal is to our Arab brothers in the
region who have mistaken the problem for the solution.
Islam-I do not need to assure them-is the solution and
not the problem, and a broader Arab-Israeli peace is only
the problem and surely not the solution.

173. I therefore hope that American officials will no
longer spend on a Zionist real non-entity, They have to live
with Moslems, with independent and powerful Moslems.
-t-L-..
L-l VcllC,
Le.--- am,,
_._A kGu,wrg
,--- :-- L”
.^ “”1- I,:. .nJu,‘
_^_^ Pl‘”
,,.A .nn,,
..LL IlC”CI
_.__
4 MC)1UO”
casualities on both sides.

16% To the Council-if
it really wants to play “Security
Council” -my proposal is a strong and straightforward
draft resolution which condemns ihe &nisi aggressor for
its recent crimes, as well as for its illegal occupation of
Lebanese territory. which has gone on for far too long, and
requires the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of
all Zionist forces from all the occupied territories. 1 believe
that the present draft resolution [S/f7ooo] contains these
two very important points of concern to my Government.
We also hope that the professional vetoers will this time

174. To my Arab brothers I have to reiterate that the
enemy is already defeated. They do not need to fear it. Let
us join together and liberate Palestine. Relieve me, the
beautiful flag of Palestine will soon be hoisted throughout
the occupied land. The .sooner we establish our united
15

Islamic front, the sooner the liberation of Palestine and tlte
rest of the oppressed people will camp about.

might have alluded to the bombs that go off endlessly in
Tripoli and in Beirut, or the artillery fire that has raked
Lebanon’s capital in recent days.

175. Since the victories of the Moslem forces in Lebanon
are usually seen as the fruit of the Islamic Revolution in
Iran. then I would like to make the comment that we can
clearly understand why, in spite of the 12 June 1984 agreement [see S/f6611] and the presence of the United Nations
team in the two capitals, we have to be the target of huge,
devastating missiles in Desful, Abadan, Ahwaz, S&poleZihab and other places.

183. This is exactly the kind of amnesia about Lebanon
we have had to endure in this forum before. When,
during the previous decade of turmoil and terror, loO.CUHl
Lebanese died-slaughtered
by Syria, the PLO and by
each other-we
did not hear even a word from the same
countries that have been busily denouncing Israel today.
that

184. But of course, in the Never-Never Land of antilsraeli resolutions, reality has a way of wandering off by
itself. So let me try. like a few others here, to bring reality
back to this discussion.

176. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Israel. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to eke his
statement.

185. We believe that if terrorists stockpile car bombs and
missiles and guns to use a@inst our soldiers and, as they
have repeatedly threateaed, against our civilians, we have
not only a right but a duty to locate these bombs and
missiles and guns before they are used against us.

177. Mr. NETANYAHU
(Israel): I want to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency. I also want
to congratulate your predecessor, the representative of
India, for his successful completion of last month’s tcnun!.
178. Some here today have falsely and maliciously
attacked my country. We have heard a vicious verbal echo
of the physical attacks Israeli soldiers have endured as the
Israeli army withdraws from South Lebanon.

186. Now, most of South Lebanon is peaceful. The
people ate sick of violence. They have rejected the murderous incitement of some local leaders inspired by Khomeini
and d&ted
by Syria. But a few villages, mostly in the
Tyre ana. have succumbed to the incitement from Damascus, Tehran and the relay station in Beirut.

179. For example, the Lebanese reptesentative has asin
put forward the despicable charge tbat Israel ~88 involved
in the explosion that destroyed the Mosque in Maatakah.
Let me therefore again state categorically that Israel bad
no involvement in that explosion whatsoever. IDF units
were not even in the village at the time of the incident. ft
appears that this explosion took place when terrorists
mishandled the triggering device and caused the explosion
device to detonate.

187. Our search and patrol missions have tracked terrorists to these villages. They have taken unusual care to place
only the minimal restrictions needed to apprehend the terrorists and to uncover their hidden weapons. Let me tell
the Council about part of what they found.
188. In the village of Dir Arabiyeh, we uncovered rocketproplled grenades, anti-tank rockets and two cars packed
with explosives. In the vitlage of Burj-Rahhal we found 37
crates with thousands of rounds of ammunition, dozens of
hand-grenades, 60 mortar shells and Stnla shoulder-fmd
missiles. In yet another village, that of Kfar Jibshit, we
found a huge depot of arms containing over 2,ooO dctonatot% hand-m,
tines, machine-guns--even Katyusha
rockets.

180. In no way did IDF units prevent ambulances and
other emergency vehicles from entering the hospital
referred to by the Lebanese nprescntative. In fact, the
contrary is true. ‘Ihe IDF cleared a path to the hospital
and assured access to it by dispersing a violent demonstration in front of the hospital.
181. So, apart from these and similarly preposterous
charges, what am we really being accused ot? I think we
are attacked simply because M have the audaeity to protect the lives of our men. We seek out caches of arms. We
attempt to locate terrorists who are planning to attack us,
or those who have already attacked us. For this we are
expected to be apologetic. We are not.

189. These weapons welt clearly intended for use against
us. But to judge by the threats made by the fanatics, they
wzrc meant to be used against others in Lebanon as well.
Countless innocent people would have betn murdered and
maimed, had ult not acted.
190. These fanatics wrap themselves in the mantle of m
But their campaign against us began in earnest
only after we statted our withdrawal. Well, what are they
resisting? Our departure?

182. Now, what is so striking about this selective indignation we have heard today is this: its motive is not to defend
the integrity of Lebanon or the safety of its citizens but
soieiy fo attack israei. For if the Govemmcnts that have
waxed so indignant about alk@ Israeli actions in Lcbanon really were concerned about that country and its
people. they would have at least mentioned the 60 per cent
of Lebanon that remains under the Syrian yoke, I have
heard many representatives here speak about the sovereignty of Lebanon. the incalculable suffering of its people.
They could have mentioned the Syrian occupation, or they

si~tance.

191. Only a few days ago, my Government began the
second phase of our withdrawal
to the international
border. But the exhortations to violence continue from
Tehran, Damascus and Beirut. The Lebanese Government
should know that when it joins the company of those who
incite terror, it will be held responsible for the
consequences.
16

the ethics of the conduct
of war. This is particularly
curious in light of rcccnt Soviet behaviour
in Afghanistan.
Now, in Afghanistan
thcrc arc no hordes of ncwsmcn
and
television
crews. But we do have the testimony
of Soviet
soldiers
who were forced to serve thcrc and latrr cscapcd
to tell about it. Let us take Private Olcg Khhm. Ibr cxamplc. An interview
with him appcarcd
in ‘IL
C’hrisriun
Science Monitor of IO August 1984. Hc said this: “We were
ordered
by our otticers that when we attack a village. not
one person must bc left alive to tell the talc. If Wc rcfusc to
carry out thcsc orders,
we get it in the neck oursclvcs.”

192.
What ia the true nature of this so-called
rcsistancc’?
Their targets arc not only military,
but civilian:
they have
killed civilians
in Lebanon.
and they have boasted
that
they will kill civi!ians
in Israel. They dclibcratcly
choose
methods
such as car bombs,
which kill indiscriminately.
193.
Bcsidcs
the indiscriminate
killing
of their own
people,
they have made targets
of the citizens
of the
mcmbcrs
of this Council.
They arc the .satne people who
have killed sleeping
American
and Prench peace-keepers,
who have bombed
cmbassics.
ollicc buildinB
and homes.
killing
women.
children
and other noncombatants.
194.
today,

202.
If the Soviet rcprescntativc
would like further examples. I shall be happy to supply them. In any cast. if hc
wants to lecture us on imernational
ethics, let him lind his
lirst students
in the Russian units in the Panshir Valley OI
Afghanistan.

In short, they kill cvcrybody;
and, as wc have seen
they even want to kill United
Nations
pcrsonncl.

195.
Now one of the intended
victims
of their terror,
Israel. has been placed in the dock. Just to bc sure that the
result in this chamber
will be satisfactory
to the terrorists,
they adopt one linal, incredible
terrorist
tactic: they level
:hreats against a State member
of the Security
Council.
They threaten
to murder
an American
mcmbcr
of the
United Nations
ot,jerver
group
if the United
States does
not accept an anti-Israeli
draft resolution.
Can any doubts
be left as to who thcsc people really arc, this so-called
resistance?

203.
There is one other statement
I should like to r&r
to
at this time: one that breaks all records, which just came
from the representative
of Iran. What can one say after
this astonishing,
sometimes
buffoonish,
display from a rep
resentative
of one of the most unabashed
terrorist
States 01
our time? Only
that it deserves marks
for candour.
The
Iranian
representative
does not even pretend.
He, like his
Government,
not only supports
terrorism
in Lebanon.
he
incites Member
States to fundamentalist
fanaticism
against
another
Member
State.

196. Thus, in an attempt
to dictate
the outcome
of our
deliberations.
terrorists
have invaded
this chamber.
Now it
is the Council
itself they want to take hostage. This is the
ultimate
hostage-taking.

204.
Thus. we come to a critical
test in the life of this
body. Terrorism
and holy war are brought
into the Security Council
by Iran. If only a handful
of representatives
lind the courage
to speak out against this dual obscenity,
this should raise grave concern for the future not only of
the United
Nations
but of the entire international
order.

197.
11’ the terrorists
wcrc to get their way, then who
would be next? Which country
here might find itself subject to terrorist
blackmail
in another
diplomatic
forum?
It
would be folly. dangerous
folly. to let the terrorists
prevail.
198.
Given its distortion
of the situation
in Lebanon.
draft
resolution
[S/17ooo]
deserves
to be defeated.
member
States wish to conduct
their affairs without
threat of terrorist
blackmail.
it must be defeated.

this
If
the

199.
I cannot
end without
directing
a few remarks
some of the statements
just made at this table-first,
statement
by the representative
of the Soviet
I.!nion.

at
the

205.
The
PRESIDENT
(interpreurion
ji-om f’rem-h):
Because of the lateness of the hour, I intend to adjourn
this
meeting
now. There are more than 14 names still left on
the list of speakers.
As a result ofconsultations.
it has been
decided
that the Council
should meet again on Monday
afternoon
to continue
its discussion
of this item. AI that
meeting
we shall hear the representatives
who were not
able to speak today. and shall then proceed to the vote on
the draft resolution.

The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m.

200.
Of the many charges levelled at my country
today. I
feel this one deserves special attention.
The Soviet representative
spoke
of Statc%ponsored
terrorism:
I believe
those were
his words:
Statesponsored
terrorism.
He
should
know.
It is a subject
on which
I am sure his
Government
is well versed.
It has, after all. bccomc
the
foremost
practitioner
of this art in this gcncration.
201.

The

Soviet

h~am-anit-zri-An
..” .,...,...w..
-..

AWWPC~
_....-_,.

trpresentativc
* Lr
..,.

rhn
. ..-

also
nrrx-r
r..,~-.

voiced

a spcial

intnrnntinnol
. . ..-... - . . . . *....

narmc
. . . . . . . . . -.

17

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
~orkl.

Nations
Consult

CO.MM&NT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

pubiicalions
may he obtained
from books~orcn
and distributors
throughout
the
your hookstore
or write (0: United Nlon,.
Sales Se&m.
New York or Geneva.

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLlCATlONS

Les publications
des Nations Unies YIIU en vcnte
du munde cmier. Infnrmet-vow
auprkn de volre
SccGon der venles. New Ynrk ou C&we.

KAK

IlOJlYYHTb

tl3~HMR

OPTAttWIAUHH

W~naawa
Opranwawf
Odwwwetwtx
w arewcr8ax
ao accx paAonax
wpa.
uarawe
WIH muuwe
no anpeey:

npoikx*e

mnawm.

COhtO

CONSECUIR

Hbhdops

DES NATIONS

UNIES

dam les libnirier
et ICC a6encer JepoGkires
libraire
w adreksez-vouc
il : Naliuns
Unies.

OEbEAtlHEHtIbIX

HAUH&t

HauaR
MOYHO rynmb
a *wutabtx
Marawnax
tlaao~secnpaax~
06 Hwawax
a aauterd KHHYHOM
Oprawwwn
Waeawewwx
HarurR.
Cewlurn
no

H.~H Xefma.

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS KACIONE.9

CNIDAS

Las publtcsclones
de Irs Nac~ones Unida, ertin en venta en hbrerias
y caw Jlrlribuldl)ra\
en
todas panes dcl mundo. Consul~e a .w librero o dirijav
a. Naciones
Umhn.
Sccc~dn de V~ntar.
Nueva York o Giwbra.

-Litho

in Unikd

Nations.

New

York

cc4cc

VC-61439

.Junc

19Y4

1.925
