S/PV.7034

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7034th meeting

Wednesday, 18 September 2013, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Quinlan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Australia)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Maes
Mr. Laassel
Mr. Ahmad
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. M’Beou
Mr. Wilson
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Sierra Leone
Eleventh report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (S/2013/547)

13-47871 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1347871*

S/PV.7034

The situation in Sierra Leone

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.

and transfer of its remaining tasks to the United Nations
country team on 31 March 2014.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone
Eleventh report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone (S/2013/547)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Sierra Leone to participate in this
meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I extend a very warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Samura M.W. Kamara,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Republic of Sierra Leone.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jens Anders
Toyberg-Frandzen, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone, to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Guillermo Rishchynski, Chair of the Sierra Leone
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Canada,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/547, which contains the eleventh
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.
I now give the floor to Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen.
Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen: I would like to begin by
thanking the Council for the opportunity to present the
eleventh report of the Secretary-General on the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) (S/2013/547). The report
highlights major developments that have taken place in
Sierra Leone over the past six months, and the progress
made towards the completion of UNIPSIL’s mandate

2/7

18/09/2013

Since I last briefed the Council, in March (see
S/PV.6933), there have been notable developments
in Sierra Leone. The United Nations and Sierra
Leone’s development partners have continued their
support to the Government in the implementation
of its national development strategy, known as the
Agenda for Prosperity (2013-2018). The strategy lays
the foundations for rapid and sustainable economic
growth and democratic transformation by focusing on
key economic, social and governance sectors. The total
cost of the Agenda is about $6 billion, with a funding
gap of more than $2 billion. Closing such a significant
funding gap and achieving the goals set by the strategy
requires far more international support, as well as the
mobilization of substantial domestic resources, through
increased domestic and foreign investment. Most
importantly, it demands the full ownership, absolute
dedication and hard work of all Sierra Leoneans.
Robust systems and institutional and legal frameworks
that would attract foreign and domestic investment
with good corporate social responsibility are also key
to the successful implementation of the Government’s
agenda.
The launching on 30 July of the long-awaited
constitutional review process is another significant
development of the past six months. We are pleased that
the process is led and owned by the Sierra Leoneans,
as amply demonstrated in the composition of the
Constitutional Review Committee that is spearheading
the review process.
We commend President Koroma for his leadership
and commitment to an inclusive and transparent
constitutional review process. The review presents a
historic opportunity for strengthening Sierra Leone’s
democratic institutions, anchoring the rule of law and
human rights, leading to a modern and more inclusive
system of governance, promoting equitable economic
development and social justice for all; those will in
turn foster greater cohesion and unity among Sierra
Leoneans. Funding for the review process has been
secured through contributions from the Government of
Sierra Leone, the European Union, the United Kingdom
Department for International Development and the
United Nations.
With the support of the United Nations and the
international community as a whole, Sierra Leone has

13-47871

18/09/2013

The situation in Sierra Leone

made significant progress over the past decade in the
consolidation of its hard-won peace and democratic
transformation. Sustaining those gains and achieving
the country’s ambitious development aspirations would,
however, require continued efforts and commitment
to strengthening and empowering the country’s
democratic institutions and promoting the rule of law
and democratic governance. In that respect, attention
and priority should continue to be given, inter alia, to
combating corruption, ensuring the professionalism and
independence of the security and justice sectors, and
building the capacity of national institutions, including
Parliament, to effectively play their role.
We commend the Government’s political
commitment to combating corruption, in particular
President Koroma’s zero-tolerance policy. In the
same vein, we wish to underline the importance of
continued support for the efforts of the Anti-Corruption
Commission to effectively discharge its mandate.
Sierra Leone’s political parties, in particular the
ruling All People’s Congress and the main opposition
party, the Sierra Leone People’s Party, have an
important role to play in maintaining and consolidating
the country’s multiparty democracy and political
pluralism. To that end, it is incumbent on them to resolve
all intra- and inter-party disputes through dialogue and
working together, putting the country’s interest above
all others.
As requested by the Council, UNIPSIL has
finalized and is implementing a transition and exit
plan aimed at the mission’s full drawdown by 31 March
2014. The plan addresses both the implementation of the
mission’s remaining mandate, as outlined in resolution
2097 (2013), and the transfer of residual tasks to the
United Nations country team. In that regard, following
consultations with the Government, the United Nations
country team and other partners, we have finalized
programme documents covering key activities in the
three priority areas, namely, constitutional review,
security sector reform and conflict prevention. Those
activities will be implemented during the next two to
four years, with funding to be secured from bilateral
sources, the United Nations Development Programme
and the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund.
The drawdown and closure of various components
and field offices of UNIPSIL are also proceeding as
planned. As indicated in the report before the Council,
the mission’s aviation unit and the Democratic
Institutions Section have been closed. The Human

S/PV.7034

Rights Section will complete its work by the end of
December 2013, with the human rights-related work
of the United Nations transferred to the Resident
Coordinator’s Office. The remaining components of the
mission, namely, the Political and Peace Consolidation
Section and the United Nations Police, will continue
their work, with reduced capacity, until the closure of
the mission.
With respect to UNIPSIL’s field offices, the
regional office in the eastern province was closed in
April, and the remaining three offices will either be
closed or transferred to the United Nations country
team by the end of December. Given the importance of
continuing the work of the United Nations in the field,
I am encouraged by the interest some United Nations
agencies have shown to take over UNIPSIL’s facilities
and maintain a presence in the various regions of Sierra
Leone. However, the scope of those agencies’ presence
will depend on availability of funding.
Most importantly, as UNIPSIL is making good
progress in the implementation of its transition and
drawdown plan, the United Nations country team has
also stepped up its work in finalizing a United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for the period
2015-2020. The Framework will replace the joint
UNIPSIL/United Nations country team strategy or the
United Nations joint vision, and serve as the United
Nations strategy to support the Government’s Agenda
for Prosperity.
The implementation of UNIPSIL’s transition and exit
strategy is on course, and we are firmly set to complete
a full drawdown on 31 March 2014. At the same time,
Sierra Leone has embarked on major undertakings: the
launching of the country’s development agenda — the
Agenda for Prosperity — and a constitutional review
exercise. Those are ambitious undertakings, but they are
also essential for Sierra Leone’s economic development
and democratic transformation and in addressing the
root causes of the conflict identified in the report of the
Sierra Leone Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
There are already high expectations. Success in
meeting those expectations and building a prosperous,
democratic and peaceful country is not only the
responsibility of the Government or a particular group,
but a shared responsibility of all Sierra Leoneans,
including the country’s political parties, civil society,
traditional leaders and others. I therefore call on all
Sierra Leoneans to set aside their political differences

13-478713/7

S/PV.7034

The situation in Sierra Leone

and group interests and work together in a spirit
of national unity to promote the development and
democratization agenda of their country.
In concluding, I wish to take this opportunity to
thank the people and the Government of Sierra Leone,
in particular President Ernest Bai Koroma, for their
continued support for the work of the United Nations,
including the seamless and timely implementation of
UNIPSIL’s transition plan. I would also like to thank
the Security Council for its continued interest in Sierra
Leone and our activities in the country.
The President: I thank Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Rishchynski.
Mr. Rishchynski: I would like to express the
appreciation of all the members of the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission for
the opportunity to come before the Security Council to
brief it on the situation in Sierra Leone.
(spoke in French)
It is my pleasure to brief the Security Council in
my capacity as Chair of the Sierra Leone configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission. I intend to focus
my remarks on three topics: the drawdown of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) and the transition to a United
Nations country team, the Government of Sierra
Leone’s Agenda for Prosperity, and the future of the
Peacebuilding Commission’s engagement.
(spoke in English)
As the Executive Representative of the SecretaryGeneral has outlined, UNIPSIL is on track to depart
Sierra Leone in March 2014. The United Nations
transition process is well under way, with a clear
plan in place for UNIPSIL to gradually transfer core
responsibilities to members of the United Nations
country team. While Sierra Leone has made significant
progress in recent years, some challenges will linger.
United Nations planning reflects those needs, with
continued investment required in the areas of conflict
prevention, security sector reform and human rights. If
managed successfully and inclusively, the forthcoming
constitutional review also has the potential to be
a transformative process, especially if it advances
equality between women and men and provides a new

4/7

18/09/2013

basis for mitigating Sierra Leone’s winner-takes-all
politics.
Those issues will require continued attention
and support. I am pleased to note that the response
to date from the United Nations and Sierra Leone’s
international partners has been extremely positive.
Funds are either in place or anticipated to be available
to cover most of the costs associated with each of the
core transition areas. We also understand that the
Peacebuilding Fund is prepared to address some of the
residual gaps through its Immediate Response Facility.
As we noted in our previous briefing (see S/PV.6933),
the Peacebuilding Commission stands ready to help
marshal any additional resources that may be required.
(spoke in French)
The Government of Sierra Leone officially launched
its Agenda for Prosperity in July 2013. The strategy
outlines a vision for socioeconomic development
based on effective management of natural resources
and private sector-led growth. The programme also
includes several elements relating to peacebuilding.
For example, pillar seven on governance and public
sector reform includes commitments to strengthening
anti-corruption efforts, protecting and promoting
human rights, enhancing access to justice, continuing
the reform of key security sector institutions, and
building public sector capacity. Pillar eight proposes
a series of important initiatives to combat violence
against women, improve economic empowerment, and
increase participation in political decision-making. In
addition, the challenge of youth unemployment features
in several other pillars dedicated to socioeconomic
development. Given this focus, the Peacebuilding
Commission intends to hold a high-level meeting in the
coming months to discuss, promote and disseminate the
Agenda for Prosperity.
(spoke in English)
Resolution 2097 (2013) requested that the
Peacebuilding Commission review its engagement in
Sierra Leone “with a view to scaling down its role”.
Discussions on the design of this process, the first
of its kind in the Peacebuilding Commission, have
begun within the configuration. An initial review
of peacebuilding in Sierra Leone will be conducted
later this year. This exercise will examine progress to
date, evaluate outstanding challenges and assess areas
potentially requiring additional support. These findings
will inform a technical mission to Sierra Leone later in

13-47871

18/09/2013

The situation in Sierra Leone

the fall, which will begin to establish the parameters
of the Commission’s own transition process. We then
plan to conduct a Chair’s visit in early 2014. That visit
will provide a valuable opportunity to discuss progress
on the United Nations transition and the Agenda for
Prosperity. It will also serve to finalize agreement
with the Government of Sierra Leone on the nature and
duration of the Commission’s support. This analysis
and planning will be distilled into a transition strategy
for the Peacebuilding Commission, on which we intend
to consult with the Security Council in early 2014.
Finally, let me conclude with two comments. First,
transitions represent critical moments during postconflict peacebuilding processes. They have potential
to either lay the foundations for sustainable progress
or create new challenges. For this reason, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General Jens ToybergFrandzen, the United Nations country team, and the
United Nations system deserves great credit for their
careful stewardship of the process to date.
Secondly, at a time when the Security Council
faces significant challenges, Sierra Leone reminds
us of what it is possible to achieve. Yet consolidating
peace is a long-term endeavour. UNIPSIL’s drawdown
should be seen as a transformation of international
support rather than its culmination. It is vitally
important that the international community continue to
devote the attention and resources necessary to build
on the impressive progress already achieved by Sierra
Leoneans.
The President: I thank Mr. Rishchynski for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Sierra
Leone.
Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): I congratulate you,
Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of September. I thank you for giving my
delegation the opportunity to contribute to this briefing
on the situation in Sierra Leone
Let me at the outset convey on behalf of His
Excellency President Ernest Bai Koroma and the
Government and people of Sierra Leone our deep
appreciation for the continued support and interest
of the Security Council, the wider membership of
the United Nations and our international partners in
consolidating peace and security in Sierra Leone,

S/PV.7034

as well as in supporting our political and economic
development effort.
In particular, I wish to express our sincere
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his eleventh
report (S/2013/547) on the activities of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL) for the period from 1 March to 31 August
2013, which has been ably introduced by the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jens
Toyberg-Frandzen. We note with profound appreciation
his instructive presentation, critically focusing on the
constitutional review process that has recently begun,
the launch of the Agenda for Prosperity and support
for its implementation, the UNIPSIL drawdown and
transition road map, and issues relating to progress
made in building and consolidating peace in Sierra
Leone. We appreciate the excellent manner in which
UNIPSIL continues to partner and cooperate with the
Government and people of Sierra Leone in the delivery
of its mandate even as it progressively draws down. The
signals so far are that it is an orderly process.
We also express our gratitude to the members of
the Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) through its Chair, Ambassador
Guillermo Rishchynski of Canada, for the relentless
commitment and strong support the configuration
continues to demonstrate in the pursuit of peace,
security and stability in Sierra Leone. We note with
particular interest his insightful remarks focusing on the
UNIPSIL drawdown and transition to a United Nations
country team, my Government’s Agenda for Prosperity,
and the future of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
engagement in the country. We share and agree with
his perspectives detailing the road map for scaling
down the Peacebuilding Commission’s engagement in
Sierra Leone, and welcome his support for our effort in
building a more resilient country.
Consistent with the improved security situation in
the country, the Security Council adopted resolution
2097 (2013) to pave the way for the drawdown
of UNIPSIL in Sierra Leone. The Government
acknowledges and supports UNIPSIL’s drawdown, as
well as the review of the PBC engagement with the
country as a response to the significantly improved
security environment prevailing in the country.
The progress we have collectively made in improving
peace, security and stability provides a platform for
rolling out the Agenda for Prosperity — the road map

13-478715/7

S/PV.7034

The situation in Sierra Leone

to the attainment of middle-income and donor country
status within the next 25 to 50 years. Thus, in launching
the Agenda for Prosperity on 12 July, President
Ernest Bat Koroma called on all Sierra Leoneans
and development partners to put all hands on deck in
support of this very ambitious development framework.
The Agenda for Prosperity embraces the nexus between
development, peace, security and stability. For us, it
is an incremental path towards building a sustainable
future for Sierra Leone after the Agenda for Change,
which ended last year.
This development framework, which represents
Sierra Leone’s third poverty-reduction strategy,
is anchored to the eight pillars, compared to the
four pillars of the Agenda for Change. They are
economic diversification to promote inclusive green
growth; better management of our natural resources;
accelerating progress on the Millennium Development
Goals for human development; improving the country’s
international competitiveness; ensuring a more focused
employment and labour strategy; ensuring social
protection; strengthening governance and public sector
reform; and mainstreaming gender.
Based on our experience in implementing the
Agenda for Change, including the lessons learned and
remaining challenges, the Agenda for Prosperity is
all-encompassing and seeks to address peacebuilding
elements, as well as the residual programmes of its
predecessor, the Agenda for Change. It is also consistent
with the “one vision, one plan” principle of the New
Deal for Engagement in Fragile States within the Global
Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation.
It is encouraging to note that the most recent fragility
assessment of Sierra Leone reveals a reduction in the
overall poverty profile, from 66.4 per cent in 2003 to
52.9 per cent in 2011. Also, preliminary estimates from
the International Monetary Fund indicate that Sierra
Leone’s economy is on track to achieve a projected
growth of up to 13.3 per cent, as output in the mining,
agriculture, construction, manufacturing and service
sectors continues to expand. The stable macroeconomic
performance in the first half of 2013 has sustained
that trend. That improvement should be a catalyst and
encouragement for us as a nation and our partners to do
more, by investing in the Agenda for Prosperity. The
country is currently concluding a new programme with
the International Monetary Fund that is consistent with
the stated ambitions of the Agenda for Prosperity.

6/7

18/09/2013

Sierra Leone remains steadfastly committed to
the fight against corruption, poverty, the illicit trade
in and transfer of small arms and light weapons, drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime, which
are currently plaguing our subregion.
We have continued to score highly on the
protection of human rights. We have made significant
strides in creating a stable and secure environment for
investment to create wealth and generate employment
opportunities for our youth. A range of initiatives have
been undertaken to mainstream gender and broaden
opportunities to enhance the role and visibility of
women in decision-making.
Efforts in addressing youth empowerment and
unemployment remain at the heart of the Agenda
for Prosperity. We have undertaken a number of
interventions, including the creation of a national
volunteer service corps, the engagement of youth in
the agricultural sector and the improvement of the legal
and institutional framework for labour administration.
The Government is also negotiating with international
partners to actualize the establishment of a youth skills
development village, aimed at preparing youth for
employment in the private sector.
We are making steady progress in strengthening
the coordination mechanisms between the newly
established Ministry of Youth Affairs and the National
Youth Commission. We welcome the support of the
United Nations team in that regard.
We continue to count on the Sierra Leone
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and all partners in the implementation of
the Agenda for Prosperity, with particular reference
to the peacebuilding elements, including the regional
approach to peacebuilding, the review of its engagement
and scaling down its role. In that regard, we applaud the
very good work and commitment of the Peacebuilding
Commission and our development partners. I would
like to urge all members to continue to support our
development process through concessional financing,
the promotion of foreign investments and support to our
educational and key governance institutions, including
through the expansion of the job market and economic
opportunities for our young population.
President Koroma inaugurated the Constitutional
Review Committee on 30 July 2013 to oversee the process
of reviewing the 1991 Constitution. The Committee has
a broad-based membership, drawn from all registered

13-47871

18/09/2013

The situation in Sierra Leone

political parties, civil society and democratic institutions
such as the National Human Rights Commission of
Sierra Leone, the National Electoral Commission and
the Political Parties Registration Commission, the
National Youth Commission, the National Council of
Paramount Chiefs, the National Union of Students, the
Sierra Leone Bar Association and the Sierra Leone
Association of Journalists.
The aim of that process, as outlined by President
Koroma in his inaugural remarks, is to produce a
people-friendly, easy-to-understand and easy-to-follow
Constitution that is inclusive and reflects the country’s
unity in diversity. The process is intended to also draw
on lessons learned from the country’s constitutional
history to capture the country’s renewal and dynamism
and best international practices of constitutionalism.
The Committee has commenced public consultations
throughout the country using wide-ranging outreach
tools to ensure the broadest possible participation of
Sierra Leoneans in the process, at the end of which
the Committee will submit its recommendations to the
Government for parliamentary approval. That will be
followed by a national referendum. The United Nations
and our international partners have agreed to provide
technical and financial support for that process.
On internal security, six personnel of the
Republic of Sierra Leone Armed Forces are currently
being investigated for allegedly holding an illegal
secret meeting at the Tekoh military barracks in the
Northern Province city of Makeni. The findings of the
investigation, when completed, will be made public.

S/PV.7034

However, the overall security situation in the country
remains under firm control.
The security sector reform programme, aimed at
continually re-training our armed forces and enhancing
the institutional capacity of our security apparatus, is
in an advanced stage. UNIPSIL is providing technical
support for the establishment of the independent police
complaints committee, a matter that will soon be
submitted to Parliament for approval.
We have also successfully resolved, through
diplomatic means, the long-standing border dispute
over Yenga with our sister country the Republic of
Guinea.
Let me conclude by commending the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jens
Anders Toyberg-Frandzen, and the staff of UNIPSIL,
United
Nations
agencies,
the
Peacebuilding
Commission, funds and programmes and other
international and regional partners for collaboratively
working with the Government of Sierra Leone in
supporting our efforts to consolidate peace and security
in the country and our development aspirations. We
stand ready to continue collaborating with UNIPSIL,
the Peacebuilding Commission and our international
partners to ensure a seamless transition to a United
Nations resident coordinator system.
The President: There are no further names
inscribed on the list of speakers. I now invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

13-478717/7
