___________________ ___ __________________
_,:_
__::,__
Resolutions adopted
on reports
of the Fifth Committee

extrlltH:dinary expenses. The Secretary-General shall
make p r o v ~ the budget estimates for reimbursing
the Working Capital Fund ;

( c) Such sums as, together with net sums outstanding for the same purposes, do not exceed $250,000 to
continue the revolving fund to finance miscellaneous
self-liquidating purchases and activities. Advances in
excess of the total of $250,000 may be made with the
prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions. The SecretaryGeneral shall submit, with the annual accounts, an explanation of the outstanding balance of the revolving
fund at the end of each year;
( d) Loans to specialized agencies and preparatory
commissions of agencies to be established by inter-governmental agreement under the auspices of the United
Nations to finance their work, pending receipt by the
agencies concerned of sufficient contributions under
their own budgets. In making such loans, which shall
normally be repayable within two years, the SecretaryGeneral shall have regard to the proposed financial resources of the agency concerned, and shall obtain the
prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for any cash
issues which would increase the aggregate balance outstanding ( including amounts previously advanced and
outstanding) at any one time to an amount in excess of
$3,000,000 and for any issue which would increase the
1>alance outstanding ( including amounts previously advanced and outstanding) in respect of any one agency
to an amount in excess of $1,000,000, provided that,
notwithstanding the above provisions, the Interim Commission of the International Trade Organization shall
be authorized to postpone until 31 December 1952 repayment of the outstanding balance of the loans made
to the Interim Commission ;
( e) Such sums as, together with the sums previously advanced and outstanding for the same purpose,
do not exceed $420,000 to continue the Staff Housing
Fund in order to finance advance rental payments,
guarantee deposits and working capital 1equirements
for housing the staff of the Secretariat. Such advances
shall be reimbursed to the Working Capital Fund following the recovery of rental advances, guarantee deposits and working capital advances ;

(f) Such sums not exceeding $90,000 as may be
required to finance payments of advance insurance
premiums and deposits where the period of insurance
extends beyond the end of the financial year in which
payment is made. This amount may be increased with
the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions. The Secretary-General shall make provision in the budget estimates of each year during the life of the related polieies to cover the charges applicable to each such year ;
(g) Such sums, if any, as may be necessary to reimburse staff members for national income taxes paid by
them in respect of payment"s received from the United
Nations during 1952, or in respect of prior years for
which reimbursement has not previously been made;
6. The governments of Member States be invited
to examine methods whereby, within the limits of their
constitutional processes, a substantial proportion of

75

their contributions would be paid within the fir:;t Qt: 1:ter of each year, and to report through the SecretaryGeneral to the next regular session of the General
Assembly on the result of that examination.
357th plenary meeting,
21 December 1951.

B
The General Assembly
Resolves that paragraph 5 of the above resolution
585 A (VI) on the Working Capital Fund for the
financial year 1952 adopted by the General Assembly at
its 357th plenary meeting on 21 December 1951 is supplemented by the following sub-paragraphs:

"(h) Such sums not exceeding $2,000,000 as may
be necessary to complete the permanent Headquarters of the United Nations.;
"(i) With the prior concurrence of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, sums deemed to be available and not exceeding
$5,000,000 for the financing of operations under the
terms of resolution 513 (VI) adopted by the General
Assembly at its 365th plenary meeting on 26 January
1952 relating to assistance to Palestine refugees.
Sums so advanced shall be repayable as may be practicable and in any event not later than 31 December
1952".
373rd plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.
586 (VI). Agreement between the United Nations
and the Carnegie Foundation concerning the
use of the premises of the Peace Palace at
The Hague
The General Assembly,
Considering that the contribution payable by the
International Court of Justice in respect of the use of
the Peace Palace under the terms of article II of the
agreement between the United Nations and the Carnegie Foundation concerning the use of the premises
of the Peace Palace at The Hague as contained in
annex A to General Assembly resolution 84 (I),
adopted by the General Assembly on 11 December
1946, is no longer sufficient to defray the costs which
the Carnegie Foundation are required to pay under the
terms of the said agreement,
Approves the Supplementary Agreement between
the United Nations and the Carnegie Foundation concerning the use of the Peace Palace at The Hague as
set forth in the annex to the present resolution.
357th plenary meeting,
21 December 1951.
ANNEX

Supplementary Agreement between the Vnited
Nations and the Carnegie Foundation concerning the use of the Peace Palace at The Hague
I. The United Nations and the Carnegie Foundation hereby
agree that article II of the agreement between the United

General ANembly--81idh Senion

76

Nations and the Camesie Foundation conceming the use of
the premises of the Peace Palace at The Hague as contained
in annex A to General Assembly resolution 84 (I), adopted
by the General Assembly on 11 December 1946, shall be
amended to read as follows :
"Article II

"The annual contribution payable by the International
Court of Justice in respect to the use of the Peace Palace is
hereby fixed at 68,400 Netherlands florins net."
2. This. Supplementary Agreement shall enter into fotcc as
of 1 January 1952.

587 (VI). United Nations Joint Staff Penaion
Fund: annual report of the Uaited Nations
Joint Staff Pemion Board
The General Assembly
Takes note of the annual report 18 of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board for the year ended
31 December 1950 and of the supplementary report 17
as of 31 May 1951.
360th plenary meeting,
12 January 1952.

598 (VI). Staff Regul■tiom of the United Nations
The Gene,-al Assembly
Adopts as the Staff Regulations of the United Nations the regulations annexed to the present resolution.
These regulations, which shall supersede all previous
staff regulations, shall become effective on 1 March
1952.
372nd meeting,
2 Febrnary 1952.
ANNEX

StaO Regulation• oJ the United Nationa

Scope and Purpose
The Staff Regulations embody the fundamental conditions of
""ice and the basic rights, duties and obligations of the
United Nations Secretariat. They represent the broad principles
of penonnel policy for the staffing and administration of the

Seerete,riat. The Secretary-Ge~ral, as the Chief Administrative Officer, shall provide and enforce such Staff Rules consistent with these principles as he considers necessary.
ARTICLE I

Duties, obligations and privileges

1.1. Members of the Secretariat are international civil ser-

588 (VI). United

Nations
system

telecommunication•

The Gener-al Assembly
Takes note of the report 18 of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations telecommunications system.
360th plena,-y meeting,
12 January 1952.
589 (VI). Headquarters of the United Nations
The Gene,.al Assembly

1. Takes note of the report 19 of the Secretary-Gen~
eral-on the Headquarters of the United Nations ;
2. Decides that the Headquarters Advisory Committee, established by General Assembly resolution 182
(II) of 20 November 1947, shall be continued with
the existing membership;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its seventh session on the progress
of construction of the Headquarters.
372nd plenary meeting,
2 Feb,-ua,-y 1952.

11
See Official Rec01'ds of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Supplement No. 8.
u Ibtd.
18
See document A/1919.
18
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 46, document A/1895.

vants. Their responsibilities are not 'national but exclusively

international. By accepting appointment, they pledge themselves
to discharge their functions and to regulate their conduct with
the interests of the United Nations only in view.
1.2. Staff members are subject to the authority of the
Secretary-General and to assignment by him to any of the
aetivities or offices of the United Nations. They are responsible to him in the exercise of their functions. The whole time
of staff members shall be at the disposal of the SecrctaryGeneral. The Secretary-General shall establish a normal workin1 week.
1.3. In the performance of their duties members of the
Secretariat shall neither seek nor accept instructions from
~ government or from any other authority external to the
Organization.
).4. Members of the Secretariat shall conduct themselves

al ~I times in a manner befitting their status as international
civil servants. They shall not engage in any activity that is
incompatible with the proper discharge of their duties with the
United Nations. They shall avoid any action and in particular
any kind of public pronouncement which may adversely reflect
on their status. While they arc not expected to give up their
national sentiments or their political and religious convictions,
they shall at all times bear in mind the reserve and tact incumbent upon them by reason of their international status.
1.5. Staff members shall exercise the utmost discretion in
re,ard to all matters of official business. They shall not communicate to any person any information known to them by
reason of their official position which has not been made
public, except in the course of their duties or by authorization
of the Secretary-General. Nor shall they at any time use such
information to private advantage. These obligations do not
cease upon separation from the Secretariat.
1.6. No member of the Secretariat shall accept any honour,
decoration, favour, gift or fee from any government or from
any other source external to the Organization during the period
of his appointment, except for war service.
1.7. Any member of the Secretariat who becomes a candidate for a public office of a political character shall resign
from the Secretariat.
