S/2021/807

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 September 2021
Original: English

United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 55 of Security Council
resolution 2556 (2020), covers developments in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo from 19 June to 17 September 2021. It describes progress made in the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) since the previous
report, of 21 June 2021 (S/2021/587). The report contains an overview of political
developments and of the Mission’s pursuit of a comprehensive approach to the
protection of civilians and the stabilization and strengthening of State institutions and
key governance and security reforms. Additionally, it highlights the development with
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo of a transition plan on the
basis of the joint strategy on the progressive and phased drawdown of MONUSCO
(S/2020/1041, annex), as requested by the Council in its resolution 2556 (2020). The
transition plan is contained in the annex to the present report.

II. Political developments
2.
Tensions mounted between political and civil society actors regarding the
electoral reforms ahead of the elections foreseen in 2023, while the Government of
the Union sacrée de la nation (USN) coalition completed its first 100 d ays.
3.
On 3 July, President Félix Tshisekedi promulgated the law reforming the
Commission électorale nationale indépendante (CENI). Thereafter, the National
Assembly issued a timeline for the designation process of the CENI bureau and
plenary members. On 4 August, Prime Minister Jean-Michel Sama Lukonde
encouraged relevant stakeholders to designate CENI members while reconfirming
that a foreseen census would not be a precondition for the holding of elections.
However, the Plateforme des confessions religieuses, which submits the name of the
proposed candidate for CENI President to the National Assembly, did not reach a
consensus on a candidate by 17 August as envisaged in the timeline, thereby delaying
the process. As a result, hostile protests by unidentif ied youth took place on 1 August
at the residence of the Archbishop of Kinshasa, Cardinal Fridolin Ambongo,
prompting widespread condemnation across the political and social spectrum.

21-12028 (E)

270921

*2112028*

S/2021/807

Additionally, members of the opposition and the majority conditioned the designation
of candidates on an inclusive consensus on electoral reforms, while several civil
society organizations called for the depoliticization of CENI.
4.
On 8 July, deputy Cerveau Pitshou Nsingi, of USN, submitted to the National
Assembly bureau a draft law to amend and supplement the 2004 law on nationality
and particularly to limit key State positions to citizens born to two Congolese parents.
Some political and civil society actors interpreted the draft law as a threat to national
cohesion and stability and as an attempt to exclude some political figures from the
2023 presidential poll. Likewise, recent allegations against Senator Augustin Matata
Ponyo (Independent) of mismanagement of public funds while he was Prime Minister,
from 2012 to 2016, were also interpreted by some political actors as a means to
neutralize a potential presidential candidate.
5.
In the context of her good offices, the Special Representative of the Secretary General continued her engagement with the President, the members of the
Government, Parliament, political leaders, and civil society actors. That engagement
primarily centred around the issue of credible, transparent, inclusive, peaceful and
gender-balanced political and electoral processes leading up to the 2023 electi ons,
supporting the Government in addressing insecurity against the backdrop of the state
of siege in Ituri and North Kivu provinces and addressing hate speech.
6.
On 4 August, Prime Minister Lukonde took stock of the first 100 days of his
Government. He commended the successes achieved on the security front since the
entry into force of the state of siege on 6 May. Meanwhile, Members of Parliament
noted that insecurity continued despite the fifth extension of the state of siege
authorized by the National Assembly and Senate on 3 and 4 August, respectively, and
urged the Government to provide an assessment of the state of siege ’s effectiveness.
A seventh extension was authorized by the National Assembly on 30 August and by
the Senate on 1 September. On 14 September, the Defence and Security Standing
Committee of the National Assembly concluded hearings undertaken to assess of the
state of siege.
7.
On 15 July, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund approved
the $1.5 billion programme under the extended credit facility arrangement to support
structural reforms to strengthen revenue mobilization, reinforce monetary policy and
boost inclusive growth. The Executive Board granted, on 2 August, an additional
$1.5 billion from a general allocation of special drawing rights to supplement the
country’s foreign exchange reserves and to support pandemic recovery.
8.
Cooperation with neighbouring countries has progressed positively. The fourth
meeting of the heads of intelligence and security services of Bu rundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania took
place on 6 July in Bujumbura, Burundi. The meeting, attended by the Special
Representative, resulted in the adoption of the Contact and Coordination Group ’s twoyear action plan and the decision to establish a Centre de coordination conjointe des
opérations to address the threat of the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF).
9.
President Tshisekedi and President Paul Kagame of Rwanda undertook
reciprocal visits to Gisenyi and Goma on 25 and 26 June, respectively. They assessed
the impact of the volcanic eruption of Mount Nyiragongo on 22 May, including on
women and girls consequently at increased risk of sexual and gender-based violence.
They also signed three bilateral agreements on promoting and protecting investments,
income taxes and tax evasion, and the gold sector. On 13 July, President Evariste
Ndayishimiye of Burundi met with President Tshisekedi in Kinshasa and discussed
the security situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The visit resulted
in the resumption of the joint commission between Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. From 31 August to 2 September, the Commission met in
2/41

21-12028

S/2021/807

Kinshasa and agreed to strengthen cooperation to neutr alize armed groups and
reinforce border security, including by demarcating borders. Bilateral relations with
Uganda also continued to improve during the reporting period, in particular following
President Tshisekedi’s meeting with President Yoweri Museveni on 16 June in
Kasindi and Mpondwe, border towns of Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
10. From 17 to 18 August, President Tshisekedi attended the forty-first Ordinary
Summit of Heads of State and Government of the Southern African Developme nt
Community (SADC) in Lilongwe. President Tshisekedi was elected to assume the
SADC chairpersonship for 2022–2023.

III. Security situation
A.

Ituri Province
11. Despite the state of siege, the security situation in Ituri deteriorated, in particular
in Djugu and Irumu territories, owing to armed group activity, causing population
displacement. The Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (FARDC)
were reinforced, which enabled the launch of offensive military ope rations in
southern Irumu territory on 6 July, and in eastern Djugu territory on 29 July. From
19 June to 6 September, 268 civilians, including at least 37 women and 13 children,
were killed, and 64 civilians, including at least six women and three childre n, were
injured.
12. In Djugu and Mahagi territories, Coopérative pour le développement du Congo
(CODECO) factions continued to attack FARDC positions and civilians. From
19 June to 6 September, CODECO factions killed 96 civilians, including at least
16 women and 6 children. Additionally, CODECO looted and damaged property,
causing the displacement of civilians. At the beginning of August, the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs estimated that 1.7 million
internally displaced persons (IDPs) were present in Ituri.
13. In Irumu Territory, frequent ADF attacks constituted the most significant threat
to civilians on both sides of the border between Ituri and North Kivu provinces. In
particular, suspected ADF combatants carried out daily attacks targeting civilians in
Banyali Tchabi and Bahema-Boga chieftaincies and near Tchabi between 20 and
25 June, on 26 and 27 July, and on 4 August. From 19 June to 6 September,
134 civilians, including at least 17 women and two children, were killed during ADF
attacks, while at least 235 civilians were abducted. As at 6 September, at least 13,200
IDPs had left areas threatened by the ADF to Komanda, Bukiringi and Bogoro. Other
IDPs, mainly from the Hutu community, assembled in a camp near a MONUSC O base
in Tchabi. On 27 July, MONUSCO responded to an ADF attack against an FARDC
position in Busio and evacuated four injured FARDC soldiers. On 29 July,
MONUSCO held, then handed over to authorities, nine alleged ADF elements and
transferred two children associated with the group to child protection actors.
14. Incidents involving the Force de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri (FRPI) and the
Front patriotique et intégrationniste du Congo decreased compared to the previous
report. From 19 June to 6 September, eight civilians, including at least one woman,
were killed, and five men were injured as a result of such incidents. Nonetheless, in
southern Irumu territory, the security situation and intercommunal tensions between
the Hutu community and several other communities prompted FRPI to increase
recruitment, while the disarmament and demobilization process of the group remained
at a standstill.

21-12028

3/41

S/2021/807

B.

North Kivu Province
15. In the Grand Nord area, the security situation continued to deteriorate owing to
ADF attacks in Beni territory, especially in the south-eastern (Rwenzori sector) and
northern parts (Watalinga Chefferie and Beni-Mbau sector, bordering Ituri), despite
ongoing FARDC operations and the military governor moving his headquarters from
Goma to Beni town. From 19 June to 9 September, 32 incidents attributed to ADF
were reported, resulting in at least 121 civilians killed, including 43 women,
33 injured, including eight women, and 43 abducted, including 12 women. On
30 June, ADF attacked civilians in Beni town for the first time since 16 December
2019. This resulted in at least 10 civilians killed (four women and six men), five
injured (two women and three men), and at least 10 abducted (one woman, three men
and six boys). Additionally, at least six civilians (two women and four men) were
injured in three improvised explosive device explosions in Beni town on 26 and
27 June. During the reporting period, three civil society representatives and local
chiefs engaged in protection and human rights activities were killed in Beni territory.
On 15 July, the civil society president of Karuruma, known for his stance against
armed groups, was killed close to his house by alleged ADF combatants.
16. In the Petit Nord area, armed conflict between the FARDC and armed groups
continued to threaten civilians. Forces patriotiques populaires-Armée du peuple and
Nduma Défense du Congo-Rénové Bwira faction (NDC-R/Bwira) continued to fight
against Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain (APCLS), Collectif
des mouvements pour le changement (CMC)/Forces de défense du peuple (FDP), and
Nduma Défense du Congo-Rénové Guidon faction (NDC-R/Guidon), committing
human rights abuses particularly in Masisi and Walikale territories. Armed groups,
particularly APCLS, CMC/FDP and other Nyatura factions, Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda (FDLR), and NDC-R factions attacked civilians resulting in
29 killings, 29 injuries, and 16 incidents of looting. Attacks concentrated mainly in
the Masisi-Kitchanga-Nyabiondo-Lukweti areas caused mass displacement of locals
towards Masisi center or the nearby MONUSCO standing combat deployment at
Nyabiondo. While FARDC maintained military pressure on armed groups in Masisi
and Rutshuru territories, the military governor of North Kivu initiated talks with
various armed groups. More than 1,000 combatants from different militias, especially
NDC-R/Bwira and APCLS, were transferred at the Government’s Rumangabo and
Mubambiro camps, awaiting the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Recovery and Stabilization Programme (PDDRC-S) process. However, poor living
conditions caused some to leave the sites prematurely.

C.

South Kivu and Maniema Provinces
17. The security context deteriorated mainly in Minembwe, Hauts Plateaux, with an
increase of clashes between FARDC troops and Twirwaneho. On 8 July, the FARDC
transferred two suspected Twirwaneho collaborators, including one woman, to
Bukavu following their arrest in Minembwe on 12 June, which triggered multiple
protests by Twirwaneho supporters and Hutu community members. In retaliation for
the arrest and transfer, Twirwaneho raided FARDC positions in and around
Minembwe on 10 and 11 July, despite a joint mission of the provincial Minister of the
Interior and MONUSCO to defuse tensions. MONUSCO protected FARDC military
magistrates, who, with the Mission’s support, were conducting disciplinary and
criminal trials involving FARDC elements. Nevertheless, Twirwaneho attacks
resulted in five FARDC soldiers killed and another 13 injured.
18. The security situation also deteriorated in the Ruzizi Plain. From 19 June to
6 September, 73 incidents were reported, including kidnapping and ambushes along

4/41

21-12028

S/2021/807

Route nationale 5, cattle rustling and intercommunal tensions. On 23 June and
27 July, cross-border movements of Burundian armed elements, including from
Forces nationales de liberation and Mouvement de la résistance pour un état de droit,
were reported into the Democratic Republic of the Congo, allegedly with the support
of local Mai-Mai leaders. In July, the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism under
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region visited the area to investigate
transborder issues, including in relation with Burundian refugee camps in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Additionally, tensions between the Barundi and
Bafulero communities were reported in late July over customary powers. An
unidentified group attempted to claim autonomy from the rest of Uvira territory by
tagging, on 18 July, “Chefferie des Barundi” on the area ’s main administrative
building. MONUSCO patrolled between Kamanyola and Mutarule to prevent
violence, and tensions were defused by early August.
19. In Kabambare territory in Maniema Province, the security situation remained
volatile due to resumed infighting between two Mai-Mai Malaika factions. While both
factions had agreed to lay down weapons on 12 July, violence continued, causing
increased conflict-related sexual violence, especially in Salamabila and Machapano
areas.

D.

Tanganyika Province
20. The security situation continued to improve in Tanganyika, especially in
Manono, Moba, Kabalo and Kongolo territories. However, isolated incidents
involving Mai-Mai elements affected the population around the Bendera area and in
the northern parts of Nyunzu Territory. Mai-Mai Yakutumba, Mai-Mai Perci Moto
and Mai-Mai Malaika targeted artisanal mining sites while conducting ambushes on
main roads to loot passers-by. In the northern part of Nyunzu Territory, Mai-Mai Apa
Na Pale continued to ambush civilians and FARDC elements, limiting humanitarian
access. As at 5 September, 52 incidents had been recorded in Bendera and 17 in
Nyunzu, resulting in the killing of 12 civilians and five FARDC elements.

IV. Human rights situation
21. Between June and July, MONUSCO documented 1,075 human rights violations
and abuses, similar to the number recorded in the previous reporting period. Almost
all documented violations were committed in conflict-affected provinces (96 per
cent), especially in the Masisi, Beni and Rutshuru territories of North Kivu; Irumu,
Djugu and Mambasa territories of Ituri and Shabunda Territory of South Kivu.
22. Armed groups in North Kivu and Ituri, especially Nyatura, FDLR, ADF,
CODECO, APCLS and NDC-R, intensified attacks against civilians despite the state
of siege. Those armed groups were responsible for 57 per cent of the documented
violations, resulting in the death of at least 211 men, 77 women and 14 children. State
agents were responsible for 43 per cent of violations documented, in particular
violations of the right to liberty and security of the person, with 303 victims (223
men, 63 women and 17 children), and the right to physical integrity, with 165 victims
(104 men, 43 women and 18 children). At least 377 people, including 89 women and
20 children, were victims of documented extrajudicial and summary killings, 4 per
cent lower than in the previous reporting period. State agents were responsible for the
extrajudicial killing of 57 men, 12 women and four children, while armed gr oups were
responsible for the summary execution of 211 men, 77 women and 16 children.
Documented violations related to democratic space increased by 12 per cent, driven
by a rise in threats against members of civil society organizations and violations of
21-12028

5/41

S/2021/807

the right to peaceful assembly. Between June and July, members of armed groups and
State agents threatened 17 journalists while doing their work. Two of them were killed
by armed men in Ituri and North Kivu provinces.
23. As a provision of the state of siege, civilian jurisdictions were to transfer
criminal cases to the military justice system in North Kivu and Ituri. In practice,
civilian courts in the two provinces closed, while the military justice system did not
have the capacity to tackle the additional caseload, which had an impact on timely
access to justice. Dozens of people remained in pretrial detention without a hearing,
increasing the overcrowding of prisons. With the verification of the detention of
42 boys by FARDC, MONUSCO also recorded an increase in the number of children
in detention as trials were delayed owing to the state of siege.
24. On 8 July, civilian courts in Ituri and North Kivu resumed operations for non criminal matters, including juvenile cases. On 9 July, the Minister of Justice ordered
the transfer of all criminal cases, except those involving minors, to military
jurisdictions and reaffirmed the jurisdiction of civilian courts in non -criminal matters,
but the military courts have not yet been granted additional means to absorb t he
additional criminal caseload. Additionally, the state of siege triggered, in practice, the
cessation of the military operational court of North Kivu owing to the transfer of
magistrates elsewhere. This substantially reduced judicial progress on priority cases
involving crimes against humanity and war crimes perpetrated by armed groups and
state security forces under the jurisdiction of this court. MONUSCO continued to
advocate for the resumption of trials for these serious crimes and the establishment
of a clear appeal pathway against decisions of this operational court, in accordance
with the Constitution.
25. Dire challenges remain in addressing security and detention conditions,
including severe overpopulation in detention facilities. As at 3 September, the
11 priority detention facilities monitored and supported by MONUSCO held 22,922
inmates, including 14,587 high-risk prisoners, 515 women prisoners and 513
juveniles, despite having a holding capacity of 7,070 inmates. A total of 75 per cent
of these inmates are in pretrial detention. From 19 June to 30 August, 66 prisoners
died at the 11 priority prisons, including 47 at the Makala prison in Kinshasa.
26. MONUSCO continued to contribute to sustaining peace by supporting the
Congolese authorities to combat impunity and provide justice to victims and survivors
by holding accountable those accused of war crimes, crimes against humanity and
other serious human rights violations. In July, the military garrison court of Bunia
tried and convicted nine male CODECO members for crimes against humanity
committed in Walendu-Djatsi sector, Djugu territory, between June and October 2019.
Since June, six members of the Police nationale congolaise (PNC) and 20 FARDC
soldiers were convicted of serious human rights violations. MONUSCO supported
four joint investigation missions with military prosecutors into serious human rights
violations and one mobile court in conflict-affected areas. From 1 to 8 July,
MONUSCO provided support to an investigation mission on alleged vio lations,
including rape, committed by alleged Raïa Mutomboki Maheshe elements in 2019 in
villages of Walungu Territory.

V. Humanitarian situation
27. The deterioration of the humanitarian situation in conflict-affected areas of
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and dwindling resources affected the
humanitarian country team’s ability to assist people in need. As at 30 August, the 2021
humanitarian response plan, which aims to raise $1.98 billion for almost 16 million
people in need, was only funded at 27 per cent. In Ituri, North Kivu, northern
6/41

21-12028

S/2021/807

Tanganyika and South Kivu, approximately 156,000 people were recorded as newly
displaced since June, and more than 1.3 million people newly displaced thus far in
2021. This brings the number of IDPs across the country to more than 5 million,
among which 51 per cent are women. This is the highest number of IDPs on the
continent. The country also hosts some 536,000 refugees from neighbouring
countries, mainly the Central African Republic.
28. Following a joint assessment of the humanitarian situation in Ituri from 11 to
13 August, the Humanitarian Coordinator announced up to $7 million in emergency
financing from the humanitarian fund to scale-up humanitarian actions for the
2.8 million people in need in the province, including areas bordering North Kivu.
29. Meanwhile, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continued to strain the
economy and health system. As at 30 August, 55,111 cases of COVID -19, including
1,059 deaths, have been recorded in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in a
context of limited testing capacity and vaccine uptake. In July, the World Health
Organization reported that the Delta variant represents up to 79 per cent of infections
sequenced in the country. As of 29 July, 94,140 people hav e received at least a first
dose of COVID-19 vaccines in 13 provinces. A supplementary 500,700 doses of
COVID-19 vaccines were delivered to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
August and September. Logistical challenges continue to hamper the provision of
access to vaccinations to people living in remote and conflict-affected areas. At the
same time, endemic diseases such as malaria, cholera and plague are severely
straining health infrastructure, with 9.5 million cases of malaria reported, making the
disease the chief cause of morbidity and mortality in 2021.
30. On 1 September, unknown armed elements attacked a civilian convoy escorted
by FARDC and MONUSCO in Ofai, Ituri Province, resulting in four civilians killed,
and at least 20 others abducted or missing. Such attacks coupled with inaccessibility
continue to impede the mobility of civilians and goods and the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to people in need. From 19 June to 13 August, 45 security
incidents were recorded, including attacks on humanitarian operations, forcing the
withdrawal and closure of some offices of humanitarian actors.

VI. Protection of civilians
A.

Mission strategies and political processes
31. The Mission’s area-based strategies and operational plans continued to be
refined with the adoption of additional specific action plans defining joint responses
to localised threats to civilians such as in the southern part of Irumu Territory in Ituri.
In August, MONUSCO approved a new Mission-wide strategic framework on the
Protection of Civilians to complement the area-based strategies and ensure an
integrated approach to the implementation of the joint strategy on the progressive and
phased drawdown of MONUSCO. As part of the implementation of the Tanganyika
area-based plan, MONUSCO continued to provide logistical support to the national
authorities and organize capacity-building activities to ensure continuity of
mechanisms for protection of civilians and early warning and response.
32. In August, FARDC and MONUSCO launched joint offensive operations against
the ADF in Beni territory in compliance with the United Nations Human Rights Due
Diligence Policy. Specific attention was paid to the protection of civilians in the
planning phase, and coordination with FARDC and the United Nations country team
was enhanced to ensure preparedness to mitigate and respond to threats posed by
ADF.

21-12028

7/41

S/2021/807

B.

Field-level responses
33. The Mission’s community alert network system received a monthly average of
247 alerts. Forty-five per cent of alerts originated from North Kivu, and 40 per cent
from South Kivu, compared to 41 per cent and 51 per cent respectively in the previous
reporting period. The national security and defence forces and /or MONUSCO
responded to 68 per cent of these alerts.
34. In North Kivu, South Kivu and Tanganyika, MONUSCO, through the United
Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS), conducted 149 spot tasks resulting in the
destruction of 243 explosive remnants of war, including three anti-personnel mines,
two cluster ammunition and 212 small arms ammunition from 19 June to 6 September.
Additionally, a MONUSCO improvised explosive device disposal team conducted
four improvised explosive device post-blast investigations in Beni area during the
same period. On 27 July, a joint MONUSCO improvised explosive device disposal
team and explosive ordnance disposal team destroyed one improvised explosive
device and over 10 unexploded ordnance in Makoko, in Beni territory.
35. MONUSCO, through UNMAS, engaged with the national authorities to develop
better protocols in response to the changing improvised explosive device
environment. Furthermore, an explosive remnants of war/improvised explosive
device risk awareness workshop was conducted in Beni to train United Nations
military and civilian personnel, non-governmental organization personnel, local
chiefs and community leaders, members of the local population, including girls and
boys, and university students and staff. Additionally, MON USCO, through UNMAS,
launched a radio campaign on improvised explosive device threat prevention in Grand
Nord using the local station of Radio Okapi in Beni.
36. At the request of the military governor of Ituri province, from 7 to 23 July,
MONUSCO supported the training, ahead of FARDC military operations in the
province, of 688 FARDC soldiers on military tactics, weapons use, jungle combat and
human rights and international humanitarian law. MONUSCO also continued to
ensure the protection of civilians along the main road axes and IDP camps in Djugu
territory. MONUSCO responded jointly with the FARDC to threats of attacks by
CODECO near Fataki (Djugu territory), where IDPs were at immediate risk of
violence. Additionally, MONUSCO supported efforts to reduce intercommunity
tensions and facilitated dialogues leading to a commitment of non -aggression
between the Bira and the Hema communities, sealed during a traditional ceremony
witnessed by eight Groupement chiefs and the provincial authorities. This resulted i n
the return of IDPs, the resumption of trade between the Hema and Bira entities and
the public condemnation of violence by the youths of respective communities to
dissuade youth from associating with armed groups and encourage young combatants
to disarm and demobilize.
37. In response to the increased threat posed by ADF at the border between North
Kivu and Ituri, MONUSCO enhanced the coordination of protection operations in
support of FARDC. Ahead of offensive operations against ADF, MONUSCO
developed contingency plans to increase its readiness to respond to anticipated threats
against civilians, including risks of retaliation. A round-the-clock hub was
operationalized to centralize information on alerts and ensure a timely, coordinated
response by MONUSCO and the United Nations country team, representing strong
cross-pillar collaboration. MONUSCO also increased patrols and provided escorts to
civilian convoys jointly with the FARDC, providing safe passage to more than 1,825
vehicles transporting over 10,293 civilians and goods, along the main axes in Irumu,
Beni and Lubero territories, including in Tchabi and along the Komanda -Luna axis.
Additionally, the Mission focused on strengthening State capacity to maintain control

8/41

21-12028

S/2021/807

over areas gained from ADF. MONUSCO also provided support to the military
prosecution to investigate improvised explosive device explosions on 26 and 27 June
in Beni.
38. In Petit Nord, North Kivu, MONUSCO projected its protection capacities to
areas affected by armed group violence and FARDC operations. Following joint threat
assessments with the United Nations country team, MONUSCO deployed standing
combat deployments in Nyabiondo and Masisi centre to mitigate threats against
civilians resulting from increased APCLS activities.
39. In South Kivu, MONUSCO conducted joint long-range patrols with the FARDC
and joint assessment missions in Minembwe on 23 June and from 22 to 24 July and
in Bwegera/Mutarule on 29 June, to boost confidence between the FARDC and
community members through dialogue. MONUSCO also conducted joint missions to
Bijombo and Kahololo with the provincial Government to develop a common
operational assessment. The latter missions also sought to enable the joint
development of an exit strategy for the MONUSCO temporary operating base in
Bijombo, where MONUSCO continues to protect IDPs settled nearby, and the
standing combat deployment in Kahololo.
40. In Tanganyika, MONUSCO conducted 11 long-range patrols and intensified
outreach missions around Bendera to respond to protection of civilians threats. This
resulted in the surrender to MONUSCO of 13 Mai-Mai Perci Moto male combatants
on 9 August in Lugogo village.

VII. Stabilization and the strengthening of State institutions
A.

Stabilization and root causes of conflict
41. On 22 June, the Minister of Human Rights presided over an official burial
ceremony in Tshisuku, Kasai Central province, for 10 of the people killed by defence
and security forces in Tshisuku on 7 May 2017. The Minister of Human Rights
apologized to the victims on behalf of the Head of State and the Government. As part
of transitional justice mechanisms implemented in the Kasai region, MONUSCO and
the Peacebuilding Fund supported this ceremony.
42. On 29 July 2021, the North Kivu police Vice-Governor inaugurated the police
station in Kikuku, North Kivu, enabling the deployment of police officers in the area.
This was part of two International Security and Stabilization Support Strategy
projects funded by the Stabilization Coherence Fund, which contributed to restoring
State authority with the return of the PNC, the customary leader and State security
services in the area.
43. During the reporting period, MONUSCO also conducted four workshops and
three quick impact projects in North Kivu, South Kivu and Tangan yika, promoting
sustainable peace through the meaningful inclusion of youth in decision -making and
political processes.

B.

Security sector and justice system reforms
44. MONUSCO maintained its engagement with security sector institutions to
support the adoption of key reforms and strengthen security sector governance
capacities. MONUSCO continued to support the National Commission for the Control
of Small Arms and Light Weapons and Reduction of Armed Violence, including to
support the revision of the law on arms and ammunitions. On 6 September, a working
group on small arms and light weapons management, bringing together international

21-12028

9/41

S/2021/807

and national stakeholders, met for the first time with international and national
stakeholders to support the monitoring of the implementation of the National
Commission’s plan of action.
45. In July, MONUSCO provided, at the request of the Minister of Defence,
strategic and technical support ahead of a planned audit exercise conducted by the
Army Inspector General’s audit team on logistics, human resources and finance, to
inform future army policy decisions.
46. From 18 to 20 August, MONUSCO, in partnership with the network for justice
and security sector reform, organized a workshop to evaluate the role of civil society
organizations in security sector reform implementation and decision -making.
Participants, including 16 women and 24 men, identified protracted challenges,
including the absence of a military programming law and inadequate budget
allocation for security sector reform and recommended, inter alia, the development of
a holistic national strategy for the reform of the security sector. On 31 August,
MONUSCO helped the Parliamentary Defence and Security Commission within the
National Assembly to convene the second informal consultative session on security
sector reform aimed at garnering consensus on the need for a common national
strategy and a national coordination mechanism for securi ty sector reform.
47. The implementation of the United Nations Joint Justice Reform Support
Programme continued to improve the delivery and accountability of justice and
corrections institutions at the national and provincial levels. In July, the provinci al
assembly of Kasai Central adopted a motion to establish an inclusive truth, justice
and reconciliation commission, which will investigate human rights violations and
abuses and support justice and the rule of law. The Commission will engage
concerned parties, victims, communities and perpetrators of violence, including
members of armed groups and the State, in a common reconciliation effort.
Additionally, MONUSCO supported, in July, capacity-building activities for
110 clerks and secretaries for the public prosecution (42 women and 68 men) and
110 judicial police officers (15 women and 95 men) of Kasai Central and Tanganyika.
Furthermore, MONUSCO supported the Tribunal de grande instance of Kalemie to
hold trials in Moba, from 13 to 20 July, to judge 47 p ersons accused of various crimes
to address prolonged detention. Of these accused, 20 were found guilty of rape of a
child and three of murder, while three were acquitted.

C.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
48. On 5 July, the ordinance creating the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme, which merges the national
programme for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and the National
Stabilization and Reconstruction Programme (STAREC), was promulgated. On
7 August, President Tshisekedi appointed Tommy Tambwe Runiga as coordinator of
the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery and Stabilization
Programme, to lead the development of the Programme’s strategy and policy.
MONUSCO adopted, on 8 July, a United Nations strategy to provide support to the
Programme in coordination with international partners and to create an enabling
environment for implementation.
49. MONUSCO continued to support the voluntary disengagement of armed group
elements. During the reporting period, MONUSCO disarmed, provided reinsertion
support and returned 87 Congolese combatants to their communities. As part of the
MONUSCO disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and
resettlement efforts, nine male foreign combatants (eight Rwandan and one Ugandan)
and eight female dependants were repatriated. MONUSCO also collected 26 AK -47

10/41

21-12028

S/2021/807

weapons during the reporting period. Meanwhile, the FRPI disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process remains at a standstill. The Stabilization
Coherence Fund donors approved, on 26 July, a project revision, in support of the
FRPI community reintegration, to start on 15 September.
50. Additionally, four community violence reduction projects in Bunia were
completed during the reporting period. These projects targeted 863 beneficiaries,
including 16 male ex-combatants, 43 male at-risk youth, 26 vulnerable women and
778 other community members (273 women and 505 men). Meanwhile, the
implementation of a community violence reduction project was launched in Beni in
July. These projects are aimed at reducing the rerecruitment of at-risk youth and
disengaged combatants as well as at mitigating intercommunal conflicts.

VIII. Women, peace and security
51. The Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo further advanced the
meaningful participation of women in political processes. For instance, President
Tshisekedi appointed, on 6 July, Marie-France Malangu Kabedi Mbuyi as the first
female Governor of the Banque Centrale du Congo. He also appointed three women
to the Bank’s Board of Directors. Meanwhile, the Vice-Prime Minister in charge of
the interior appointed women as interim governors in Lualaba and Bas -Uele
provinces. Hence, 2 provinces out of 26 are now led by women.
52. MONUSCO continued to raise awareness of the women and peace and security
agenda and to engage with women leaders to explore joint advocacy opportunities to
boost women’s meaningful participation in political and electoral processes, in line
with the Action for Peacekeeping. On 29 July, MONUSCO met with Irena Kalonji,
president of the network of women national leaders of political parties, to discuss the
challenges faced by women candidates. MONUSCO also organized a training session
on women’s leadership for 20 girls from secondary schools in Bukavu on 1 July to
contribute to enhancing women’s participation in local governance.
53. The Special Representative held a series of exchanges with the African Women
Leaders Network in June and July to include women’s voices and perspectives in the
transition plan. These meetings also improved women’s understanding of the
Mission’s mandate and reaffirmed the vital role of women in building lasting peace.
On 29 June, MONUSCO, the Ministry of Gender, Family and Children, and the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) jointly convened a meeting of 40 civil society representatives (three
men and 37 women) in Kinshasa to discuss the involvement of women in conflict
resolution processes. This resulted in recommendations for strengthening
collaboration between MONUSCO and women’s civil society organizations at the
national and local levels, to increase women’s meaningful participation in such
processes.
54. MONUSCO continued to strengthen the gender dimension of the protection of
civilians. In August, MONUSCO conducted awareness-raising workshops on the role
of women in reducing insecurity and violence through their participation in local early
warning systems and information networks. Attended by 60 participants (13 women
and 47 men), including local authorities, defence and security actors, members of
local protection committees and women leaders from Masisi territory, the workshop
led the military administrator of Masisi territory to pledge to involve women into all
local peace and security processes in his entity.

21-12028

11/41

S/2021/807

IX. Child protection and sexual violence in conflict
55. From 19 June to 31 August, MONUSCO verified 462 grave violations against
children (94 girls and 307 boys). Forty-five children (17 girls and 28 boys) were killed
or maimed, including 10 children killed during attacks committed by CODECO and
four killed by unexploded remnants of war.
56. Meanwhile, 281 children (29 girls and 252 boys) escaped or were separated from
armed groups. Among those, 39 (11 girls and 28 boys) were newly recruited during
the reporting period, 127 children (5 girls and 122 boys), were voluntarily released
by armed groups, including pursuant to road maps to end and prevent child
recruitment and other grave violations against children. Mai -Mai groups in the Haut
Plateaux of South Kivu were the main perpetrators of recruitment and use of children
in conflict (four girls and 60 boys), followed by Nyatura (50 boys), ADF and
FDLR/Forces combattantes abacunguzi (FOCA) (12 children each, including eight
girls and 16 boys in total) in North Kivu.
57. Mai-Mai Mutetezi’s commander, in the Haut Plateaux of South Kivu, signed a
unilateral declaration and road map to end and prevent child recrui tment and other
grave violations against children. To date, 40 armed groups have made such
commitments since July 2018, resulting in the voluntary release of 2,364 children,
including 334 girls.
58. Between June and July, at least 194 women, 97 girls and one boy were victims
of documented conflict-related sexual violence, mostly in South Kivu (36 per cent),
North Kivu (21 per cent), Maniema (16 per cent), Tanganyika (12 per cent) and Ituri
(10 per cent). Among these, 207 were victims of conflict-related sexual violence
committed by armed groups, 73 by FARDC soldiers, 9 by elements of the PNC and
3 by other State agents. Of the armed groups, Mai-Mai Raïa Mutomboki, Nyatura and
Mai-Mai Malaika were the main perpetrators.
59. With the support of the Peacebuilding Fund, MONUSCO constructed a women’s
house and a radio station in Kigulube, Shabunda territory, South Kivu, to strengthen
sensitization against conflict-related sexual violence. Journalists followed a human
rights training, including on conflict-related sexual violence, and were provided with
legal materials.
60. Congolese judicial authorities convicted nine civilians, seven soldiers of
FARDC and one agent of PNC for crimes of conflict-related sexual violence,
including against children, between June and July. MONUSCO also provided
medical, psychosocial and legal assistance to 50 survivors of conflict -related sexual
violence, 46 women and four girls, committed by defence and security forces,
members of armed groups and civilians.

X. Exit strategy
61. On 5 July, Prime Minister Sama Lukonde and MONUSCO established a joint
working group and thematic sub-groups to frame discussions on specific issues
related to the transition. The sub-group on transition identified 18 benchmarks, risks
and mitigation measures and strategic partnerships that form the basis of the transition
plan, contained in the annex to the present report. Civil society actors and relevant
partners of the Democratic Republic of the Congo were consulted throughout the
process.
62. On 30 June 2021, MONUSCO withdrew from the Kasai provinces. The Mission,
however, continued to provide bridging support for key peacebuilding and
stabilization efforts. This included support to national authorities to strengthen justice
12/41

21-12028

S/2021/807

and correctional institutions through the colocation of six international and two
national personnel with United Nations agencies. Radio Okapi and the Joint Human
Rights Office remain present in Kananga, including to strengthen the capacity of
human rights defenders and organizations to monitor, document and report on the
human rights situation, and advocate for remedial actions. Additionally, MONUSCO
supported the PNC-patrolling system until 25 June when the transfer of the Stratégie
operationelle de lutte contre l’insecurité à Kananga to PNC was completed.
63. In Tanganyika, MONUSCO, the provincial Ministry of the Interior and United
Nations agencies jointly assessed remaining challenges to the protection of civilians
and identified capacity enhancement requirements. A road map was also subsequently
developed to guide the MONUSCO drawdown from Tanganyika in mid-2022. On
25 August, MONUSCO handed over the newly built office of the provincial branch
of the National Human Rights Commission in Kalemie. This branch will contribute
to strengthening the monitoring, reporting and advocacy capacities of the National
Human Rights Commission and human rights defenders ahead of the Mission ’s
foreseen withdrawal from the province.

XI. Mission effectiveness
A.

Mission performance

1.

Assessment of the performance of the force and police components
64. From 19 June to 7 September, the MONUSCO Force conducted 17,234 day and
night patrols, 1,847 joint patrols, 961 escorts and 240 aerial reconnaissance operations
and launched 20 standing combat deployments. From 19 June to 7 September, 16 out
of 40 military units were inspected, with three assessed as excellent, five assessed as
optimal, two as above average and one as average. The remaining five inspection
reports had not yet been released at the time of reporting. The Mission began to
implement measures to address the findings of inspections, including enhancing base
defences and compliance with best practices.
65. Women represent 19 per cent of military staff officers and military observ ers
and 4.9 per cent of military contingent members. MONUSCO currently has 19 female
and mixed engagement teams, five more than the previous report, carrying out
mounted and foot patrols to address security and protection needs.
66. The enhancement of the Force Intervention Brigade headquarters and
intelligence capabilities is complete. In addition to the Geolocation Threat Analysis
Unit, the Tactical Intelligence Unit has now reached full operational capacity. An
additional 34 military staff officers have been deployed during this period, thus
increasing the strength to 55 military staff officers out of 58 budgeted for the Force
Intervention Brigade headquarters. The second quick reaction force, from Kenya, has
been operational since the end of August. The deployment of the remaining two quick
reaction forces, from Nepal and South Africa, was delayed in the context of the
COVID-19 pandemic, including owing to unprecedented unavailability of shipping
vessels. Their deployment is envisaged by October.
67. Six formed police units out of eight were evaluated as satisfactory against
criteria such as support to mandate implementation, aspects related to command and
control, training, discipline, sustainable logistical capacity and medical support.
Formed police units updated their contingency plans on a regular basis and conducted
47 training sessions on the protection of civilians, public order management, firearms
and command and control.

21-12028

13/41

S/2021/807

68. Currently, women represent 17 per cent of formed police unit personnel, and the
objective is to reach at least 25 per cent by the end of 2021, including among
commanding officers. To this end, MONUSCO assessed the existing female
accommodations capacities with a view to improving infrastructure and creating a
conducive environment for the deployment of women in the framework of the
Secretary-General’s uniformed gender parity strategy 2018-2028.
69. On 30 June, MONUSCO’s police component conducted a quarterly performance
evaluation of 340 individual police officers, including 10 4 women officers.
Evaluation criteria included: professionalism; commitment to addressing protection
challenges; capacity to identify security threats, gather and analyse information; and
productivity. The overall performance assessment was 72.9 per cent, representing an
increase of 2 per cent compared to the previous reporting period. This reflects the
progress made on deliverability, productivity and protection activities due to
implementation of measures, including regular evaluation meetings, 26 new
appointments and the assignment of five individual police officers at commanding
posts. Additionally, the police component organized 13 online in -mission trainings
for 132 individual police officers, including 35 women, on child protection, sexual
exploitation and abuse, gender and leadership.
2.

Progress in the implementation of the Comprehensive Planning and
Performance Assessment System
70. MONUSCO completed the first phase of the Comprehensive Planning and
Performance Assessment System roll-out, with the finalization of the draft results
framework, adjusted to reflect the transition plan’s benchmarks and related/intended
outcomes. The System’s intended outcomes were aligned with these benchmarks to
ensure a harmonized data and reporting system to support integrated, data-driven and
evidence-based transition planning.

3.

Impact of the pandemic on mandate implementation
71. MONUSCO continued to implement mitigation measures to prevent the spread
of COVID-19, including a 14-day quarantine of newly deployed uniformed personnel,
while prioritizing operational activities with a focus on the protection of civilians.
Risk mitigation measures taken by the Government delayed the troop rotations of
several contingents.
72. As at 30 August, 1,051 United Nations personnel had tested positive for
COVID-19, of whom 961 had recovered and 13 had died. As at 25 August, the United
Nations vaccination campaign for United Nations personnel and their dependents in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo had administered 15,156 doses, including
7,919 first doses and 7,237 second doses, of which 18.2 per cent were administered
to civilians and 81.8 per cent to uniformed personnel.

B.

Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
73. From 1 June to 31 August, seven allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse
relating to incidents in 2021 involving two military contingent members and five
civilian staff members, all men, were recorded. The allegations were referred to the
appropriate investigation entities. The seven alleged victims, all women, were
referred to the United Nations Population Fund and the United Nations Children ’s
Fund (UNICEF) for support. In addition, 12 allegations of serious misconduct,
namely harassment, physical assault, fraud and theft, were recorded and referred to
the Office of Internal Oversight Services.

14/41

21-12028

S/2021/807

74. MONUSCO developed a sexual exploitation and abuse action plan for 2021 2022. The plan focuses on preventive measures, including training; risk assessments,
enforcement of curfews and out-of-bounds areas; and training and engagement with
the host communities on the United Nations zero tolerance policy for protection from
sexual exploitation and abuse. Meanwhile, MONUSCO, through Radio Okapi and
community radio stations, continued to disseminate sensitization messages in local
languages on the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse.
75. As part of a project financed by the sexual exploitation and abuse trust fund in
support of vulnerable women, including victims of sexual exploitation and abuse, 444
women, including 32 victims, completed vocational skills training in Bunia, Beni,
Bujovu, Kalemie, Kavumu and Uvira. The objective is to enable vulnerable women,
including victims of sexual exploitation and abuse, to generate incomes for
themselves and care for their children.

XII. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
76. In line with the Action for Peacekeeping commitments, ensuring the safety and
security of United Nations personnel and facilities remained a priority. MONUSCO
recorded 98 incidents involving United Nations personnel and facilities, including 7
incidents related to armed conflict, 38 to crime, 11 to civil unrest and 42 to hazards.
The incidents affected 27 international staff (21 men and six women) and 42 national
staff, including one woman.
77. A reduction in incidents was observed compared to the previous report, mainly
owing to a general improvement of the security situation in urban centres where most
personnel as defined by the United Nations security management system are located.
However, rural areas, especially in the conflict-affected provinces, continued to face
armed conflict and intercommunal tensions, which mostly affected local populations.
78. The incidents related to improvised explosive devices in Beni town represents
a shift in threat environment in the Grand Nord, exposing the United Nations and
humanitarian personnel operating in the area to further risks. In response to this shift,
MONUSCO conducted several vulnerability and risk assessments to adapt and
improve security management measures. As at 31 August, no personnel as defined by
the United Nations security management system was directly affected.

XIII. Observations
79. The Government’s programme of action (2021-2023) constitutes a key tool to
advance lasting and sustainable peace, stability and development in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. All political stakeholders are urged to spare no effort in
implementing the critical governance, security and economic reforms, including in
support of women, youth and vulnerable people, contained therein. I encourage the
international community to support such efforts, as appropriate. This momentum
needs to be maintained in the run-up to the 2023 elections.
80. The holding of timely, inclusive and peaceful elections is a key element to
sustainable peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I therefore call on all
stakeholders to overcome their differences through dialogue, to uphold the
Constitution and to refrain from hate speech and incitement to violence that would
contribute to social or political division.
81. I welcome the constructive and fruitful discussions between the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United Natio ns that have led to the
development of the transition plan for the progressive and phased drawdown of the
21-12028

15/41

S/2021/807

Mission. This cooperation is emblematic of the mutual commitment of the United
Nations and the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to f acilitate a
successful transition, which is a key pillar of the Action for Peacekeeping agenda.
The United Nations will continue to work hand-in-hand with the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to meet the end state of MONUSCO. The evolution of the situation on
the ground and progress towards achieving the benchmarks identified in the transition
plan will continue to inform future decisions about the presence of MONUSCO with
a view to sustaining the gains achieved by the Government and people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in partnership with the United Nations during two
decades of peacekeeping in the country. I call on the international community to
support such a transition process towards sustainable peace and development.
82. I am, however, deeply concerned by the persistent insecurity in Ituri, North Kivu
and South Kivu, where attacks by armed groups and intercommunal conflicts continue
to cause suffering to the population and hinder progress towards the stabilization of
the country. I also remain deeply troubled by the persistent human rights violations
and abuses, including conflict-related sexual violence committed by armed groups
and State agents. I urge the Congolese authorities to redouble their efforts to fight
impunity, ensure that perpetrators of crimes are held accountable and provide support
to victims and survivors.
83. I urge compliance with the international human rights and humanitarian law
obligations of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the context of the ongoing
state of siege in Ituri and North Kivu and for relevant authorities to act with restraint.
In this context, I appreciate the Government’s ongoing assessment of the state of siege
to ensure that the protection needs of the population are met and that their right to a
fair, transparent, effective, non-discriminatory and accountable justice system is
realized.
84. I am encouraged by the Government’s commitment to advance transitional
justice as reflected in its programme of action and by the recent creation of a joint
commission, composed of representatives of the Government and the United Nations,
mandated to draft a road map towards realizing a process of transitional justice. I am
also encouraged by the progress made in implementing transitional justice measures
in the Kasai region, which is critical for its stability. Addressing past violations and
advancing reconciliation remain a crucial step in attaining lasting and inclusive peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
85. I welcome the establishment of the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Recovery and Stabilization Programme, which offers an opportunity for the
Government, the United Nations and key partners, including the World Bank, to work
together to advance disarmament, demobilization, community reinteg ration and
stabilization in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
86. I commend President Tshisekedi’s continued diplomatic engagements with
Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi to build good relations with neighbouring countries
and advance peace, security and regional integration. The outcomes of the meeting of
the heads of intelligence and security services of Burundi, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania are encouraging.
The adoption of a two-year action plan on non-military measures to complement
military efforts by countries in the region and the establishment of an operational cell
in Goma are concrete manifestations of this renewed momentum.
87. Lastly, I wish to thank my Special Representative, Bintou Keita, for her
steadfast leadership and dedication. I also wish to express my sincere gratitude to all
MONUSCO personnel, members of the United Nations country team, troop - and
police-contributing countries and the Office of my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
Region, for their continued commitment to peace and security in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

16/41

21-12028

S/2021/807

Annex
[Original: French]

Transition plan of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
I.

Background
1.
In its resolution 2556 (2020), the Security Council approved the joint strategy
on the progressive and phased drawdown of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
(S/2020/1041, annex), and requested the development of a transition plan, which had
to include a set of detailed criteria and specific, measurable and realistic in dicators
with indicative timelines. The plan was also expected to contain an outline of the roles
and responsibilities of each party and a risk assessment and mitigation strategies for
the progressive drawdown of MONUSCO, and to set out the practical modal ities for
the transfer of tasks to the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
United Nations country team and other stakeholders.
2.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations system engaged in a series of discussions as part of a joint working group,
co-chaired by the Prime Minister, Jean-Michel Sama Lukonde Kyenge, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of MONUSCO, Bintou
Keita, and held consultations with representatives of civ il society, including women’s
groups. The discussions underlined the importance of a joint assessment mechanism,
involving the Government, the United Nations and civil society, which could
periodically provide updates on an assessment of the situation on t he ground and of
progress towards the achievement of priority benchmarks.
3.
Those discussions culminated, on 14 August 2021, with the validation of the
report on the consultative process, which provided the basis for the development of
the benchmarks and indicators necessary for the implementation of the transition plan
based on conditions on the ground.
4.
In accordance with the joint strategy and resolution 2556 (2020), MONUSCO
withdrew from Kasaï and Kasaï-Central Provinces on 30 June 2021 and plans to close
its office in Tanganyika Province by mid-2022. The Mission maintains its
headquarters in Kinshasa and a field presence concentrated in Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu Provinces. Further political and security progress will allow for the
continuation of this step-by-step approach leading to a phased, responsible and
sustainable drawdown of the Mission.

II.

State of play and analysis
5.
The political tensions surrounding the composition of the government coalition
have stabilized, in relative terms. Nevertheless, the risk of polarization of political
debates around the reform of key institutions, in the build -up to the 2023 election,
remains real. The election of the new Bureau of the National Assembly and the Bureau
of the Senate has nonetheless led to the emergence of the Union sacrée de la nation
in the legislature. On 26 April 2021, the National Assembly inaugurated the
Government of the Prime Minister and approved its programme of action fo r 20212023. The programme offers a comprehensive road map for tackling the most pressing
challenges facing the country and constitutes a solid basis for identifying priorities
under the current transition plan.

21-12028

17/41

S/2021/807

6.
It is also worth noting the importance of the issuance of order No. 21/038 of 5
July 2021 on the creation, organization and functioning of the Disarmament,
Demobilization, Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme (PDDRC -S),
which sanctioned the merger of the implementation units of the National
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Programme (UEPNDDR) and the
National Stabilization and Reconstruction Programme (STAREC).
7.
While the security situation has improved in Kasaï and Kasa ï Central Provinces
and the majority of the territories in Tanganyika, it remains worrisome in Ituri, North
Kivu and South Kivu Provinces, where national armed groups and negative forces
and foreign armed groups confronting the forces of law and order rema in active and
continue to undermine State authority. Among the main groups that are active in the
eastern part of the country are the Coopérative pour le développement du Congo
(CODECO) and the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), the latter of which has been
placed on the sanctions list of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) and designated as a terrorist group by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. These groups have remained the main source of threat to peace
and the protection of civilians, thus perpetuating insecurity, population displacement,
and human rights violations and sexual and gender-based violence in those provinces.
8.
Against this backdrop, on 3 May 2021, the President of the Republic declared a
state of siege in Ituri and North Kivu, entrusting the management of those provinces
to officers of the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (FARDC)
and the Congolese National Police (PNC). Generals have been appointed to
administer those provinces and to direct the ongoing military operations. The strategy
of the FARDC is to rigorously control and monitor operations in all operational
sectors, control and monitor land, river and lake borders, s trengthen discipline within
its ranks, improve the management of human and material resources, and actively
participate in the disarmament and demobilization phases of the PDDRC -S.
9.
The lack of respect for human rights in the provinces of Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu remains worrisome. More than 90 per cent of violations and abuses of
those rights have occurred in these three eastern provinces. Some State agents also
continue to commit violations, particularly with regard to the right to liberty and
security of person and the right to physical integrity.
10. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has ratified various national, regional
and international legal instruments through which it has made commitments to
comply with the main standards on women’s rights. The National 1325 Action Plan
on Women, Peace and Security (II) 2019–2022 has established the general framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo to fulfil those commitments, in order to
promote the rights of women, their protection and their full, equal and meaningful
involvement in conflict prevention, management and resolution, and in
peacebuilding. Other policy initiatives include the addendum to the joint communiqué
on conflict-related sexual violence published by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the United Nations in December 2019, the National Action Plan of the
“Immediate Zero Tolerance” campaign 2021–2023 and the National Strategy to
Combat Gender-Based Violence (2009). Nonetheless, the number of reported cases
of sexual and gender-based violence keeps rising. The majority of the cases have been
attributed to non-State armed groups, and the rest to State actors. The limited presence
of State institutions in some areas makes it difficult for survivors, including women
and girls, to access public services, such as justice and basic social services.
11. Substantial progress has been made at the regional level. The President of the
Republic, who is also the Chairperson of the African Union for 2021, has been making
diplomatic efforts in the region to strengthen bilateral relations with neighbouring
countries and to coordinate efforts to combat negative forces. As part of that
18/41

21-12028

S/2021/807

diplomatic push, he has signed bilateral cooperation agreements with Burundi,
Uganda and Rwanda on security, development of road and rail infrastructure, mining
resources and other issues of common interest, with a view to fostering regional
integration and cooperation among the States of the region. Furthermore, in the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region (the Addis Ababa Framework
Agreement), the Contact and Coordination Group, composed of representatives of the
intelligence and security services of the countries bordering confli ct-affected areas,
has developed an action plan on non-military measures to complement ongoing
military operations.
12. MONUSCO and the United Nations country team, in collaboration with key
national and international stakeholders, are implementing the hu manitariandevelopment-peace (triple nexus) approach in the provinces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that are in a post-conflict situation, from which MONUSCO
has already withdrawn or is preparing to withdraw. The agencies, national and
provincial authorities and non-governmental and civil society partners have continued
to address the underlying causes of conflict and systemic challenges generating
humanitarian needs. This approach has had a positive impact on sustainable
stabilization in Kasaï, Kasaï Central and Tanganyika Provinces, where it helps to
create an enabling environment for development and facilitates the transition towards
peacebuilding, allowing basic humanitarian needs to be addressed.
13. Despite those efforts, the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to face
a complex and multi-layered humanitarian crisis. According to the Humanitarian
Response Plan published in January 2021, 19.6 million people need humanitarian
assistance; more than 5.1 million people, 51 per cent of whom are women, are
internally displaced; and more than 962,142 Congolese refugees are in neighbouring
countries. The unstable security situation and severe access constraints, particularly
in the eastern part of the country, have also continued to hinder human itarian
operations.

III.

Vision
14. While most of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is in a peaceful or post conflict situation, Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu Provinces are still in a conflict
situation dominated by the activities of national and foreign armed groups and
negative forces.
15. As stated in the joint strategy, “reducing the threat posed by national and foreign
armed groups to a level that can be managed by national authorities, as well as
addressing the root causes of conflict, will enable the Mission’s exit.” In addition, in
order for the Mission’s drawdown to be carried out sustainably, a protective
environment should exist, and it should allow citizens and national institutions to
identify and promote their own solutions to conflict, to governance deficits and to
other systemic challenges.
16. The transition plan therefore contains indicative timelines for the achievement,
by 2024, of benchmarks that constitute the minimum conditions necessary for the
progressive and responsible drawdown of MONUSCO, and risk factors that could
reignite violent conflicts or undermine security and stability.
17. The achievement of these benchmarks will depend on the implementation of the
measures contained in the Government’s programme of action, particularly with
regard to good governance, institution-building and the enactment of necessary
reforms. This includes holding credible, transparent, inclusive and peaceful elections
in 2023, in accordance with constitutional timelines; fully implementing the

21-12028

19/41

S/2021/807

PDDRC-S; strengthening the rule of law by implementing the national justice reform
policy, ensuring the coordinated functioning of the police, the judiciary and
correctional facilities in the eastern provinces of the country as part o f the
demilitarization of law enforcement institutions, and addressing the needs and
capacities of the populations, in particular the vulnerable and at -risk populations with
regard to justice and legal protection; promoting full, equal and meaningful
participation by women in political processes; recognizing and addressing the
particular challenges faced by women, girls and boys in the judicial system; adopting
measures for the protection of victims and witnesses, in particular women and
children, before, during and after judicial proceedings; and designing and
implementing transformative justice programmes that address not only the singular
violations suffered by women and children, but also the underlying inequalities that
make women, girls and boys vulnerable in times of conflict.
18. The United Nations system will support the Government’s programme of action
and key reform initiatives, in keeping with the view that lasting peace is sustained by
political solutions, in a manner that supports and reinforce s national ownership. The
priority areas with regard to peacebuilding described in the joint strategy
(S/2020/1041, annex, paras. 11 to 21) are also represented in the United Nations
sustainable development cooperation framework for 2020–2024. They are
implemented by the United Nations country team and MONUSCO, in close
collaboration with the Government and national and international partners, through
joint programmatic initiatives, as well as in other strat egic and programmatic
documents, such as the collective outcomes of the triple nexus approach, the
International Security and Stabilization Support Strategy and the agreement between
the Government and the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund for the period 2 020 to
2024. They will be addressed at the national level, including through targeted
capacity-building initiatives for relevant authorities, and will apply to varying degrees
at the provincial level. Context-specific priorities have also been identified at the
provincial level in targeted strategies, which are currently being implemented.

IV.

Transition priorities and benchmarks
19. To enable the effective implementation of the transition, 18 benchmarks have
been identified, organized around two main themes: (a) minimum conditions for the
drawdown of MONUSCO (security and protection of civilians; and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration); and (b) priority actions in collaboration with the
agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations (community recovery and
stabilization; restoration of State authority in conflict and post -conflict areas). The
reforms envisaged in this transition plan apply nation-wide and in the provinces where
MONUSCO is still present, for a progressive transfer of the tasks of MONUSCO to
the Government, with the support of the United Nations country team and the other
relevant stakeholders, in order to allow for a responsible and sustainable drawdown
of the Mission. The indicators for measuring progress regarding the v arious
benchmarks, the indicative timelines and the roles and responsibilities of each
stakeholder are shown in the table below.
20. The 18 benchmarks set by the Government and the United Nations for the period
from 2021 to 2024 are indicated below:

1.

Minimum conditions for the drawdown of MONUSCO

(a)

Security and protection of civilians
Benchmark 1: Significant reduction in armed threats thanks to a comprehensive
approach that helps to put an end to the existence of armed groups in the provinces of

20/41

21-12028

S/2021/807

Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu to an extent that they can no longer cause
widespread violence against the civilian population.
Benchmark 2: Existence of a greater capacity to respond rapidly to protection threats
and resolve intercommunity conflicts effectively, and greater cooperation between the
security forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO, the actors
concerned and other effective civil defence mechanisms, including civil society and
humanitarian personnel.
(b)

Disarmament and demobilization
Benchmark 3: Adoption of a national framework outlining key strategic, political,
institutional, legal, coordination, financial and operational strategies for disarmament
and demobilization, including community reintegration that will serve as a means of
transition towards community recovery and stabilization.
Benchmark 4: Contribution of the PDDRC-S to the sustainable reduction of the
number of armed groups, in accordance with order No. 21/038 of 5 July 2021,
following the transition timeline.

2.

Priority collaborative actions with specialized agencies, funds and programmes
of the United Nations

(a)

Community recovery and stabilization
Benchmark 5: Continued implementation of the national framework outlining key
strategic, political, institutional, legal, coordination, financial and operational
parameters for community recovery and stabilization in the country with the support
of the agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Benchmark 6: Capacity and concrete engagement of the Government and civil
society and other non-State actors in preventing, mitigating and resolving disputes
through functional, inclusive and sustainable platforms (mechanisms) for the
resolution of local conflicts.

(b)

Restoration of State authority in conflict and post-conflict areas
Benchmark 7: Adoption and implementation of a government policy that takes into
consideration the rights and needs of refugees, internally displaced persons and host
communities, as well as gender issues (men, women, girls and boys).
Benchmark 8: Meaningful participation of women and young leaders (to amplify the
voices of women and young leaders) in decision-making processes related to the
protection of civilians, stabilization and peacebuilding.
Benchmark 9: Increased capacities of State institutions to protect civilians and their
rights by restoring State authority.
Benchmark 10: Engagement of State institutions in the protection of civilians and
their rights, strengthening the rule of law to combat impunity and cor ruption in
accordance with national laws and international human rights obligations.
Benchmark 11: Effective and functional presence of State institutions to ensure a
minimum offering of public services to the population.
Benchmark 12: Enhanced demand for justice, access to justice and legal protection
for the population, in particular vulnerable and at-risk groups by setting up the
appropriate legal and operational mechanisms.

21-12028

21/41

S/2021/807

Benchmark 13: Implementation of disciplinary and legal measures, in accordance
with the law, against those responsible for acts of corruption or for maintaining
commercial relations with armed groups.
Benchmark 14: Continued implementation by the Government of a security strategy
at the national and provincial levels, as well as a pla n of action for security sector
reform, focusing in particular on respect of human rights and gender.
Benchmark 15: Organization of credible, inclusive and peaceful elections held in
accordance with constitutional timelines.
Benchmark 16: Stabilization of conflict-sensitive mining areas through the
progressive formalization of the mining sector and a significant reduction of fraud
and corruption.
Benchmark 17: Finalization of land reform to ensure transparency over land
allocation and security of tenure.
Benchmark 18: Implementation of the transition plan in line with the integrated
regional strategy, respecting the commitments made by the countries of the Great
Lakes Region, signatories, guarantors and the Office of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations under the Addis Ababa Framework
Agreement.

V.

Priority areas of action in the provinces
21. The joint strategy had identified conditions for the transition specific to each
province in which MONUSCO was present, and whose attainment would be
necessary to envisage a progressive drawdown in each area. Those conditions remain
valid for assessing progress made at the provincial level. It is worth noting the areas
where the Government, with the support of the United Nations system , will focus its
efforts in each province to allow for a progressive and responsible drawdown of the
Mission as part of its end state.

1.

Tanganyika
22. With recent progress on the security front in Tanganyika Province, conflicts in
the border area with the territories of Fizi in South Kivu and Kabambare in Maniema
have continued to subside, and tensions in the territories of Nyunzu and Kongolo
between the Bantu and Twa populations, which would likely require a continued
military capacity for intervention in both territories, are being addressed.
Transhumance and conflicts between communities of nomadic herders and sedentary
farmers, as well as land and customary conflicts, remain widespread in the province.
23. Until the drawdown of the Mission from Tanganyika Province, expected by
mid-2022, the Government, MONUSCO and the United Nations country team will
focus on (a) improving the security environment in the territories of the province in
order to facilitate the voluntary return of internally displaced persons and Congolese
refugees; (b) starting to implement the PDDRC-S; (c) strengthening the capacity of
local community conflict resolution mechanisms in o rder to build trust between the
Twa and Bantu communities and address recurrent conflicts; and (d) fostering access
to fair trials, legal aid, judicial protection and appropriate reparation for victims.

2.

Ituri
24. Despite the declaration of the state of siege and the significant achievements of
the operations of the FARDC, notably against factions of the ADF and CODECO, the
period since the presentation of the joint strategy in October 2020 has been marked

22/41

21-12028

S/2021/807

by a worrisome escalation of violence against civilians and the security forces. That
trend was observed in the territories of Djugu, Irumu and, to a lesser extent, Mahagi.
The areas affected by violence, characterized by brutal attacks, have increased. Armed
groups have proliferated, mainly in the territories of Djugu and Irumu, where the
armed group Force patriotique et intégrationniste du Congo has intensified its
activities and the armed group Zaire, active in Djugu and northern Irumu, continues
to have the potential to destabilize both territories. Despite some advances in the
implementation of the peace agreement signed on 28 February 2020 between the
Government and the Force de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process set out in the agreement ha s been interrupted
pending the implementation of the new modalities.
25. The priority actions of the Government, with the support of MONUSCO and the
United Nations country team, are: (a) creating the necessary security conditions for
the implementation of social policies conducive to the voluntary and sustainable
return of internally displaced persons and refugees, while continuing to provide
physical protection where necessary; (b) strengthening the capacity and presence of
the State in the security and justice sectors in order to establish a protective
environment in the province, to effectively combat impunity, prosecute serious
crimes, including sexual and gender-based violence, and promote human rights;
(c) strengthening transitional justice processes in order to combat impunity
effectively, give victims access to justice and reparation, and introduce non recurrence measures; and (d) implementing the PDDRC-S, which focuses on
sustainable community reintegration and not the integration of former combatant s
into the State security forces.
3.

North Kivu
26. The situation in North Kivu has remained unchanged since the publication of
the joint strategy and continues to be of concern. Armed groups, both national and
foreign, such as factions of the Nduma défense du Congo rénové (NDC-R) and the
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda-Forces combattantes abacunguzi
(FDLR/FOCA), continue to compete for control of territory and pose a serious threat
to civilians. The ADF is currently concentrated in two mai n localities: along the
provincial border between Ituri and North Kivu, between Tchabi, Kainama, Mamove
and Luna; and south-east of Beni, in the Ruwenzori area. Although the group has been
dislodged from its traditional strongholds, recruitment, including in neighbouring
countries and through kidnapping, continues. The military operations of the FARDC
against the ADF have resulted in the dispersion of the ADF into smaller, more mobile
groups, but no fighters have surrendered. In addition to the activities o f the ADF,
dozens of local armed Maï-Maï groups, positioning themselves as Nande self-defence
groups, continue to operate mainly in the west, south and south -east of Beni territory
and in most of Lubero territory.
27. Among its priority actions, the Government, with the support of MONUSCO
and the United Nations country team, will continue to focus on: (a) creating the
necessary security conditions for the implementation of social policies conducive to
the voluntary and sustainable return of internally displaced persons and refugees,
while continuing to provide physical protection where necessary; (b) strengthening
the capacity and presence of the State in the security and justice sectors, in order to
establish a protective environment in the province, to effectively combat impunity,
prosecute serious crimes, including sexual and gender-based violence, and promote
human rights; (c) planning and executing joint operations between MONUSCO and
the FARDC to eliminate the threats posed by the ADF, increasing press ure on the
FDLR to disarm, and enabling the FARDC and the PNC to maintain basic security in
areas liberated from armed groups; (d) creating a cohesive environment between the

21-12028

23/41

S/2021/807

population and the State and increasing efforts to address the underlying causes and
main drivers of conflict, such as land disputes and illegal exploitation of mineral
resources; (e) implementing the PDDRC-S, including the community reintegration of
combatants of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the return of foreign fighters
to their countries of origin; and (f) prosecuting the perpetrators of serious human
rights violations and crimes against humanity and strengthening the criminal justice
chain, including the functioning of the police, the judiciary and the prison
administration.
4.

South Kivu
28. The situation in the Hauts Plateaux, Moyens Plateaux and the Ruzizi plain
remains worrisome, including in the context of the intercommunity conflict between
the Twigwaneho self-defence militia and a Maï-Maï coalition. The conflict with
several foreign armed groups, such as Résistance pour un État de droit au Burundi
and the Forces nationales de libération, has a significant cross -border element.
Clashes between coalitions of armed groups and attacks against civilians have
resulted in violations of human rights and international humanitarian law. In addition,
the Maï-Maï Yakutumba faction operates in South Kivu and in the border areas with
Maniema and Tanganyika. It is the driving force behind the many shifting Maï -Maï
alliances, and exerts particular influence on the Maï-Maï Apa Na Pale and Maï-Maï
Malaika groups, and continues to be heavily involved in illegal mining activities.
29. The priority actions of the Government, with the support of MONUSCO and
the United Nations country team, will continue to revolve around: (a) creating the
security conditions necessary for the implementation of social policies conducive to
the voluntary and sustainable return of internally displaced persons and refugees,
while continuing to provide physical protection where necessary; (b) strengthening
the capacity and presence of the State in the security and justice sectors in order to
establish a protective environment in the province, to effectively combat impunity,
prosecute serious crimes, including sexual and gender-based violence, and promote
human rights; (c) implementing the PDDRC-S for combatants of armed groups,
including the Maï-Maï Yakutumba and their allies, while addressing the illicit
exploitation of natural resources which fuels the violence of armed groups;
(d) restoring State authority in order to enable displaced persons to return to their
communities of origin; and (e) combating human rights violations, including high
levels of conflict-related sexual violence, particularly in the territories of Shabunda,
Walungu, Fizi and Kabambare.

VI. Risk assessment and mitigation measures
30. The drawdown of the Mission, although gradual, will have a political and
security impact on the implementation of the Mission’s mandate concernin g human
rights and humanitarian access in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Among the
most significant risks are the security consequences of a premature withdrawal from
areas affected by armed conflict, including a possible resurgence of conflict.
However, other risks are worth considering, including increased political tensions
which could undermine the adoption of key institutional reforms, including security
sector reform and the implementation of the PDDRC-S, weak institutional capacity,
impunity for crimes committed by armed groups and some security authorities, which
could further undermine the peace process and reconciliation efforts, and poor
resource mobilization to support the transition process.
31. The partnership between the Government and the United Nations system is
central to risk management. A joint analysis of the national and provincial contexts is

24/41

21-12028

S/2021/807

among the mitigation measures that must be emphasized. At the provincial level, the
mitigation strategy could be carried out through joint programmes, such as an
emergency community development and stabilization programme, in order to increase
its impact. The resource mobilization strategy also needs to be strengthened in order
to diversify sources of funding and to support the implementatio n of the
Government’s programme of action.

VII.

Strategic partnerships
32. The implementation of this transition plan will require close collaboration
between the Government, the United Nations system and partners, in order to ensure
that the conditions are in place to facilitate the drawdown of MONUSCO in a
progressive, responsible and sustainable manner. In consultation with international
financial institutions and other multilateral and bilateral partners, the Government and
the United Nations will continue to ensure an inclusive process that reflects the
capacities which the Government, the Mission, the United Nations country team and
other international organizations can provide to support the implementation of joint
priorities, and that sets out capacity-building strategies to ensure a progressive
transition.
33. The Mission will continue to contribute to the implementation of the United
Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework during the transition
period. The United Nations will undertake joint programmatic activities in order to
better integrate its work into the Mission’s core areas of focus, with a view to
facilitating the transition towards a post-peacekeeping context. Joint programmatic
activities will focus on security, protection of civilians, community violence
reduction, disarmament, demobilization, community recovery and stabilization,
human rights and institutional reforms.
34. As part of an integrated approach, the United Nations will also continue to work
with the Congolese authorities, local populations and civil society, including
organizations led by women and young people, to support reconciliation and
community stabilization initiatives. It will also continue to work in collaboration with
key national and international stakeholders, using the humanitarian -developmentpeace (triple nexus) approach to address the underlying causes of conflict and the
systemic drivers of humanitarian needs.
35. The United Nations will also support the strategic use of projects financed
through the Peacebuilding Fund and the Stabilization Coherence Fund and the
establishment of a strategic framework to strengthen institutions, with a focus on
addressing the underlying causes of conflict, strengthening the Government’s
capacities, consolidating the accountability mechanism, and ensuring democratic
dialogue, community resilience and social cohesion.
36. In the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and other
instruments concerning women, peace and security, the United Nations system will
collaborate with the Ministry of Gender, Family and Children’s Affairs and the Office
of the Special Adviser to the Head of State on combating sexual violence and c hild
recruitment, the FARDC, the PNC and judicial and prison authorities, as well as other
stakeholders.

21-12028

25/41

Benchmark

1.

Indicator

Area of engagement

Responsibility

Timeline

Minimum conditions for the drawdown of MONUSCO

(a) Security and protection of civilians
1. Significant reduction in
armed threats thanks to a
comprehensive approach that
helps to put an end to the
existence of armed groups in
the provinces of North Kivu,
South Kivu and Ituri to an
extent that they can no longer
cause widespread violence
against the civilian population

1. The number of armed groups, the
size of their membership and the
geographical area where they
operate in violence-affected areas
declines considerably

Ituri, North Kivu and South Government and
MONUSCO
Kivu

By the end of 2023

21-12028

2. The capacity and presence of
Ituri, North Kivu and South Government (FARDC,
PNC)
security forces increase in areas
Kivu
where armed groups are present and
active

Each year

3. The PNC is deployed in liberated
areas and takes over the security
role performed by the FARDC

Ituri, North Kivu and South PNC
Kivu

By 2024

4. The reconfiguration of the
MONUSCO force, in particular its
Force Intervention Brigade (FIB),
is complete and its engagement in
joint operations is effective

Ituri, North Kivu and South MONUSCO
Kivu

By the end of 2024

5. The number of persons internally
displaced owing to armed conflict
decreases

Ituri, North Kivu and South Government and
MONUSCO
Kivu

Each year

6. The trust of the population,
including women and young
people, in the national defence and
security forces is rising (polling
data disaggregated by gender and
by age group)

Ituri, North Kivu and South Government
Kivu

By the end of 2024

7. The cases of sexual and genderbased violence and other human
rights violations drop sharply

Ituri, North Kivu and South Government
Kivu

By the end of 2024

S/2021/807

26/41

Transition priorities and benchmarks

21-12028

Benchmark

2. Existence of a greater
capacity to respond rapidly to
protection threats and resolve
intercommunity conflicts
effectively, and greater
cooperation between the
security forces of the
Democratic Republic of the
Congo, MONUSCO, the actors
concerned and other effective
civil defence mechanisms,
including civil society and
humanitarian personnel

Indicator

Area of engagement

Responsibility

8. The number of people by territory
who say that the armed groups are
the principal source of insecurity
decreases (polling data)

Ituri, North Kivu and South Government
Kivu

Timeline

By the end of 2024

1. Inclusive and representative early
Ituri, North Kivu and
warning and protection mechanisms South Kivu
exist and are functioning
effectively, translating into rapid
response by State actors

Government,
MONUSCO (in part)
and agencies, funds and
programmes of the
United Nations

By the end of 2024

2. Women, young people, civil society Ituri, North Kivu and
and community representatives,
South Kivu
including religious leaders,
participate actively and inclusively
in coordination mechanisms dealing
with security and conflict
resolution

Government,
MONUSCO (in part)
and agencies, funds and
programmes of the
United Nations

By the end of 2024

3. Local councils for neighbourhood
Ituri, North Kivu and South
security are operational and local
Kivu
security committees and standing
human rights protection monitoring
committees are in place and
operational

Government,
MONUSCO (in part)
and agencies, funds and
programmes of the
United Nations

By the end of 2024

Ituri, North Kivu and South Government,
Kivu
MONUSCO (in part)
and agencies, funds and
programmes of the
United Nations

By the end of 2024

Ituri, North Kivu and South Government and
Kivu
partners

By the start of 2022

(b) Disarmament and demobilization

S/2021/807

27/41

3. Adoption of a national
1. The components of the PDDRC-S,
framework outlining key
such as the steering committee, the
strategic, political, institutional,
national coordination group, the
legal, coordination, financial
technical committee, the provincial
and operational strategies for
coordination groups and the
disarmament and
territorial branches, are in place and
demobilization, including
operational
community reintegration that
2. The national policy and strategy
will serve as a means of
papers for the PDDRC-S outlining
transition towards community
the principles, objectives, roles and
recovery and stabilization
responsibilities, necessary

Indicator

Area of engagement

Responsibility

Timeline

Government,
MONUSCO (in part)
and agencies, funds and
programmes of the
United Nations

By the end of 2022

resources, coordination
mechanisms and the systems for
monitoring and overseeing
disarmament, demobilization and
community reintegration and
stabilization activities in
accordance with order No. 21/038
of 5 July 2021 are prepared and
approved by the competent
authorities
3. The national disarmament,
Ituri, North Kivu and South
demobilization, community
Kivu
reintegration and stabilization
strategy is developed and
implemented in accordance with the
provisions of order No. 21/038
4. Rebels are not incorporated
automatically or massively into the
regular army and the PNC

Ituri, North Kivu and South Government
Kivu

By 2022

5. Women and girls and boys
associated with armed groups and
their dependants are demobilized
and benefit from sustainable,
effective, holistic and gendersensitive DDCR-S programmes

Ituri, North Kivu and South Government
Kivu
MONUSCO (in part)
and agencies, funds and
programmes of the
United Nations

By the end of 2023

4. Contribution of the
1. The number of armed groups
PDDCR-S to the sustainable
dismantled through disarmament
reduction of the number of
and demobilization operations and
armed groups, in accordance
whose members are then
with order No. 21/038 of 5 July
reintegrated through community
2021, following the transition
reintegration projects respectful of
timeline
the rights of victims to reparation
and to measures of non-recurrence
increases

Ituri, North Kivu and South Government,
Kivu
MONUSCO (in part)
and agencies, funds and
programmes of the
United Nations

By the end of 2024

S/2021/807

28/41

Benchmark

21-12028

21-12028

Benchmark

2.

Indicator

Area of engagement

Responsibility

2. The number of women, girls and
boys and dependants associated
with armed groups and returning
vulnerable members of
communities who have benefited
from community reintegration
projects increases

Ituri, North Kivu and South Government,
Kivu
MONUSCO (in part)
and agencies, funds and
programmes of the
United Nations

Timeline

By the end of 2024

Priority collaborative actions with agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations

(a) Community recovery and stabilization
Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

After 2024

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

Ongoing

6. Capacity and concrete
1. The number of customary power
engagement of the Government
conflicts addressed and resolved
and civil society and other nonthrough an appropriate mechanism
State actors in preventing,
with the broad participation of the
mitigating and resolving
communities concerned increases
disputes through functional,
2. Inclusive and effective conflict
inclusive and sustainable
resolution mechanisms, including
platforms (mechanisms) for the
customary conflict resolution
resolution of local conflicts
advisory committees and barazas
are strengthened, taking into
consideration the gender dimension

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

Ongoing

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

Ongoing

S/2021/807

29/41

5. Continued implementation 1. Former combatants who have
Ituri, North Kivu and South
of the national framework
surrendered voluntarily are
Kivu
outlining key strategic,
accompanied and supported
political, institutional, legal,
through community recovery
coordination, financial and
processes
operational parameters for
2. Communities, including traditional Ituri, North Kivu and South
community recovery and
and religious leaders, women and
Kivu
stabilization in the country with
youth
groups,
participate
actively
in
the support of agencies, funds
the development and
and programmes of the United
implementation of inclusive
Nations in the Democratic
(socioeconomic) disarmament,
Republic of the Congo
demobilization, community
reintegration and stabilization
programmes

Indicator

Area of engagement

Responsibility

Timeline

3. The number of men and women
who say that they have good
relations with the members of their
ethnic group and other ethnic
groups increases (polling data)

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

Ongoing

4. The number of intercommunity and Ituri, North Kivu and
intracommunity clashes reported
South Kivu
decreases

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

Ongoing

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government

By 2022

2. A favourable environment allowing Ituri, North Kivu and
refugees, internally displaced
South Kivu
persons, including women and
girls, and host communities to
effectively enjoy their rights is
created

Government

Ongoing

3. The needs of refugees, internally
displaced persons, including
women and girls, and host
communities are integrated into
development plans at the national
and local levels

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government

Five-year timelines

4. The number of refugees and
internally displaced persons
benefitting from lasting solutions,

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government with the
support of agencies,

Ongoing

(b) Restoration of State authority in conflict and post-conflict areas
7. Adoption and
implementation of a
government policy that takes
into consideration the rights
and needs of refugees,
internally displaced persons
and host communities, as well
as gender issues (men, women,
girls and boys)

1. The Democratic Republic of the
Congo deposits an instrument of
ratification of the African Union
Convention for the Protection and
Assistance of Internally Displaced
Persons in Africa of 23 October
2009 and passes a national law on
the implementation of the
Convention

S/2021/807

30/41

Benchmark

21-12028

21-12028

Benchmark

Indicator

Area of engagement

including the return to their
localities of origin, increases and
peaceful coexistence with host
communities is promoted

Responsibility

Timeline

funds and programmes
of the United Nations

Government with the
By 2022
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

6. Internally displaced persons and
refugees enjoy lasting security in
their places of residence

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

By 2024

8. Meaningful participation of 1. The representation and significant
women and young leaders (to
participation of women in
amplify the voice of women
community mechanisms, such as
and young leaders) in decisionlocal security committees and
making processes related to the
provincial security councils,
protection of civilians,
increases
stabilization and peacebuilding
2. Implementation of the plan of
action of the PNC and the plan of
the FARDC regarding the joint
communique on conflict-related
sexual violence is pursued and
strengthened

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

Ongoing

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

By 2024

3. The National 1325 Plan of Action
on Women, Peace and Security (II)
and the Revised National Strategy
for Combating Gender-Based
Violence are implemented in the
provinces of North Kivu, South
Kivu and Ituri

North Kivu, South Kivu
and Ituri

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

By 2022

4. The number of women
organizations and networks
benefitting from protection,

North Kivu, South Kivu
and Ituri

Government with the
support of agencies,

By 2022

S/2021/807

31/41

5. Government directives and the
Ituri, North Kivu and
presence of security actors facilitate South Kivu
secured humanitarian access to
vulnerable populations, including
women and girls

Indicator

Area of engagement

stabilization and peacebuilding
increases
9. Increased capacities of
State institutions to protect
civilians and their rights by
restoring State authority

1. Cases of physical aggression
against civilians, in particular
women, girls and boys decrease

Responsibility

Timeline

funds and programmes
of the United Nations
Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government

By 2023

2. An environment conducive to
Ituri, North Kivu and
safety and security for women, girls South Kivu
and boys, free of sexual and sexist
violence and other forms of human
rights violations is created

Government

By 2023

3. Mechanisms are in place to ensure Ituri, North Kivu and
compensation in case of loss,
South Kivu
damage and arbitrary or illegal land
deprivation

Government

By 2023

10. Engagement of State
1. The number of human rights abuses
institutions in the protection of
and violations, including serious
civilians and their rights,
violations of the rights of the child,
strengthening the rule of law to
sexual and gender-based violence,
combat impunity and
war crimes and crimes against
corruption in accordance with
humanity committed by all armed
national laws and international
groups and State actors, decreases
human rights obligations
2. The resources allocated to the
judicial system and establishment
of mechanisms for the prevention
of and response to human rights
violations and abuses, including for
reparations and comprehensive
support for victims, increase

Ituri, North Kivu and South Government, MONUSCO By 2024
(in part) and agencies,
Kivu
funds and programmes of
the United Nations.

Ituri, North Kivu and South Government, MONUSCO By 2024
(in part) and agencies,
Kivu
funds and programmes of
the United Nations

21-12028

3. The effectiveness of State human
Ituri, North Kivu and South Government
rights protection institutions
Kivu
increases due to the establishment
of the Provincial Human Rights
Division in Ituri Province and the
strengthening of the activities of the
National Human Rights

By 2023

S/2021/807

32/41

Benchmark

21-12028

Benchmark

Indicator

Area of engagement

Responsibility

Timeline

Commission in an optimal and
effective manner for it to fulfil its
mandate in accordance with the
Paris Principles, including for the
handling of complaints
Ongoing

5. Victims, including women and girl Ituri, North Kivu and South Government
survivors of sexual and genderKivu
based violence and conflict-related
sexual violence, are recognized and
compensated appropriately

Ongoing

6. The number of women who are
represented in State institutions for
the protection of civilians and their
rights and who influence them
significantly increases

Ituri, North Kivu and South Government
Kivu

Ongoing

7. The number of respondents who
think that victims of sexual
violence may have their case heard
in court increases (polling data)

Ituri, North Kivu and South Government
Kivu

Ongoing

8. A national and provincial system of Ituri, North Kivu and South Government
transitional justice is established
Kivu

Ongoing

9. The legal framework is
Ituri, North Kivu and South Government
strengthened in accordance with
Kivu
international legal instruments
concerning human rights ratified by
the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; the law setting measures for
the application of freedom to

Ongoing

S/2021/807

33/41

4. Allegations of serious human rights Ituri, North Kivu and South Government
violations are investigated, and
Kivu
credible prosecutions are conducted
by the judicial authorities and the
perpetrators, including those in
command and control positions, are
brought to justice

Indicator

Area of engagement

Responsibility

Timeline

demonstrate is passed; the draft
legislation on the rights and
responsibilities of human rights
defenders and the draft legislation
on general provisions applicable to
non-profit institutions and public
utilities are adopted
11. Effective and functional
presence of State institutions to
ensure a minimum offering of
public services to the population

1. The operating mechanisms of
decentralization are reinforced

Ituri, North Kivu and South Government,
Kivu
MONUSCO (in part)
and agencies, funds and
programmes of the
United Nations

2. Police and justice institutions,
including the prison system, are
operating in a coordinated manner
in the major towns of Tanganyika,
Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu
Provinces and are assuming
increasing responsibility for law
and order

Ituri, North Kivu and South Government, MONUSCO By 2023
(in part) and agencies,
Kivu
funds and programmes of
the United Nations

Ongoing

3. The number of qualified women in the Ituri, North Kivu and South Government, MONUSCO By 2024
Kivu
(in part) and agencies,
judiciary, the army and the police
funds and programmes of
increases
the United Nations
4. The five-year plan of action for reform Ituri, North Kivu and South Government, MONUSCO Five-year
Kivu
(in part) and agencies,
of the PNC is fully funded and
funds and programmes of
implemented
the United Nations
5. The Government’s security
Ituri, North Kivu and South Government, MONUSCO Ongoing
(in part) and agencies,
institutions have the appropriate
Kivu
funds and programmes of
capacity and are implementing the
the United Nations
agreed frameworks for combating
crimes of sexual violence
21-12028

6. The effectiveness of public
administration is improved at the
central, provincial and local levels, in

Ituri, North Kivu and South Government, MONUSCO Ongoing
Kivu
(in part) and agencies,

S/2021/807

34/41

Benchmark

21-12028

Benchmark

Indicator

Area of engagement

accordance with the Government’s
programme, including through the
more efficient management of
resources
7. The priority prisons of Ndolo
Makala, Luzumu, Goma, Beni,
Butembo, Bunia, Kalemie, Uvira,
Bukavu, Kabare and Kananga treat
inmates, including high-risk and
“high profile” inmates, with the
appropriate security capacities to
ensure internal security and the
basic subsistence of inmates

12. Enhanced demand for
justice, access to justice and
legal protection for the
population, in particular
vulnerable and at-risk groups
by setting up the appropriate
legal and operational
mechanisms

Responsibility

Timeline

funds and programmes of
the United Nations

Ituri, North Kivu and South Government, MONUSCO Ongoing
(in part) and agencies,
Kivu
funds and programmes of
the United Nations

8. The working and living conditions of Ituri, North Kivu and
law officers, police officers and prison South Kivu
officers are improved, in accordance
with the Government’s programme

Government, MONUSCO Ongoing
(in part) and agencies,
funds and programmes

1. Police, justice and prison
infrastructure in areas affected by
armed conflict, are built or
rehabilitated, in accordance with the
Government’s programme

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

By 2024
Government with the
support of agencies, funds
and programmes of the
United Nations and
MONUSCO (until 2024)

2. Access to information and justice
(investigation and prosecution
processes) is facilitated for the
non-discriminatory treatment of
women, girls and boys facing the
judicial system

Ituri, North Kivu and South Government with the
Ongoing
Kivu
support of agencies, funds
and programmes of the
United Nations and
MONUSCO (until 2024)

3. Measures for the protection of victims Ituri, North Kivu and
and witnesses, in particular women
South Kivu
and children, exist before, during and
after judicial proceedings
Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

S/2021/807

35/41

4. A justice reform and empowerment
mechanism for women is in place to

Ongoing
Government with the
support of agencies, funds
and programmes of the
United Nations and
MONUSCO (until 2024)
By 2022
Government with the
support of agencies, funds

Indicator

Area of engagement

combat impunity with regard to
human rights violations and sexual
and gender-based violence

Responsibility

Timeline

and programmes of the
United Nations and
MONUSCO (until 2024)

5. Transformative justice programmes
Ituri, North Kivu and
that address violations suffered by
South Kivu
women as well as the underlying
inequalities that make women and
girls vulnerable in times of conflict are
developed and implemented

By 2023
Government with the
support of agencies, funds
and programmes of the
United Nations and
MONUSCO (until 2024)

13. Implementation of
1. The capacities of the Government to
Ituri, North Kivu and
disciplinary and legal measures,
investigate and prosecute cases of
South Kivu
in accordance with the law,
corruption, serious violence against
against those responsible for
civilians or commercial relations with
acts of corruption or for
armed groups involving officials of
maintaining commercial
the Democratic Republic of the Congo
relations with armed groups
are strengthened

Government (Ministry
of Human Rights and
Ministry of Justice) and
agencies, funds and
programmes of the
United Nations.

Ongoing

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government (Ministry
of Human Rights) and
agencies, funds and
programmes of the
United Nations

Ongoing

14. Continued implementation 1. Priority plans of action for reform
by the Government of a
of the FARDC and the PNC are
security strategy at the national
disseminated and implemented at
and provincial levels, as well as
the national and provincial levels,
a plan of action for security
taking into consideration the gender
sector reform, focusing in
dimension
particular on respect of human
2. The mechanism for oversight and
rights and gender
monitoring of the empowerment of
security institutions through
parliament is strengthened

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

By 2022

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

Ongoing

3. Gender-sensitive road maps for the
implementation of the priority plan
of action for reform of the defence
and security forces, as well as

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government with the
support of agencies,

By 2021

2. A law to protect whistle-blowers is
passed in order to counter illicit
enrichment, in accordance with the
Government’s programme

S/2021/807

36/41

Benchmark

21-12028

21-12028

Benchmark

Indicator

Area of engagement

reserved quotas and specialized
training facilitating the recruitment,
retention and participation of
women in security sector
institutions, are adopted and
communicated to bilateral and
multilateral partners

Responsibility

Timeline

funds and programmes
of the United Nations

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

By 2021

5. Awareness by security institutions
of respect for human rights,
including the rights of the child,
international humanitarian law and
protection of civilians is increased

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

Ongoing

6. The capacity of judicial
mechanisms to combat human
rights violations committed by
State security services and
violations of the rule of law,
including conflict-related sexual
violence, is strengthened

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

Ongoing

7. Complete gender-sensitive
assessments of national security
institutions (justice, police,
FARDC) are conducted to fill
capacity gaps

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

By 2022

8. The FARDC and the PNC are
Ituri, North Kivu and
trained on gender-sensitive
South Kivu
approaches in security contexts and
are educated about the linkage

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

Ongoing
S/2021/807

37/41

4. An updated road map for the
Ituri, North Kivu and
implementation of the annual
South Kivu
recruitment and demobilization
plans of the FARDC and the PNC is
adopted and communicated to
bilateral and multilateral security
sector reform partners

Indicator

Area of engagement

Responsibility

Timeline

15. Organization of credible,
1. The electoral law and the organic law Nation-wide
inclusive and peaceful elections
on the organization and functioning of
held in accordance with
the National Independent Electoral
constitutional timelines
Commission are revised; the
amendments are adopted by consensus
following political consultations

Government and
agencies, funds and
programmes of the
United Nations, and
other funders

Constitutional
timelines

Nation-wide

Government and
agencies, funds and
programmes of the
United Nations, and
other funders

By 2022

3. Political actors are refraining from any Nation-wide
use of armed violence related to the
contesting of elections

Government and
agencies, funds and
programmes of the
United Nations, and
other funders

By 2023

Nation-wide

Government and
agencies, funds and
programmes of the
United Nations, and
other funders

By 2024

5. The number of women participating in Nation-wide
electoral processes, including as
candidates for various elections,
increases at the national and provincial
levels

Government and
agencies, funds and
programmes of the
United Nations, and
other funders

By 2023

between gender and the prevention
of violent extremism

2. A consensus is reached on
constitutional reforms concerning
voting methods

4. Gender-sensitive legal frameworks
and arrangements, including the 2015
law on the modalities for the
enforcement of women’s rights and
parity, are established

S/2021/807

38/41

Benchmark

21-12028

21-12028

Benchmark

Area of engagement

Responsibility

Timeline

16. Stabilization of conflict1. State control is implemented thanks
sensitive mining areas through
to the effective strengthening of the
the progressive formalization of
mining police in mining areas
the mining sector and a
significant reduction of fraud
2. Significant progress is made in the
and corruption
fight against impunity and in
accountability in cases of illegal
commercial relations with armed
groups

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

By 2022

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations
and other funders

By 2024

3. Units suspected of being involved
structurally in the illegal
exploitation of natural resources in
conflict-sensitive areas are rotated
and their command changed

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

By 2024

4. Tangible progress is made with
regard to accountability for the
illegal exploitation of natural
resources at all levels of command

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

By 2024

1. Reinforced traceability,
Nation-wide
certification and due diligence
systems control economic activities
and reduce opportunities for fraud
by criminal actors

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds, programmes of
the United Nations

By 2022

2. Considerable progress is made in
the formalization and support of
artisanal mining in identified
conflict-sensitive priority areas

Nation-wide

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

By 2022

3. Active measures are taken to
improve legal trading opportunities

Nation-wide

Government with the
support of agencies,
funds and programmes
of the United Nations

By 2022

17. Finalization of land reform
to ensure transparency over
land allocation and security of
tenure

Indicator

S/2021/807

39/41

Indicator

18. Implementation of the
1. The transition plan is executed as part
Transition Plan in line with the
of an integrated regional strategy
integrated regional strategy,
while respecting the commitments
respecting the commitments
made by the countries of the Great
made by the countries of the
Lakes region
Great Lakes Region,
signatories, guarantors and the
Office of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary General of the
United Nations under the Addis
Ababa Framework Agreement
2. Regular assessments of the
implementation of the Framework
undertaken

Area of engagement

Responsibility

Timeline

Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu

Government,
By 2024
MONUSCO (until
2024), countries
signatory to the Peace,
Security and
Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
and the Region, and
guarantors

Nation-wide

Government,
By 2024
MONUSCO, countries
signatory to the Peace,
Security and
Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
and the Region, and
guarantors

S/2021/807

40/41

Benchmark

21-12028

21-12028

S/2021/807

41/41
