United Nations

A/RES/58/143

General Assembly

Distr.: General
10 February 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 110

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2003
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/58/501)]

58/143. Violence against women migrant workers
The General Assembly,
Recalling all of its previous resolutions on violence against women migrant
workers and those adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women, the
Commission on Human Rights and the Commission on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice, and the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against
Women, 1
Reaffirming the provisions concerning women migrant workers contained in
the outcome documents of the World Conference on Human Rights, 2 the
International Conference on Population and Development, 3 the Fourth World
Conference on Women 4 and the World Summit for Social Development 5 and their
five-year reviews,
Noting the various activities initiated by entities in the United Nations system,
such as the Hemispheric Conference on International Migration: Human Rights and
the Trafficking in Persons in the Americas, organized by the Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean and the International Organization for
Migration, held at Santiago from 20 to 22 November 2002, as well as other
activities that continue to assess and alleviate the plight of women migrant workers,
Emphasizing the need for objective, comprehensive, broad-based information,
possibly including a database for research and analysis, and a wide exchange of
experience and lessons learned by individual Member States and civil society in the
formulation of policies and concrete strategies to address the problem of violence
against women migrant workers,

_______________
1

See resolution 48/104.
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
3
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
4
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
5
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
2

03 50316

A/RES/58/143

Encouraging the continuing participation of civil society in developing and
implementing appropriate measures to support innovative partnerships among public
agencies, non-governmental organizations and other members of civil society for
combating violence against women migrant workers,
Noting the large numbers of women from developing countries and some
countries with economies in transition who continue to venture forth to more
affluent countries in search of a living for themselves and their families as a
consequence of poverty, unemployment and other socio-economic conditions, and
acknowledging the duty of the countries of origin to try to create conditions that
provide employment and economic security for their citizens,
Expressing deep concern at the continuing reports of grave abuses and acts of
violence committed against women migrant workers,
Realizing that the movement of a significant number of women migrant
workers may be facilitated and made possible by means of fraudulent or irregular
documentation and sham marriages with the object of migration, that this may be
facilitated through, among other things, the Internet, and that these women migrant
workers are more vulnerable to abuse and exploitation,
Acknowledging the economic benefits that accrue to both the country of origin
and the country of destination from the employment of women migrant workers,
Recognizing the importance of joint and collaborative approaches and
strategies at the bilateral, regional, interregional and international levels in
protecting and promoting the rights and welfare of women migrant workers,
Recognizing also the importance of exploring the link between migration and
trafficking,
Encouraged by some measures adopted by some countries of destination to
alleviate the plight of women migrant workers residing in their areas of jurisdiction,
Underlining the important role of relevant United Nations treaty bodies in
monitoring the implementation of human rights conventions and the relevant special
procedures, within their respective mandates, in addressing the problem of violence
against women migrant workers and in protecting and promoting their rights and
welfare,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 6

Also takes note of the reports of the Special Rapporteur of the
2.
Commission on Human Rights on the human rights of migrants 7 and of the Special
Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on violence against women, its
causes and consequences, 8 with regard to violence against women migrant workers,
and encourages the Special Rapporteurs to continue to address the issue of violence
against women migrant workers and their human rights, in particular the problems
of gender-based violence and of discrimination, as well as trafficking in women;

_______________
6

A/58/161.
E/CN.4/2003/85 and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1, Add.2, Add.3 and Add.3/Corr.1 and Add.4.
8
E/CN.4/2003/75 and Corr.1 and Add.1, Add.2 and Add.2/Corr.1, Add.3 and Add.4.
7

2

A/RES/58/143

3.
Acknowledges with appreciation the entry into force of the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
their Families 9 on 1 July 2003;
Requests all Governments to continue to cooperate fully with both
4.
Special Rapporteurs in the performance of their tasks and mandated duties and to
furnish all information requested, including by reacting promptly to the urgent
appeals of the Special Rapporteurs;
Encourages Governments, in particular those of the countries of origin
5.
and destination, to make available to the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of
migrants information on violence against women migrant workers, with a view to
requesting the Special Rapporteur to recommend concrete measures and actions to
address the problem;
Also encourages Governments to give serious consideration to inviting
6.
the Special Rapporteur to visit their countries so as to enable her to fulfil the
mandate effectively;
Urges concerned Governments, in particular those of the countries of
7.
origin and destination, to strengthen further their national efforts to protect and
promote the rights and welfare of women migrant workers, including through
sustained bilateral, regional, interregional and international cooperation, by
developing strategies and joint action and taking into account the innovative
approaches and experiences of individual Member States, and to establish and
maintain continuing dialogues to facilitate the exchange of information;
Also urges concerned Governments, in particular those of the countries of
8.
origin and destination, to support and allocate appropriate resources for programmes
aimed at strengthening preventive action, in particular information for target groups,
education and campaigns to increase public awareness of this issue at the national
and grass-roots levels, in cooperation with non-governmental organizations;
Notes with appreciation the adoption by Member States, including
9.
countries of origin, transit and destination, of measures to inform women migrant
workers of their rights and the benefits to which they are entitled, and encourages
other Member States to adopt appropriate measures in this regard;
10. Calls upon concerned Governments, in particular those of the countries
of origin and destination, if they have not done so, to put in place penal and criminal
sanctions to punish perpetrators of violence against women migrant workers and, to
the extent possible, to provide and to encourage non-governmental organizations to
provide victims of violence with the full range of immediate assistance and
protection, such as counselling, legal and consular assistance, temporary shelter and
other measures that will allow them to be present during the judicial process, as well
as to establish reintegration and rehabilitation schemes for returning women migrant
workers to their countries of origin;
11. Encourages concerned Governments, in particular those of the countries
of origin and destination, to support and, if they have not done so, to formulate and
implement training programmes for their law enforcers, prosecutors and service
providers with a view to instilling among those public sector workers the necessary
skills and attitude to ensure the delivery of proper and professional interventions for
women migrant workers who are subjected to abuse and violence;
_______________
9

Resolution 45/158, annex.

3

A/RES/58/143

12. Also encourages concerned Governments, in particular those of the
countries of origin and destination, to adopt measures or strengthen existing ones to
regulate the recruitment and deployment of women migrant workers, and to consider
the adoption of appropriate legal measures against intermediaries who deliberately
encourage the clandestine movement of workers and who exploit women migrant
workers;
13. Invites Governments to identify the causes of undocumented migration
and its economic, social and demographic impact, as well as its implications for the
formulation and application of social, economic and migration policies, including
those relating to women migrant workers;
14. Encourages concerned Governments, in particular those of the countries
of origin, transit and destination, to avail themselves of the expertise of the United
Nations, including the Statistics Division of the Secretariat and other relevant
bodies, such as the International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women, to develop appropriate national data-collection
methodologies that will generate comparable data on violence against women
migrant workers as bases for research and analysis of the subject;
15. Encourages Member States to consider signing and ratifying or acceding
to relevant International Labour Organization conventions and to consider signing
and ratifying or acceding to the International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, as well as the
Slavery Convention of 1926; 10
16. Welcomes the imminent entry into force of the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, 11 and the adoption by the General Assembly of the Protocol against the
Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,11 and encourages Governments
to consider signing and ratifying or acceding to the Protocols;
17. Encourages the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women to consider developing a general recommendation on the situation of
women migrant workers;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixtieth session on the problem of violence against women migrant workers and on
the implementation of the present resolution, taking into account updated
information from the organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the
International Labour Organization, the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Development Fund for Women and the International Research
and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women, as well as the International
Organization for Migration and other relevant sources, including non-governmental
organizations.
77th plenary meeting
22 December 2003

_______________
10
11

4

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 212, No. 2861.
See resolution 55/25.
