IX
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE
A.D HOC POLITICAL COMMITTEE
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTEES SUR LES RAPPORTS DE LA
COMMISSION POLITIQUE SPECIALE
terim Committee of the General
Assembly

196 (III). Retablissement de la Cona•
mission interimaire de I'Assemblee
acenerale

The General A11embly,
. Havinc taken note of the report submitted to it

L'AUtJmb!k genbals,
Ayant pri, aete du rapport qui lui a ete squmis

the Interim Commit1ee on the advisability
o establishing a permanent committee of the
General Assembly (A/606),
Ajirminc that, for tho effective performance
of the duties specifically conferred upon the
General Assembly by the Charter in relation to
matters concerning the maintenance of international peace and security (Articles 11 and 3 5),
the promotion of international co-operation in
the political field (Article 13), and the peaceful
adjustment of any situation likely to impair
the general welfare or friendly relations among
nations (Article 14), it is necessary to continue
the Interim Committee for the purpose of considering such matters further and reporting with
conclusions to the General Assembly,

par la Commission interimaire suri' opportuniU
d'etablir une commission permanente de l'Assemblee generale (A/606),
Ajirmant qU8, pour mener a bien les tiches
expressement confiees par la Charte al' Assemblff
generale en ce qui concerne les questions relatives au maintien de la pai.x et de la sfcuriU
internationales (.Ar.icles 11 et 35), le dtSveloppement de la cooperation internationale dans le
domaine politique (Article 13), et l'ajustement
pacifique de toute situation qui lui semble de
nature a nuire au bien general OU a compromettre les relations amicales entre nations
(Article 14), il est necessaire de continuer la
Commission interimaire pour qu'elle poursuive
l'etude de ces questions et presente un rapport
avec des conclusions A l'Assemblee generale,
Reronnai,,ant pleinement que la responsal)ilite
principale d'une action rapide et efficace destinee
a maintenir la paix et la securite internationales
incomhe au Conseil de securite (Article 24),

196 (III). Re-establishment of the Jn.

bl

RecolJrimng fully the primary responsibility
of the Security Council for prompt and effective
action for the maintenance of international
peace and security (Article 24),

Decide ce qui suit

Reaolve, that
1. There shall be re-established for the period
between the closing of the present session and
the opening of the next regular session of the
General Assembly an Interim Committee on
which each Member of the General Assembly
shall have the right to appoint one representative;

1. II est retabli, pour la periode qui s'ecoulera
entre la cl6ture de la presente session et l' ouverture de la prochaine session ordinaire de l'Assemblee generale un" Comnussion interimaire A
laquelle chaque Memhre de l'Assemblee generale
a le droit de nommer un representant;

2. The Interim Committee, as a subsidiary
organ of the General Assembly established in
accordance with Article 22 of the Charter, shall
assist the General Assembly in the performance of
its functions by discharging the following duties :
(a) To consider and report with conclusions
to the General Assembly on such matters as may
be referred to the Committee by or under the
authority of the General Assembly;

2. La Commission interimaire, en tant qu'organe subsidiaire de l'Assemblee generale etabli
conformement a l'Article 22 de la Charte, seconde
l'Assemblee generale dans l'accomplissement de
ses fonctions en remplissant les tiches suivantes :
a) Etudier les questions qui lui sont renvoyees
par l'Assemblee generale OU en vertu d'une
autorisation de celle-ci et presente un rapport
a leur sujet a l'Assemhlee generale avec des conclusions;
b) Etudier tout differend ou toute situation
dont !'inscription a l'ordre du jour de l'Assemhlee generale a ete demandee, en vertu des
Articles 11 (paragraphe 2), 14 ou 35 de la
Charte, par un Etat Memhre de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies ou, en vertu des Articles 11
(paragraphe 2) ou 3 5, par un Etat non memhre,

(b) To consider and report with conclusions
to the General Assembly on any dispute or any
situation which, in virtue of Articles 11 (paragraph 2), 14 or 35 of the Charter, has been
proposed for inclusion in the agenda of the
General Assembly by any Member of the United
Nations, or by any non-member State under

28

.........._,_._,,,

Articles 11 (paragraph 2) or 3 5, or has been
brought before the General Assembly by the
Security Council, provided the Committee previously determines the matter to be both important and requiring preliminary study. Such
determination shall be made by a majority of
two-thirds of the members present and voting,
unless the matter is one referred to the General
Assembly by the Security Council, in which case
a simple majority will .suffice;
(c) To consider systematically, using as a
starting point the recommendations and studies
of the Interim Committee contained in document A/605, the further implementation of
that part of Article 11 (paragraph 1) relating
to the general principles of co-operation in the
maintenance of international peace and security, and of that part of Article 13 (paragraph 1 a)
which deals with the promotion of international
co-operation in the political field, and to report
with conclusions to the General Assembly;

(d) To consider, in connexion with any matter
under discussion by the Interim Committee,
whether occasion may require the summoning of
a special session of the General Assembly and,
if the Committee deems that a session is required,
so to advise the Secretary-General in order that
he may obtain the views of the Members of the
United Nations thereon;
(e) To conduct investigations and appoint
commissions of inquiry within the scope of
the Committee's duties, as it may deem useful
and necessary, provided that decisions to conduct
such investigations or inquiries shall be made by
a two-thirds majority of the members present
and voting. An investigation or inquiry elsewhere than at the headquarters of the United
Nations shall not be conducted without the
consent of the State or States in whose territory
it is to take place;
({) To report to the next regular session of the
General Assembly on any changes in the Committee's constitution, its duration or its terms of
reference which may be considered desirable in
the light of experience ;

_____

OU dont le Conseil de securite aura saisi l'Assemhlee generale, sous reserve que la Commission
decide d'abord qu'il s'agit d'une question importante et requerant une etude preliminaire, et
presenter un rapport avec des conclusions a
l'Assemblee generale a son sujet. La Commission
prend cette decision a fa majorite des deux tiers
des membres presents et votants, a moins qu'il
ne s'agisse d'une question dont l'Assemhlee
generale aura ete saisie par le Conseil de securite,
auquel cas la majorite simple suffit;
c) Proceder, en prenant comme point de
depart les recommandations et les etudes de la
Commission interimaire qui se trouvent dans le
document A/605, a l'examen systematique de la
continuation de la mise en reuvre des disposition11
de l' Article 11 (paragraphe 1) relatives aux
principes generaux de cooperation pour le maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales,
ainsi que des dispositions de !'Article 13
(paragraphe 1 a) qui traitent du developpement
de la cooperation internationale dans le domaine
politique, et presenter un rapport avec des conclusions a I' Assemblee generale;
d) Apprecier, a propos de toute question en
discussion au sein de la Commission interimaire,
si la situation appelle la convocation d'une session
extraordinaire de l'Assemblee generale et, dans
!'affirmative, en aviser le Secretaire general afin
qu'il puisse obtenir l'avis des Membres de )'Organisation des Nations Unies ace sujet;

e) Conduire des enqu~tes et designer des
commissions d'enquMe, dans la limite de ses
fonctions et dans la mesure ou elle le juge utile
et necessaire, sous reserve que toute decision
tendant a conduire une enqu~te soit prise a la
majorite des deux tiers des membres presents et
votants. Aucune enquMe ne devra ~tre conduite
ailleurs qu'au siege de !'Organisation des Nations
Unies sans le consentement de l'Etat ou des Etats
sur le tcrritoire desquels elle doit avoir lieu,
/) Faire rapport a l'Assemblee generale, lors
de sa prochaine session ordinaire, sur toute
modification a ses propres constitution, duree
ou mandat, qui pourrait ~tre jugee souhaitable
a la lumiere de I' experience;
3. La Commission interimaire est autorisee
par la presente resolution a demander a la Cour
internationale de Justice des avis consultatifs
sur les questions juridiques qui se poseraient
dans le cadre de son activite ;
4. Dans l'accomplissement de ses fonctions,
la Commission interimaire prend a tout moment
en consideration les responsabilites confiees par
la Charte au Conseil de securite, en vue de maintenir la paix et la securite internationales, et
tient dt\ment compte egalement deti fonctions
confiees par la Charte, par l'Assemhlee generale

3. The Interim Committee is hereby authorized to request advisory opinions of the International Court of Justice on legal questions arising
within the scooe of the Committee's activities;
4. In discharging its duties, the Interim
Committee shall at all times take into account
the responsibilities of the Security Council under
the Charter for the maintenance of international
peace and security as well as the duties assigned
by the Charter or by the General Assembly or
by the Security Council to other Councils or to

29

any committee or comm1ss1011. The Interim
Committee shall not consider any matter of
which the Security Council is seized and which
the latter has not submitted to the General
Assembly;

OU par le Conseil di,: s,irunle
OU

a d'aulres Conseib,

a tout comite OU commission. La Commission

interimaire n'exarninP aucune question dont IP
Conseil de securite est saisi et dont ce derni,T
n'a pas saisi l'Assemhlee generale;

5. The rules of p1·occdurc rioverninu the
proceedings of the Interim Committee and such
suh-committees and commissions as it may set
up shall be those adopted by the Interim Committee on 9 January 1948 1 with such changes and
additions. as the Interim Committee may deem
necessary, provided that they are not inconsistent
with any provision of the present resolution or
wilhanyapplicable rule ofprocedureoftheGener-al Assembly. The Interim Committee shall be
convened by the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Chairman elected during the
previous session of the Committee or the head
of his delegation, to meet at the headquarters of
the United Nations not later than 31 January
1949. At the opening meeting, the Chairman
elected during the previous session of the Committee, or the head of his delegation, shall
preside until the Interim Committee has elected
a Chairman. The Interim Committee shall meet
as and when it deems necessary for the conduct
of its business. No new credentials shall be
required for representatives who were duly
accr~dited to. the Interim Committee during its
prev10us sess10n;

5. Les deliberations de la Commission inti•rimaire et celles des sous-commissions et commissions qu'elle pourrait creer sont regies par le
reglement interieur adopte par la Commission
interimaire, le 9 janvier 19681, avec les modifications et additions que la Commission pourra
juger necessaires, a condition que ces modifications et additions ne soient incompatibles ni
avec l'une quelconque des dispositions de la
presente resolution, ni avec aucune des dispositions pertinentes du reglement interieur de
I' Assemhlee genen1le. La Commission interimaire
sera convoquee par le Secretaire general, en
consultation avec le President elu au cours de la
session precedente de la Commission interimaire
ou avec le chef de sa delegation, au siege de
!'Organisation pour le 31 janvier 196 9 au plus
tard. Le President elu au cours de la session
precedente de la Commission interimaire, OU le
chef de sa delegation, assurera la presidence
lors de la premiere seance jusqu'a ce que la
Commission interimaire ait elu un President.
La Commission interimaire fixe la date de ses
reunions en tenant compte des necessites de sa
tache. Les representants d~ment accredites a
la Commission interimaire au cours de sa session
precedente, ne ~eront pas tenus de presenter de
nouveaux pouvo1rs;

6. The Secretary-General shall provide the
necessary facilities and assign appropriate staff
as required for the work of the Interim Committee, its sub-committees and commissions.

6. Le Secretaire general met a la disposition
de la Commission interimaire, de ses souscommissions et commissions, les moyens et le
personnel necessaires a l'accomplissement de
leurs taches.
Cent-soixante--neuiume 3'ance pUniere,

Hundred and sixty-ninth plenary meeting,
3 December 1948.
197 (Ill). Admission of new Members

le 3 decemlm, 1948.
197 (Ill).

Aclmission de
Membres

nouveaux

A

A

Wltma8, pursuant to the provisions of Article 4, paragraph 2, of the Charter, admission to
membership in the United Nations will be effected
by a decision of the General Assembly upon the
recommendation of the Security Council, and
Wltma8 the International Court of Justice in
an advisory opinion of .28 May t 948i declared
that :
(a) A Member of the United Nations which is
called upon, in virtue of Article 4 of the Charter,
to pronounce itself by its vote1 either in the Secu-

Attsndu qu'aux termes du paragraphe 2 de
!'Article 6 de la Charte, l'admission comme
Membre des Nations Unies se fait par decision de
l'Assemblee generate sur recommandation du
Conseil de securite, et
Attsndu que, clans un avis consultatif emis le
2 8 mai 1948\ la Cour internationale de fostice
a declare :
a) Qu'un Membre de l'Organisation des Nations Unies appele, en vertu de l'Artide 4 do la
Charte, a se prononcer par son vote, soit au

1 See

docu111ellt A/AC.18/10.
' See .4auaioft of o Scm co &lie U"iced Nolioria ( Chorier,
•~ticlt A), .4clNJry OpifttOII, I. C. J. Reports, 1948, page 5 7.

1 Voir le document A/AC.18/tO.
• Voir .4dmiuiOII d'1m Ew.t cn,:c Nation, Unin ( Clorte, Article 4) • .4vi, COM11ltoty, C. I. J., Recueil, 19~ 'I, page 57.
