VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

187

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31 /86 of 13 December 1976,
32/66 of8 December 1977, 33/51 of 14 December 1978
and 34/45 of 23 November 1979,

Having noted the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,""
Noting with appreciation that, following its appeal,
more Member States have acceded to the International
Covenants on Human Rights," 1
Bearing in mind the important responsibilities of the
Economic and Social Council in relation to the International Covenants on Human Rights,
Noting with appreciation that during the first regular
session of the Economic and Social Council in 1980 the
Sessional Working Group on the Implementation of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights began consideration of reports submitted by States parties under article 16, of the Covenant,
Recognizing the important role of the Human Rights
Committee in the implementation of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol thereto,
I. Notes with appreciation the report of the Human
Rights Committee on its eighth, ninth and tenth sessions02 and expresses satisfaction at the serious and constructive manner in which the Committee is continuing
to undertake its functions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the States parties to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
which have extended their co-operation to the Human
Rights Committee when submitting their reports under
article 40 of the Covenant and urges States parties which
have not yet done so to submit their reports to the Committee as speedily as possible;
3. Urges States parties which have been requested by
the Human Rights Committee to provide additional information to comply with that request;
4. Takes note of the fact that the Human Rights
Committee is considering the question of the follow-up
to its consideration of the reports of the States parties to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights;
5. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution L980/24 of 2 May 1980 regarding the consideration of reports submitted under the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;
6. Again invites all States which have not yet done so
to become parties to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights as well as
to consider acceding to the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
7. Invites the States parties to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to consider making the declaration provided for in article 41 of the
Covenant;
8. Appreciates that the Human Rights Committee
continues to strive for uniform standards in the implementation of the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and of the Optional
Protocol thereto, and emphasizes the importance of the
strictest compliance by States parties with their obligations under the Covenant;

"See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1978,
Supplement No. 4 (E/ I 978/34), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
"Ibid., 1979, Supplement No. 6 (E/1979/36), chap. XXIV. sect. A.
"Ibid., 1980, Supplement No. 3 (E/1980/13 and Corr. I),
chap. XXVI, sect A.

''" A/35/195.
''' Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session,
Supplement No. 40 (A/35/40).

2. Requests the Economic and Social Council and
the Commission on Human Rights to consider the draft
guidelines related to procedures for determining whether adequate grounds exist for detaining persons on the
grounds of mental ill-health and the draft principles for
the protection of persons suffering from mental disorder
requested in resolution 33 /53, with a view to their being
submitted to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session.
92nd plenary meeting
I I December 1980
35/131.

Question of a convention on the rights of the
child

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33 / 166 of 20 December 1978,
entitled "Question of a convention on the rights of the
child", and 34/4 of 18 October 1979, entitled "International Year of the Child",
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights
resolutions 20 (XXXIV) of 8 March 1978, S7 19 (XXXV)
of 14 March 1979 5 ' and 36 (XXXVI) of 12 March
1980, 59 as well as Economic and Social Council resolutions 1978/18 of 5 May 1978 and 1978/40 of I August
1978 and Council decision 1980/138 of 2 May 1980,
Aware of the widespread interest during the International Year of the Child in working out an international convention on the rights of the child and of the
important role the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the United Nations
Children's Fund have to play in the subject-matter concerned,
Noting further progress in discussions on and in the
elaboration of such a draft convention by the Commission on Human Rights,
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the work so far
accomplished and the spirit of co-operation in elaborating a convention on the rights of the child:
2. Welcomes Economic and Social Council decision
1980/138 by which the Council authorized an openended working group of the Commission on Human
Rights to meet for a period of one week prior to the
thirty-seventh session of the Commission to complete
the work on the draft convention:
3. Requests the Commission on Human Rights, at
its thirty-seventh session, to continue to give high
priority to the question of completing the draft convention on the rights of the child;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Question of a
convention on the rights of the child".
92nd plenary meeting
I I December 1980
35/132.

International Covenants on Human Rights

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

188

9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
keep the Human Rights Committee informed of the activities of the Commission on Human Rights, the SubCommission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities and the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination and also to
transmit the annual reports of the Human Rights Committee to these bodies;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a report on
the status of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights;
11. Welcomes the measures already taken by the
Secretary-General to improve the publicity for the work
of the Human Rights Committee and encourages the
Committee to continue its consideration of this question;
12. Urges the Secretary-General to take all possible
steps to ensure that the Division of Human Rights of the
Secretariat is able to assist effectively the Human Rights
Committee and the Economic and Social Council in the
implementation of their respective functions under the
International Covenants on Human Rights, taking into
account General Assembly resolutions 3534 (XXX) of
I 7 December 1975 and 31 /93 of 14 December 1976:
13. Requests the Secretary-General to make appropriate arrangements, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 31 / 140 of 17 December 1976, for
the holding of meetings of the Human Rights Committee in developing countries, and to report in this regard
to the Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.

92nd plenary meeting
I I December 1980
35 / 133.

International Year of Disabled Persons

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 31 / 123 of 16 December 1976,
by which it proclaimed the year 1981 International Year
of Disabled Persons,
Recalling also its resolutions 32/ 133 of 16 December
I 977, by which it established the Advisory Committee
for the International Year of Disabled Persons, 33 / 170
of 20 December 1978 and 34/ 154 of 17 December 1979,
Recalling further resolution 2, entitled "Improving the
situation of disabled women of all ages", adopted on
30 July I 980 by the World Conference of the United
Nations Decade for Women,"'
Recognizing that the International Year of Disabled
Persons should promote the realization of the right of
disabled persons to participate fully in the social life and
development of their societies and to enjoy living conditions equal to those of other citizens, as well as an equal
share in the improvements in living conditions resulting
from social and economic development,
Bearing in mind the importance of co-ordination at
the national, regional and international levels in the
programming for the prevention of disability and the rehabilitation of disabled persons.
"'See Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Copenhagen, 14-J0 July
/980 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.IV.J and corrigendum), chap. I, sect. B.

Convinced thut the International Year of Disabled
Persons should give the impulse for the establishment of
a long-term world plan of action to follow up the activities of the Year.
Recognizing that the International Year of Disabled
Persons should contribute to a greater awareness of the
magnitude and complexity of the incidence of physical,
sensorial and mental disabilities through, inter alia, effective public information activities,
Having considered the offer of the Government of
Argentina"' to act as host to the action-oriented international symposium of experts on technical assistance in
the field of disability and technical co-operation among
developing countries, to be convened during the International Year of Disabled Persons,
Concerned about the need to provide the secretariat of
the International Year of Disabled Persons with the
resources necessary for the implementation of the Plan
of Action for the Year"' and its follow-up,
l. Notes with satisfaction the steps already taken in
the implementation of the Plan of Action for the International Year of Disabled Persons by Member States,
organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system and non-governmental organizations, and encourages them to intensify their action and coordination during the Year:
2. Recommends that, in their efforts to promote the
full participation of disabled persons in all aspects of
life, Member States and organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system should pay particular attention to the participation of disabled persons
themselves and of their organizations in the activities
undertaken in connexion with the International Year of
Disabled Persons and its follow-up:
3. Invites Member States which have not yet done so
to establish national committees or similar bodies for
the International Year of Disabled Persons:
4. Urges Member States to give higher priority to
development assistance projects in developing countries
in the fields of rehabilitation services, technical aids and
training of appropriate personnel, including disabled
persons themselves:
5. Welcomes the voluntary contributions made by
Governments to the International Year of Disabled Persons and appeals for further voluntary contributions to
the Year:
6. Decides to accept the offer of the Government of
Argentina to act as host in 1981 to the action-oriented
international symposium of experts on technical assistance in the field of disability and technical co-operation
among developing countries, to be held in conformity
with the Plan of Action for the International Year of
Disabled Persons:
7. Requests the regional commissions to formulate
appropriate programmes for implementing the recommendations contained in the Plan of Action for the International Year of Disabled Persons:
8. Requests the Secretary-General to examine the
question of access to United Nations buildings, documents and information for persons with sensorial disabilities:
,,, See i\/C ..,;.,~. '·
'' The Plan of Action for the International Year of Disabled Persons adopted by the General Assembly consists of the text appearing
1n paragraphs 57 to 76 of the annex to document A/34/158 and
Corr. I, with the deletion of the phrase following the words "(see subpara. (i) below)" in paragraph 74 (c). of paragraph 74 (u), and of the
\\ords following the v.ord "nationallv" in paragraph 75 (h).
