S/2010/254

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 May 2010
Original: English

Letter dated 26 May 2010 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 1912 (2010) of
26 February 2010 on the situation in Timor-Leste. In that resolution, the Council
underscored the need for the concept of operations and rules of engagement for the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) to be regularly updated
as necessary and to be fully in line with the provisions of that resolution, and
requested me to report on them to the Council and troop- and police-contributing
countries within 90 days after the adoption of the resolution.
As the roles and tasks of the military liaison group have not changed, no
adjustments are required to the military concept of operations. The current concept
of operations of the police component, which was approved in January 2010, has
been carefully reviewed by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the
United Nations Secretariat and UNMIT and is perceived as meeting the
requirements of the mandate of the Mission, as set forth in Security Council
resolution 1912 (2010) and relevant previous resolutions.
In its resolution 1912 (2010), the Council expressed support for the ongoing
work on the resumption of primary policing responsibilities by the Polícia Nacional
de Timor-Leste (PNTL) through a phased approach, to ensure that PNTL met the
criteria mutually agreed between the Government of Timor-Leste and UNMIT, as set
out in paragraph 21 of my report of 4 February 2009 (S/2009/72). As highlighted in
my letter dated 20 May 2009 (S/2009/261) and in paragraph 20 of my report dated
2 October 2009 (S/2009/504), the resumption process is being conducted pursuant to
the agreement concluded on 13 May 2009 by His Excellency Mr. Kay Rala Xanana
Gusmão, Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, and my Special Representative (hereinafter
referred to as the “agreement”) and in accordance with the Arrangement on the
Restoration and Maintenance of Public Security in Timor-Leste and Assistance to
the Reform, Restructuring and Rebuilding of the Timorese National Police and the
Ministry of the Interior, concluded between the Government of Timor-Leste and
UNMIT on 1 December 2006. The agreement reiterates the mutually agreed criteria
for the resumption process and sets forth the respective roles and responsibilities of
the UNMIT police and PNTL after the latter resumes primary policing
responsibilities in a district or unit. As further provided for in the agreement, joint
assessment teams of civilian and police representatives from the Government and
UNMIT continue to determine the readiness of the districts and units on the basis of
the agreed criteria. The teams also identify any shortcomings that need to be

10-37723 (E) 260510

*1037723*

S/2010/254

addressed by PNTL and the Government of Timor-Leste, both prior to and following
resumption, with the assistance of UNMIT.
In line with the agreement, a revised version of the current concept of
operations for the police component of UNMIT is in its final stage of review and
approval. It provides strategic objectives as well as operational guidance for the
implementation of the gradual resumption of policing responsibilities by PNTL. It
also sets out the change in the roles and responsibilities of PNTL and the UNMIT
police whereby the latter has assumed an increasing role in mentoring, training,
monitoring, advising and providing operational support to PNTL. To enhance the
effectiveness and joint ownership of the resumption process by the UNMIT police
and PNTL, the Mission is developing, jointly with the Timor-Leste authorities, a
plan for the continued role of the UNMIT police in mentoring, training and
monitoring as well as providing advice and operational support to PNTL. In this
connection, in order to better assist PNTL in building its capacity, priority will be
given to the deployment to UNMIT of police officers as well as civilian experts with
the required skill sets. The assistance of Member States in the provision of such
personnel to UNMIT in a timely manner will be vital. At the same time, it will be
important for the Timorese to increasingly assume ownership of the process and to
utilize, to a maximum extent, the assistance provided by the continued presence of
UNMIT.
The directive on detention, searches and use of force for United Nations police
officers on assignment with UNMIT, which sets out the circumstances in which such
officers may utilize force in executing their duties, does not require any revision at
this time, as the UNMIT police will continue to have significant responsibilities for
interim law enforcement until PNTL has been fully reconstituted.
To date, PNTL has resumed primary policing responsibilities in 6 of the
13 districts of Timor-Leste (Lautem, Oecussi, Manatuto, Viqueque, Ainaro and
Baucau) and 3 of 12 units (the Police Training Centre, the Maritime Unit and the
Police Intelligence Service). In addition, PNTL has met the criteria for the
resumption of primary policing responsibilities in another two districts, Aileu and
Liquica, and resumption of those responsibilities in these districts is planned for
June 2010. Further, the resumption of responsibilities in Ermera district can also
proceed once the status of the non-certified district commander is resolved.
In close consultation with UNMIT, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations will continue to review, on a regular basis, the concept of operations for
the UNMIT military liaison group and the UNMIT police so as to ensure that they
adequately reflect the evolving situation as the resumption process progresses, in
order to enable UNMIT to carry out its mandate in the most effective manner. The
Department will continue to keep Security Council members, as well as troop- and
police-contributing countries, informed.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2

10-37723
