A/55/PV.111

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-fifth session

111th plenary meeting
Friday, 7 September 2001, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Holkeri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Finland)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/55/1031)
The President: In a letter contained in document
A/55/1031, the Secretary-General informs the
Assembly that 15 Member States are in arrears in the
payment of their financial contributions to the United
Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter.
I should like to remind delegations that, under
Article 19 of the Charter,
“A Member of the United Nations which is
in arrears in the payment of its financial
contributions to the Organization shall have no
vote in the General Assembly if the amount of its
arrears equals or exceeds the amount of the
contributions due from it for the preceding two
full years.”
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in document
A/55/1031?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 8 (continued)
Adoption of the agenda and organization of work

Seventh report of the General Committee
(A/55/250/Add.6)
Draft decision (A/55/L.94)
Request for the reopening of the consideration
of agenda item 33 (A/55/L.95)
The President: I should like to draw the attention
of representatives to the seventh report of the General
Committee (A/55/250/Add.6) concerning a request by a
number of Member States for the inclusion in the
agenda of an additional item.
In the report, the General Committee decided to
recommend to the General Assembly that an additional
item, entitled “Observer status for Partners in
Population and Development in the General
Assembly”, should be included in the draft agenda of
the fifty-sixth session.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides
to include that additional item in the draft agenda of
the fifty-sixth session?
It was so decided.
The President: I should now like to draw the
attention of the Assembly to a draft decision issued as
document A/55/L.94 and entitled “Meaning of the
terms ‘takes note of’ and ‘notes’”.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
decision A/55/L.94.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

01-53211 (E)

*0153211*

A/55/PV.111

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/55/L.94?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: As indicated in the footnote to
document A/55/L.95, in order for the General
Assembly to take action on the draft resolution, it will
be necessary to reopen consideration of agenda item
33, entitled “Culture of peace”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of agenda item 33?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 33 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution (A/55/L.95)
The President: Members will recall that, at its
9th plenary meeting on 11 September 2000, the
General Assembly decided to consider agenda item 33
directly in plenary meeting.
In order for the General Assembly to take action
expeditiously on the draft resolution, may I further take
it that the Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to
the consideration of agenda item 33?
It was so decided.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to introduce draft resolution
A/55/L.95.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom warmly welcomes this opportunity to
introduce the draft resolution before the General
Assembly in document A/55/L.95. As this is a joint
initiative sponsored with Costa Rica, Ambassador
Chassoul will shortly also say a few words by way of
introduction. We believe, and I hope that the Assembly
will not wholly disagree, that Costa Rica and the
United Kingdom together present a passable
combination of vision and practicality.
I am also delighted to announce that the
following Member States have now added their names
to the list of sponsors of this draft resolution:
Bangladesh, Belarus, Gambia, Japan, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Paraguay and San Marino.

2

The United Nations International Day of Peace
was originally established by General Assembly
resolution 36/67 as a result of the initiative of Costa
Rica. It was set to occur on the third Tuesday in
September each year, to coincide with the opening of
the regular session of the General Assembly. The
United Kingdom and Costa Rican Governments have
now joined together to strengthen and reinvigorate
what we believe is the unique and still largely
unfulfilled opportunity for the practical furtherance of
peace.
The need for such an enhanced approach was
originally brought to our attention by a United
Kingdom-based non-governmental organization, Peace
One Day, which, over the past two years, has gained
far-reaching support for its campaign from senior
political leaders in every continent. What we are
collectively hoping to achieve is to take the
International Day of Peace beyond its essential
symbolism, an aim that is itself symbolic of the
programmatic targets that the United Nations has set
itself for the new millennium.
We believe that the meaning and impact of the
International Day of Peace should be strengthened to
allow the global community as a whole to understand
and honour the Day in a fuller, more practical and more
significant way. Accordingly, this draft resolution
recommends that henceforth the United Nations
International Day of Peace be observed as a global
ceasefire day, the foundation for a wide-scale and, I
hope, unanimous cessation of violent conflict
throughout the world for the duration of the Day.
It further recommends that the United Nations
International Day of Peace become a fixed date in the
calendar, to avoid the confusion that has arisen in
recent years as to when the Day falls, to allow for
better planning and publicity and, thus, to encourage
broader observance throughout the world. Most
important, however — because most useful to those in
need — it will create a clear and unequivocal window
for medical, humanitarian and developmental agencies,
both non-governmental and governmental, to provide
vital services in comparative safety to civilian victims
in areas of conflict. The draft resolution suggests that
the Day be fixed as 21 September, reflecting the firstever United Nations International Day of Peace —
which was 21 September 1981 — as well as
symbolizing the twenty-first century.

A/55/PV.111

Costa Rica and the United Kingdom jointly
commend this draft resolution to our fellow Member
States as a step both symbolic and concrete towards our
collective ambition to make peace a reality throughout
the world 365 days a year.
Mrs. Chassoul (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, first of all, to thank Ambassador Greenstock
for the excellent introduction of the draft resolution he
has just made. I would also like to thank him for the
leadership of his delegation in promoting this initiative.
From the beginning of written history, humankind
has lived under the shadow of war, destruction and
death. Hate and violence reign in the hearts of men.
Nations take up arms against one another, and peoples
drown in rivers of blood. How many lives have been
lost? How many dreams, hopes and expectations have
been wasted? How much sadness has been created?
War, disease, hunger and death are the four
horsemen of the apocalypse. Today they continue to
threaten human progress. Humankind should grab the
reins of its destiny with a firm hand and chart a path
towards a better future. This Organization is the beacon
that can illuminate that path.
Humankind is at long last living in circumstances
that are propitious to both embracing peace and
definitively rejecting war. The shadows cast by the
cold war and the arms race have vanished. The veil of
ideological confrontation has been lifted, and there is a
daily growing awareness of the barbarity of violence,
poverty and injustice. Today we have before us a fertile
field in which to sow the seeds of peace so that the
excesses of destruction and conflict may be replaced by
the values of brotherhood, tolerance and cooperation
among all people.
Peace is not created in a day. The promotion of
peace requires a continuous effort to create an
environment where there is mutual respect and where
violence is shunned. Real sustainable peace can be
attained only when the conditions of a worthy life are
guaranteed for all; when there is a level of economic
development that provides for the basic needs of all;
when basic human rights are respected; and when
social and political differences are resolved through
democratic means, dialogue and negotiation. Building a
true culture of peace requires that efforts be made in
every field. Respect for and promotion of human
dignity and the search for the common well-being are
essential prerequisites for peace.

Peace is not created in a single day. Nevertheless,
it is both just and essential that we devote a special day
every year to commemorate and strengthen the ideal of
peace among all nations.
Exactly 20 years ago, in 1981, Costa Rica worked
towards the adoption by the General Assembly of an
annual observance of the International Day of Peace. It
did so precisely to commemorate and advance these
lofty ideals. That initiative was the idea of the
President of Costa Rica at the time, Mr. Rodrigo
Carazo Odio, a firm believer in the fact that peace can
only be built through education, training and example.
It was that very commitment that later led President
Carazo to establish the University for Peace, an
institution of higher education designed to provide
training in academic fields that promote peaceful
relations between people and nations.
My delegation fully supports the draft resolution
introduced on behalf of the sponsors by the
representative of the United Kingdom. It provides for
setting a fixed date for the commemoration of the day
of peace. This will help the preparations for the
celebrations and commemoration and at the same time
enable all peoples to respect a truce that day. The
sponsors are convinced that these measures will make
it possible at a later stage for people to recognize the
value of peace even more. That will be the first stage
towards a solution to existing conflicts.
We hope that this draft resolution will be adopted
with the firm support of all the Member States.
The President: I should like to announce that
since the introduction of the draft resolution, France,
Georgia, Greece, Kuwait and Liechtenstein have
become sponsors of A/55/L.95.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/55/L.95, entitled “International Day of
Peace.” May I take it that the Assembly decides to
adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/282).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 33?
It was so decided.

3

A/55/PV.111

Agenda item 181 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons
Draft resolution (A/55/L.92)
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands to introduce draft
resolution A/55/L.92.
Mr. van den Berg (Netherlands): My delegation
has the pleasure to introduce the draft resolution
regarding cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, as contained in document A/55/L.92. By this
procedural resolution the General Assembly will
approve the Agreement concerning the Relationship
between the United Nations and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. Moreover,
cooperation between the two organizations will be
included in the agenda of future General Assembly
sessions.
I should like to take this opportunity to thank all
those countries that have co-sponsored this important
resolution, which will facilitate the process of
cooperation that started in the General Assembly in
May 1997. In addition to those listed in document
A/55/L.92, I should like to include the following
countries that have expressed their wish to be added to
the group of sponsors: Georgia, India, Paraguay, the
Republic of Korea, Spain, Thailand and Ukraine.
It is my hope and expectation that the draft
resolution will be adopted by consensus.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/55/L.92.
I should like to announce that since the
introduction of the draft resolution, France has become
a sponsor.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/55/L.92?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/283).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 181?

4

It was so decided.
Agenda item 186
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in Africa
Draft resolution (A/55/L.84/Rev.1)
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/55/L.84/Rev.1.
Mr. Abreha (Ethiopia): Ethiopia would like to be
included as a sponsor of the draft resolution.
The President: I should like to announce that
since the publication of the draft resolution, the
following countries have become sponsors: Belarus,
China, Costa Rica, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, Greece,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Monaco, Morocco, Spain, the
Syrian Arab Republic, the United States and
Yugoslavia.
The Assembly will now take a decision of draft
resolution A/55/L.84/Rev.1.
Ms. Lajous (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
Government of Mexico believes that this is an
opportune time for the General Assembly to consider
the problem of malaria in developing countries,
particularly in Africa, as a response to the just call
made at the African summit meeting held in Abuja in
April 2000 and, in so doing, to promote national,
regional and international efforts to combat malaria, a
disease that stands in the way of development and
poverty alleviation in developing countries. Malaria
exists in various regions of the world, but 90 per cent
of cases are in sub-Saharan Africa.
Despite the strong negative impact that malaria
has had in a number of countries, the problem can be
remedied, as Mexico’s experience proves. The solution
is to be found in simultaneous public health efforts at
the regional level. Combating malaria is a task that
must be undertaken jointly. The African countries have
committed themselves to promoting community
participation in activities to roll back malaria; to
ensuring that diagnostic services and treatment,
including treatment at home, are accessible to the
population; and to increasing their vigilance in order to
overcome the resurgence of malaria in controlled areas.
For its part, the international community must
allocate substantial resources to assist in rolling back
malaria; invest in the development of vaccines against

A/55/PV.111

malaria and provide incentives for other anti-malaria
technologies; strengthen and finance the work of
research institutions and ensure the participation of
international specialists; and promote the cooperation
of research institutions with the agencies that are
implementing the malaria roll-back initiative so as to
ensure that full use is made of scientific knowledge and
experience gained from other programmes.
Mexico has established a Centre for Research on
Malaria within the National Institute of Public Health.
We have more than 20 years of experience and global
recognition in basic and functional research on malaria.
Our research has led to the development of new
strategies for the control of vectors and the control of
the transmission of parasites, as well as for ensuring
epidemiological vigilance with regard to the disease.
Through the use of such strategies, we have achieved
levels of control never before attained, with the
advantage of reducing the use of insecticides,
eliminating DDT in such activities and promoting
community participation in the control, treatment and
prevention of the disease.
Mexico would like to make available the
expertise and experience of the Centre to assist in the
transfer of technology and provide practical treatment
in the field, as well as courses specially designed for
individuals involved in controlling malaria and
programmes, at the masters and doctorate levels within
the Institute, for scientific personnel from African
countries. We have already done this for Central
American countries.
The Government of Mexico supports the call of
the General Assembly to declare 2001-2010 the Decade
to Roll Back Malaria in Developing Countries,
Particularly in Africa. We believe that this will give
impetus to activities that have already been undertaken
by developing countries to ensure that we roll back this
disease in various regions of the world, particularly
Africa.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/55/L.84/Rev.1, entitled
“2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/55/L.84/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/55/L.84/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 55/284).

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 186?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 61 (continued) and agenda item 62
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Draft resolution A/55/L.93
The President: As members will recall, I
appointed His Excellency Mr. Valdés of Chile as the
facilitator for the informal consultations on the
revitalization of the General Assembly and improving
the efficiency of the General Assembly. As a result of
his able assistance, today the Assembly has before it
the draft resolution. I would like to take this
opportunity to extend to Mr. Valdés, on behalf of the
Assembly, our sincere appreciation for his
contributions.
I now give the floor to Mr. Gabriel Valdés of
Chile to introduce draft resolution A/55/L.93.
Mr. Valdés (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I am
pleased to introduce the draft resolution contained in
document A/55/L.93, the annex to which contains the
outcome of the informal consultations on the
improvement of the working methods of the General
Assembly.
The consultation process, begun at the suggestion
of President Holkeri, had as its starting point
resolutions 47/233, 48/264 and, in particular, 51/241,
all of which relate to the revitalization of the work of
the General Assembly, with particular emphasis on the
implementation of those provisions agreed upon in the
resolutions referred to that have not yet resulted in any
specific decisions. As a result, with regard to the
agenda of the General Assembly, it is proposed that
cooperation items be clustered and biennialized, and
that certain substantive items, set out in part II.B of the
annex, also be biennialized. At the same time, we need
to state that these agreements in no way affect the right
of any State to propose any item or issue for
consideration by the Assembly, as established in the
draft resolution submitted today.

5

A/55/PV.111

In addition, it was decided to allocate to the Third
Committee the consideration of the item on the World
Summit for Social Development and the biennial
treatment of some items referred to in item II.B of the
annex.
Regarding the consideration of reports by the
Assembly, progress was made on implementing the
provisions of resolution 51/241, in particular those
relating to the annual report of the Secretary-General.
Finally, the annex contains a few innovative
proposals related to the General Committee, to the
strengthening of the office of the President of the
General Assembly, and to the use of information
technology.
The resolution and the annex submitted today for
approval by the General Assembly constitute one more
step in the already extensive history of the effort to
grant to the Assembly the central political role that it
should have in the United Nations system. As such,
they respond to one of the most heartfelt aspirations of
the Member States: to restore to this democratic body
par excellence, which allows for the participation of all
its members in conditions of equality, the
preponderance in international affairs which the
drafters of the Charter envisaged for it. The various
resolutions adopted by the Assembly in the past
pursued the objective of strengthening the United
Nations system.
Through the various processes of debates and
agreements, including the establishment of a high-level
open-ended working group, in recent years members
have adopted resolutions — such as 47/233, 48/264,
49/252 and 51/241 — that propose, among other
matters, improving the General Assembly’s capacity to
effectively manage its responsibilities and to fully
comply with its mandate. In this way, emphasizing the
character of the Assembly as the highest political body
with universal representation within this Organization,
the consideration of agenda items in plenary was
reserved for questions or issues that are urgent or of
great political importance. This requires reviewing the
agenda and reducing its scope. Without this measure it
will be difficult for the Assembly to be effective and to
comply with the mandate established in the Charter. To
this end, these resolutions authorize the President of
the Assembly to evaluate the debates in the various
bodies of the system and to carry out effective informal
and open-ended consultations to consider, if deemed

6

appropriate, the adoption of measures to make the role
of the General Assembly more effective. As we know,
the full implementation of these resolutions has not
been possible.
In the fifty-fifth session of the Assembly, which
is nearing its end, it has been thanks to the initiative
and personal energy of the President of the General
Assembly, Mr. Harri Holkeri, that we have been able to
respond to these issues in the debate among Member
States. I am certain that I am expressing the views in
this Hall in saying that all Member States without
exception are thankful to him for his personal
leadership, devotion and political commitment, as well
as for the transparency of the process of consultation
which led to this resolution. Allow me, on my own
behalf, to express my gratitude for the confidence that
the President placed in me in seeking my assistance in
this facilitation process, which has led to this new step
in the revitalization of the General Assembly.
During our consultations I noted the unanimous
agreement of Member States regarding the need to
adopt for the General Assembly’s work to the demands
of today’s world, to give greater relevance to urgent
political discussions, and to reduce an agenda that
dilutes the impact of the Assembly’s decisions and
discussions and makes it very difficult for the smallest
delegations to follow and participate on an equal
footing. I am grateful for the cooperation and interest
shown by all delegations in the development of the
consultation process. We have all noted during these
discussions that difficulties arise regarding adapting
the agenda and the need to respect the legitimate
aspirations of Member States to preserve the items
which are of preferential interest to them. Also, we
noted the need to continue making progress in this
area, and the general agreement to do so.
These efforts have brought limited results, but the
open debate we have had together enables us to
visualize other initiatives to revitalize the Assembly
and increase the relevance of its debates, not only for
the system, but also for the development of the
international community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium, speaking on behalf of the
European Union.
Mr. De Loecker (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I have the honour to take the floor on
behalf of the European Union.

A/55/PV.111

To begin with, we would like to thank you and
Ambassador Valdés for all your efforts to ensure that
we get a resolution on the revitalization of the General
Assembly and improving its efficiency, to be found in
document A/55/L.93. We welcome the results achieved
and are glad that it will still be possible to adopt this
resolution under your presidency in the fifty-fifth
session. We hope that there will be no delay in the
implementation of its provisions. The search for more
effective working methods for the Assembly remains a
concern for the European Union, and that is why it is
our fervent wish that this exercise will be continued at
the forthcoming session.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/55/L.93. I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Chen Jian: Should the General Assembly
adopt draft resolution A/55/L.93, paragraphs 22, 23
and 24 of the annex thereto call for a number of
measures for strengthening the office of the President
of the General Assembly and for enhancing the use of
modern technology in the intergovernmental processes
of the Organization.
As regards strengthening the office of the
President of the General Assembly specified in
paragraph 22 of the annex to the draft resolution, the
additional measures for its strengthening would be
identified in consultations with the office of the
President. The impact of those measures on the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 20022003 would be assessed on the basis of the experience
of the current biennium and taking into account the
observations and recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
on the issue contained in its report of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2002-2003
(A/56/7) and reported to the Assembly during the main
part of its fifty-sixth session, as requested by the
Assembly in paragraph 22 of the Annex to the draft
resolution. On that understanding, the proposals
contained in paragraph 22 of the annex to the draft
resolution would have no programme budget
implications on the programme budget of the biennium
2000-2001.
As regards the need to enhance the use of modern
technology and information within the United Nations,
including in the intergovernmental processes of the
Organization, the scope of the proposals for such

enhancing, as detailed in paragraph 24 of the annex to
the draft resolution, requires specific evaluation to
estimate the related requirements. Such evaluation
would be undertaken by the Secretariat during the rest
of the year 2001. The results of the evaluation and the
related requirements would be reported to the General
Assembly at its fifty-sixth session in accordance with
established procedure. On that understanding, the
proposals contained in paragraphs 23 and 24 of the
annex to draft resolution A/55/L.93 would have no
programme budget implications on the programme
budget for the biennium 2000-2001.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on A/55/L.93, entitled “Revitalization of the
General Assembly; improving the efficiency of the
General Assembly”. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/285).
Mr. Vámos-Goldman (Canada): My delegation
first wishes to congratulate the facilitators for their
very hard work and for this draft resolution which we
have just adopted. Canada strongly supports the
resolution and the efforts to improve the efficiency of
the General Assembly. A number of steps, including
the biennialization of items will, we hope, lead us
firmly in this direction. My delegation would like to
note that certain items — for example, the situation in
Haiti — while biennialized in this exercise, may have
to be revisited in subsequent sessions, should the
situation warrant.
Canada would like to emphasize that we
supported the biennialization of this item in spite of
this possibility because we feel strongly about the need
to improve the efficiency of the General Assembly. We
would urge other delegations positively to consider this
course of action in future exercises to improve the
work of the Assembly, that is, to allow items to be
biennialized for the sake of efficiency, secure in the
knowledge that should the situation warrant, the item
can be reintroduced in the following session.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda items 61 and 62?
It was so decided.

7

A/55/PV.111

Agenda item 48
The situation of democracy and human rights
in Haiti
The President: Members will recall that on 12
September 2000, the Assembly decided to include this
item in the agenda of the present session. It is my
understanding that it would be desirable to defer
consideration of this item to the fifty-sixth session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to defer consideration of this item and to include it in
the draft agenda of the fifty-sixth session?
It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration
of agenda item 48.
Agenda item 63
Restructuring and revitalization of the United
Nations in the economic, social and related fields
The President: Members will recall that on 12
September 2000, the Assembly decided to include this
item in the agenda of the present session. It is my
understanding that it would be desirable to defer
consideration of this item to the fifty-sixth session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to defer consideration of this item and to include it in
the draft agenda of the fifty-sixth session?
It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration
of agenda item 63.
Agenda item 64
Question of Cyprus
The President: Members will recall that on 12
September 2000, the Assembly decided to include this
item in the agenda of the present session but deferred a
decision on the allocation of the item to an appropriate
time during the session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the fifty-sixth
session of the Assembly. May I take it, then, that is the
wish of the Assembly to defer consideration of this

8

item and to include it in the draft agenda of the fiftysixth session?
It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration
of agenda item 64.
Agenda item 86 (continued)
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/55/572/Add.1)
The President: In order to allow time for the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions and the Fifth Committee to consider the
programme budget implications of the draft resolution
contained in the report, it is necessary to forward this
report to the fifty-sixth session of the General
Assembly.
May I therefore take it that it is the wish of the
Assembly to include in the draft agenda of its fiftysixth session the item entitled “Comprehensive review
of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all
their aspects”?
It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration
of agenda item 86.
Agenda item 119
Improving the financial situation of the United
Nations
The President: Members will recall that on 12
September 2000, the Assembly decided to include this
item in the agenda of the present session. It is my
understanding that it would be desirable to defer
consideration of this item to the fifty-sixth session of
the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to
include it in the draft agenda of the fifty-sixth session?
It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration
of agenda item 119.

A/55/PV.111

Agenda item 131
Financing of the United Nations Mission in
East Timor
The President: Members will recall that, on 12
September 2000, the Assembly decided to include this
item in the agenda of the present session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the fifty-sixth
session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to
include it in the draft agenda of the fifty-sixth session?
It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration
of agenda item 131.
Agenda item 139
Financing and liquidation of the United Nations
Transitional Authority in Cambodia
The President: Members will recall that, on 12
September 2000, the Assembly decided to include this
item in the agenda of the present session.

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to
include it in the draft agenda of the fifty-sixth session?
It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration
of agenda item 141.
Agenda item 142
Financing of the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique
The President: Members will recall that, on 12
September 2000, the Assembly decided to include this
item in the agenda of the present session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the fifty-sixth
session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to
include it in the draft agenda of the fifty-sixth session?
It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration
of agenda item 142.

It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the fifty-sixth
session of the General Assembly.

Agenda item 145

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to
include it in the draft agenda of the fifty-sixth session?

The President: Members will recall that, on 12
September 2000, the Assembly decided to include this
item in the agenda of the present session.

It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration
of agenda item 139.
Agenda item 141
Financing of the United Nations Operation in
Somalia II
The President: Members will recall that, on 12
September 2000, the Assembly decided to include this
item in the agenda of the present session.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Haiti

It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the fifty-sixth
session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to
include it in the draft agenda of the fifty-sixth session?
It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration
of agenda item 145.

It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the fifty-sixth
session of the General Assembly.

9

A/55/PV.111

Agenda item 146
Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Liberia
The President: Members will recall that, on 12
September 2000, the Assembly decided to include this
item in the agenda of the present session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the fifty-sixth
session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to
include it in the draft agenda of the fifty-sixth session?
It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration
of agenda item 146.
Agenda item 147
Financing of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Rwanda
The President: Members will recall that, on 12
September 2000, the Assembly decided to include this
item in the agenda of the present session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the fifty-sixth
session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to
include it in the draft agenda of the fifty-sixth session?
It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration
of agenda item 147.
Agenda item 149

It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the fifty-sixth
session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to
include it in the draft agenda of the fifty-sixth session?
It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration
of agenda item 149.
Agenda item 151
Financing of the Military Observer Group of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala
The President: Members will recall that, on 12
September 2000, the Assembly decided to include this
item in the agenda of the present session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude consideration of agenda item
151?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 178
Armed aggression against the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
The President: Members will recall that, on 12
September 2000, the Assembly decided to include this
item in the agenda of the present session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the fifty-sixth
session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to
include it in the draft agenda of the fifty-sixth session?
It was so decided.

Financing of the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja
and Western Sirmium and the Civilian Police
Support Group
The President: Members will recall that, on 12
September 2000, the Assembly decided to include this
item in the agenda of the present session.

10

The President: This concludes our consideration
of agenda item 178.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.
