United Nations

S/PV.6394

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6394th meeting
Wednesday, 29 September 2010, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Apakan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Turkey)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Nishida
Mr. Salam
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2010/463)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-55499 (E)

*1055499*

S/PV.6394

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2010/463)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Afghanistan, in which he requests that
the Foreign Minister of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. I
have also received letters from the representatives of
Australia, Canada, Germany, India, Italy, New Zealand,
Norway and Pakistan, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rassoul
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I wish
to extend a warm welcome to His Excellency
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. De Mistura to take a seat at the
Council table.

2

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, head of the delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2010/463, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to whom I now
give the floor.
Mr. De Mistura: I thank you, Sir, for giving us
the opportunity on behalf of the whole United Nations
system in Afghanistan to give the Council a brief
update.
Much has happened, as is often the case in
Afghanistan, during these past few months. Since my
last briefing (see S/PV.6351), some key events have
taken place. I would like to review some of those
events, which preceded the recent and highly
anticipated parliamentary elections, in order not to lose
sight of the progress that is being made in Afghanistan.
Let me begin with something the Council is very
familiar with, since many of us attended it at the time —
the Kabul Conference. The Conference, which was held
on 20 July, did indeed reinforce the Government’s
commitment to assuming greater control of its own
future. That was the message we got from the
Conference. The substantive preparations undertaken,
and which addressed a lot of varied issues, involved
extensive cooperation between ministries and required a
high level of engagement on the part of the international
community with the Afghan authorities and with civil
society. The Government of Afghanistan, including its
own Afghan National Security Forces — and I am glad
to see that our friend the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan is here with us to hear it publicly — should

10-55499

S/PV.6394

be commended, because everyone who attended the
Conference was impressed with the way it was organized
and how it unfolded. It required a lot of logistical,
organizational and substantive preparations.
The Conference was a key moment in the Kabul
process, as we call it now, that began with President
Karzai’s second inaugural speech. While that speech
set a broad governing agenda, the Conference added
details to that agenda by elaborating a series of joint
commitments. These commitments include the
development of a framework, clear timelines,
benchmarks for national priority programmes, progress
towards the Afghan security lead, improvement in
governance and, of course, the very serious and
important issue of tackling corruption.
Since the Conference, the Government has taken
a number of important steps in terms of technical
planning. First, it has indicated its intention — and we
confirm that this is taking place — to continue, through
the cluster approach — that is, various ministries
working together with the international community —
to pursue agreed priorities. That was the bottom line of
the Conference: trying to identify priorities with which
we could all realign our own priorities. Secondly, it has
begun to roll out the 21 national priority programmes
agreed on at the Conference. Thirdly, the Government
has made an immediate start to public finance
management reforms, which are a concern to everyone,
including a review of 14 line ministries, led by the
Ministry of Finance. Fourthly, the Government has
indicated that it will make a start on tackling the
anti-corruption agenda agreed at the Conference, which
also includes the creation of a joint monitoring and
evaluation committee by the end of this month.
Let us now look at one issue that has been front
and centre for us over the past few months — the
elections. The campaign period for the elections ran
from 23 June to 15 September, and frankly — we were
discussing this just this morning — it was
characterized by a very big change from in the events
of 2005. People were showing their faces, people were
campaigning, and women were present. There was an
active and very creative style of campaigning in these
elections.
More than 2,500 candidates — actually, 2,521 —
stood for re-election, including almost 400 women —
398, to be precise. Of those, only one withdrew during
the campaign, while two men did. That also shows the

10-55499

level of courage and determination they displayed in
wanting to be part of this democratic process, as
complicated and, sometimes, as difficult as it might be.
Of the 249 sitting Members of Parliament, 229 sought
re-election, demonstrating their own interest, and also,
to a certain degree, their confidence in the democratic
system in Afghanistan. Of the 2,521 candidates, there
were many new entrants and many new, young faces.
Of course, it remains to be seen where they are at the
end of this process.
We must not forget that one of the main
achievements of these elections is the fact that they
actually took place. Afghanistan is still a country in a
very tense conflict. The fact that an election took place
at all, not least in such a short time after the previous
one and during a comparatively more volatile period —
because security has not improved; in fact the contrary
is true — is an accomplishment in itself.
And, while there were no high-profile incidents,
quite a number of security incidents did occur. They
were not sufficient, however, to disrupt the elections
overall. The proof is that almost 4.3 million votes were
cast. Of course, we will now need to see how many
actual voters were part of that, but this is quite an
achievement compared to the previous and current
environment. While the consolidation of the figures on
security is still going on, election day security
incidents were estimated at about 490, compared to
290 in the previous election. That represents a big
difference, but the impact of those incidents was
basically comparable, if not less. Again, the proof is
that people went to vote. The incidents’ intensity was
lower. The overall deterioration of the security
situation from last year to this was in any case greater,
so that also has to be taken into consideration. About
1.6 million of the 4.3 million ballots cast to date — we
have to see how many voters that means — were in
female polling stations, again an indicator of a
direction that we should all welcome.
This is the point. According to all of us, frankly,
it is too early to give an overall assessment of the
elections, except for the fact that they took place and
4.3 million Afghans had the courage to go, and that
according to many people the systems were better. But
the outcome remains to be seen, and that is why we are
being cautious about it.
We also need to see how even or uneven the
actual turnout was over all the provinces and in the

3

S/PV.6394

country. According to everyone, the Independent
Electoral Commission has demonstrated a significant
improvement compared to last year’s presidential
election, despite immense security and logistical
challenges. In contrast to last year, the location of all
polling centres was announced publicly a month before
polling day. The Council will remember that last year,
during the presidential elections, the list of polling
centres was publicized two days before voting, and that
was the biggest reason why there was so much concern
about fraud. This time it was publicized a month
beforehand. That was probably the biggest mitigating
measure that could have been taken to avoid massive
and systemic fraud.
Despite significant challenges, the polling
materials arrived on time in most places, and 5,510
polling centres opened, of the 5,897 that had been
announced on 18 August.
Another major improvement was the security
arrangements for the design, use and movement of
sensitive materials, including ink. I think that Minister
for Foreign Affairs Rassoul and I can still testify with
our fingers that the ink that we used, at least, was quite
indelible, and after 10 days I am still looking forward
to getting rid of it. We publicly put our fingers in some
bleaching products, and it is still there. That does not
mean that in some places there was not some faking,
but the ink that was provided on a massive scale for the
election was quite good.
Having said that, the elections this time had a
major security element, reassuring us that at least they
would be much more monitored than in the past. We
had 397,000 national observers, and they were
observing the interests of each candidate on their own.
They represented, in that sense, quite an impressive
capacity, wanting to make sure that there would be no
massive fraud, at least. The sensitive materials were
also moved quite safely, in spite of the Taliban having
twice threatened to disrupt that.
However, this is just the beginning of the process.
That is why, on the Council’s behalf, in Afghanistan
and outside, we are now being cautious. We pushed, we
tried to support the electoral mechanism to go forward,
and we tried to encourage the Afghan people to feel
that it was worth taking a risk because democracy was
moving forward, but now we are being cautious,
because we need to see what the outcome is.

4

Despite some retail fraud and, certainly, many
problems, the outcome will very much depend on
whether the Independent Electoral Commission and the
Electoral Complaints Commission will have the
stamina, the courage, the neutrality and the
determination to actually go over the 3,900 complaints
received thus far and be able to say which are right and
which are wrong, and take that decision before
30 October.
There are and there will be 2,000 losers — there
are 2,521 candidates and 249 posts — and those losers
are, unavoidably, already complaining. Again, the
secret will be whether the electoral commissions will
be able to stand in a credible way. We are ready to
sustain and support them, but that is an Afghan
responsibility.
Regarding conclusions on the election, on our
side we should allow the requisite time for the process,
which is until 30 October — 8 October for the
preliminary outcome and 30 October for the final
outcome, more or less, based on the hard work that
they will have to do now. We must not make premature
judgments. We should note that the positive
improvements over last year’s elections — from which
we all, including the United Nations, have all drawn
key lessons, by being careful in making any type of
declaration about the outcome before it is clarified —
make us cautious but supportive of the steps ahead in
ensuring the integrity of the process and accountability
to the Afghan people. The final comments will come at
the end of the month.
Once the elections have been successfully
concluded in one form or another, hopefully, the real
discussion regarding the future of the electoral system
and long-term electoral reform needs to be initiated.
We already know that. Many here are already keen on
that, and so are the Afghan people. UNAMA will work
with the Government, with the electoral institutions
and all relevant Afghan and international partners, in
particular the European Union (EU).
The representative of the European Union,
Vygaudas Ušackas — with whom, as the Council
knows, we are working extremely closely — has
already indicated publicly the interest of the EU in
having a leading role in supporting the process of the
electoral reform agenda with the Afghan Government.
We will be supporting that ourselves. It will focus,
most likely, on the electoral legal framework; the

10-55499

S/PV.6394

sustainability of the electoral calendar, because we
cannot have an election every three months; the longterm status of the Electoral Complaints Commission,
which is only ad hoc, making it very fragile compared
to the Independent Electoral Commission; a single
nationwide electoral roll, because, as the Council
knows, we do not have that; and, the mother of all
issues, building the capacity of both electoral
commissions.
So what is coming up on the radar? Well, the year
began, as the Council knows, with setting a series of
stepping stones. The first was the Istanbul conference.
Then we had the London Conference, followed by the
Consultative Peace Jirga, then the Kabul Conference
and now the elections.
What is next? Well, a broader political process.
We heard this, and yesterday we heard President Karzai
elaborating on launching the high-level peace
commission, with more than 67 members from all sides
of Afghan society. We will focus on supporting that, on
the basis of the mandate given to us by the Security
Council, and on the Kabul process. At the same time
we will watch with interest, and potentially with
substantive support, the transition, which is probably
going to be discussed at the Lisbon summit and then in
Kabul.
I am glad to acknowledge the presence here of
our colleague and friend, Mark Sedwill, who is the
Senior Civilian Representative of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF). I have had the
opportunity on other occasions here to say how closely
we have been working together and how important it is
that we are working in that way in order to avoid any
type of confusion and to ensure that the Afghans feel
that we, on the international side, are all together in
supporting the Afghan lead.
Today, I would like to highlight some of key
conditions that are essential for the so-called road map
on our side in the Kabul process. The Kabul process
cannot be just a technocratic exercise. All partners
need to engage politically behind the agenda. We know
that we can count on President Karzai’s leadership in
this.
Secondly, we need to avoid new agendas or
competing initiatives. We should focus on identifying
the priorities that the Kabul Conference said that we
need to tackle first, and concentrate our collective
effort behind them. The Government has sent a signal

10-55499

regarding the priorities they seek to pursue: the rollout
of national priority programmes and public finance
management reform. We need to support that agenda,
and we plan to work on it.
Thirdly, we, the international community, need to
keep our own part of the bargain by aligning
resources — or realigning resources — behind the
Government priorities. The United Nations is
committed in Kabul to a “one-UN” approach, so that
we too contribute to the realigning and not just help in
the realigning of other partners.
Fourthly, we must continue to strive to be more
results-oriented, as the Afghan people are asking of us
and the Afghan Government. I intend to work with the
Government before the next meeting of the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board, to be held at the
end of November, to ensure that the Board, without
having to create new bodies or new institutions, can be
revitalized and be a follow-up to the actual Kabul
follow-up conference. Of course, all of that will go
forward only if it is moving towards a consolidated
peace and reintegration programme within a
complementary, structured political process that leads
to a future Afghanistan reconciled on the basis of
mutual respect.
There is a unanimous consensus in the
international community that there is no military
solution for Afghanistan. In the end, the solution can
and should be political and Afghan, a solution that can
only be supplemented with broader regional support
and a solution that we can all work towards. Yesterday,
the Government of Afghanistan took a very significant
initial step, and UNAMA, in accordance with its
mandate, will do all that it can to support it.
The next few months will be critical, first, in
looking at the follow-up to the election, and secondly,
in seeing how transition can become a concrete, wellorganized and fair approach in the eyes of the Afghans
and the international community.
Transition does not mean exit; it means
transition, and the Government of Afghanistan will
continue to receive all possible support from all of us
with a view to bringing about what we are all hoping to
see, namely, a peace and reconciliation initiative.
I will stop there, Mr. President, with your
permission.

5

S/PV.6394

The President: I thank Mr. De Mistura for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Zalmai
Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan.
Mr. Rassoul (Afghanistan): At the outset, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting on the situation in Afghanistan and
congratulate the Government of Turkey for assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September. I also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his most recent report on Afghanistan
(S/2010/463) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his
comprehensive briefing.
Today’s meeting comes at a crucial time for
Afghanistan, just over three months after the Kabul
Conference and less than two weeks since the holding
of our parliamentary elections. I am pleased to meet
with the Security Council today to discuss the current
situation in my country and shed light on the strategy
we will pursue to end violence and achieve lasting
peace and security.
I want to begin by saying a few words about our
recent elections, which gave Afghans another chance to
shape their future and consolidate our young
democracy.
Millions of Afghans from all segments of society
braved intimidations and threats of attacks, including
assassination, to cast their vote. By doing so, Afghans
reaffirmed their steadfast commitment to democracy
and self-determination. The unprecedented number of
young candidates and voters illustrates the degree to
which democracy is taking root in Afghan society.
Further, the significant increase in women’s
participation is testament to the further empowerment
of women in Afghan political life.
Our elections were a major victory for democracy
in Afghanistan. Let me take this opportunity to convey
our gratitude to the United Nations and other partners
for providing financial and technical support for the
elections.
Just three months ago, Afghanistan and our
international partners gathered at the international
Kabul Conference to renew our partnership for lasting
peace, security and stability. Together, we adopted the
“Kabul Process”, which focuses on increased Afghan

6

leadership across the board. We also presented our 23
national priority programmes, including the national
security policy and our national reconciliation
initiative, all of which were endorsed by the
international community.
Going forward, Afghanistan will pursue a
comprehensive strategy to implement the outcome of
the London and Kabul Conferences. We will work
towards gradual leadership in all State affairs, in
particular, security, development and governance. Our
objective is clear: a gradual transfer of responsibilities
towards self-reliance in ensuring social and economic
opportunities for all Afghans and enforcing the rule of
law throughout the country.
In the area of security, we will work to build the
size, capacity and operational capability of
Afghanistan’s national security forces. In so doing, we
will meet a vital precondition for taking the lead in
combat operations in volatile provinces by 2011 and
for independently meeting our security obligations by
2014, with international forces offering back-up
support. I want to reiterate the importance, for
achieving this goal, of sustained international support
for the training, resourcing and equipping of the
Afghan national security forces.
Moreover,
we
have
committed
to
a
comprehensive social and economic agenda to improve
the lives of all Afghans and achieve a sustainable
Afghan economy. In particular, we are giving special
focus to agricultural development, rural rehabilitation,
human resource development and economic and
infrastructure development to generate employment
opportunities and meet the immediate needs of our
people. I seize this opportunity to convey
Afghanistan’s thanks and appreciation for the
international community’s support and assistance.
Meanwhile, it is should be noted that Afghanistan
will not be able to attain its development goals without
greater responsibility for its finances. Afghans must
have a greater decision-making role in their own
development.
We
welcome
the
international
community’s decision to channel 50 per cent of donor
assistance through our national budget by January
2012. That will lead to greater transparency and
efficiency in the utilization of development assistance
coming from donor countries.
At the same time, we have embarked on a
reinvigorated effort to combat corruption and

10-55499

S/PV.6394

strengthen governance at all levels. Afghans are well
aware of the detrimental effect of the menace of
corruption and weak governance on the dignity, image
and prosperity of our country. We are fully committed
to effectively and resolutely ridding our society of
corruption.
In less than two months, Afghanistan and its
NATO partners will gather at the NATO Summit in
Lisbon to crystallize our joint strategy for the transition
to Afghan leadership in security matters in the country
in the coming years. We will update our international
partners on our progress in building our security forces
and discuss remaining challenges to that effect.
For the transition to succeed, we first have to find
a solution to Afghanistan’s ongoing security problem.
Afghanistan has endured violence for more than 30
years. Almost 10 years after the start of our joint
efforts to stabilize Afghanistan, security remains a
problem. We have prioritized ending violence and
providing Afghans with what has eluded them for
decades: the chance to live in peace and security.
There will be no peace unless military efforts are
complemented by a robust and comprehensive outreach
initiative. That is why President Karzai launched a
reintegration and reconciliation initiative to ensure an
honourable place in society for members of the armed
opposition who are willing to surrender their arms,
renounce violence, accept our constitution, return to
normal life and embrace international human rights.
We recently established the High Peace Council
to oversee the implementation of reintegration and
reconciliation. The High Council is now operational
and will meet regularly. In addition, we welcome the
Security Council’s review and updating of the
Consolidated List created pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) as important for implementing our peace
initiative. In this regard, we look forward to additional
updates, as additional de-listing requests are made.
Terrorism poses a grave threat to the security and
stability of our region and beyond. In this regard, we
remain concerned with the continued presence in our
region of safe havens and sanctuaries where terrorists
receive recruitment, training and logistical support.
It is ever more evident that addressing the
challenges facing Afghanistan and our region —
including terrorism, extremism and the production and
trafficking of narcotic drugs — will not be possible

10-55499

without meaningful cooperation at the regional level.
For our part, Afghanistan remains fully committed to a
sincere and effective dialogue with Pakistan and other
regional countries in favour of the security and
prosperity of our region.
Just recently, together with the Government of
Pakistan, we signed the Afghanistan-Pakistan Transit
Trade Agreement aimed at increasing bilateral trade
and generating employment opportunities. Moreover,
the signing of the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-PakistanIndia gas pipeline project and the conclusion of the
feasibility study for the Central Asia-South Asia
project for transfer of energy in the region are
milestones for the development and prosperity of our
region. We are confident that these projects will benefit
security and stability in Afghanistan and the region and
strengthen mutual trust and confidence.
Afghanistan is confident that by pursuing our
comprehensive
national
agenda
for
security,
development and governance, and by implementing our
reintegration and reconciliation initiative, we will
succeed in stabilizing Afghanistan and preventing the
enemies of a stable and prosperous Afghanistan from
regaining control of our country.
Nine and half years since the beginning of our
partnership with the international community to defeat
terrorism and achieve a stable and prosperous
Afghanistan, we have come a long way. We attribute
our achievements to the sacrifices of the Afghan people
and the troops of our partner countries. A transition to
increased Afghan responsibility and ownership will be
our main priority over the coming years. We expect our
international partners to remain by us with fortitude
and commitment to ensure the successful conclusion of
that transition.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Foreign Minister of Afghanistan
and I thank Special Representative Mr. Staffan de
Mistura for his very comprehensive briefing. I also
express my gratitude to the men and women of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) who have demonstrated their deep
commitment to a very difficult mission.
The Government of Japan expresses its
appreciation that the polling process for the election on
18 September to the Wolesi Jirga, or the Lower House
of the National Assembly, has so far and generally been
conducted as planned, though some polling stations

7

S/PV.6394

were inaccessible because of the security situation. We
express our deep regret that some people became the
victims of violent acts by anti-Government forces and
strongly condemn such violence.
Japan dispatched an observer mission to
Afghanistan for the election in addition to financial
assistance for the United Nations Development
Programme electoral assistance activities. We pay
tribute to the Afghan authorities concerned, including
the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC), which
participated in the election process, and also the
international community which supported it.
UNAMA played a major role in providing
significant support to the Afghan Government and
other related parties in, for example, its support of the
IEC so that it could publish the list of polling centres
one month before the election date. This was a great
contribution to enhancing the transparency of the
election. It is essential that the electoral process and
investigation
of
complaints
should
proceed
transparently until the final results of the election are
certified.
We praise the Afghans’ participation in the
election, especially the high turnout of women and
young people, in spite of the security risks, so that they
themselves could decide their own future. Japan
expects that reconciliation and development in
Afghanistan will proceed smoothly with a new,
democratically elected Parliament.
At the successful Kabul Conference in July this
year, important progress was made towards the
stabilization and reconciliation of Afghanistan with the
Afghan leadership’s presentation of their national
priority programme, to which the international
community committed to aligning its assistance. At the
same time, as was reaffirmed in the Kabul Conference
communiqué, it is essential that the Afghan
Government make necessary reforms to strengthen its
financial management capabilities and to reduce
corruption.
Together with its partners in the international
community, including the United Nations, Japan
continues to assist the Afghan Government to improve
this capacity. The coordination and monitoring of aid
through the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
(JCMB) is important for proper progress in the Kabul
process. In this context, we appreciate the role of
UNAMA as Joint President of the JCMB.

8

As we stated during the Kabul Conference, Japan
has been actively providing assistance to Afghanistan,
focusing on the three priority areas, namely, security,
reintegration
and
development,
given
our
determination to prevent Afghanistan from slipping
back into a safe haven for terrorists.
As pointed out in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/463), the security situation has continued to
deteriorate in some parts of the country. Improving
security in Afghanistan is an essential prerequisite for
its reconstruction. In order to strengthen Afghan
security forces so that Afghanistan can take over
responsibility for its own security, Japan has been
providing and will continue to provide assistance for
the salaries and equipment of the Afghan National
Police. We also recently decided to provide funding
and instructors for the training in Turkey of Afghan
police officers.
We appreciate the announcement by the Afghan
Government of the Afghanistan peace and reintegration
programme and of the launching of the peace and
reintegration trust fund, to which Japan recently
disbursed a $50 million contribution. Japan calls for
the swift implementation of the Afghanistan peace and
reintegration programme through the effective use of
this trust fund.
As for development, Japan believes in the
importance of showing results through quick-impact
projects, while also maintaining a mid- to long-term
perspective. We are providing assistance for human
resource development, infrastructure, development and
the rebuilding of the agricultural sector and rural
communities.
Last week, in his address to the General
Assembly, the Japanese Prime Minister, Mr. Naoto
Kan, emphasized that Japan’s assistance will be
provided in such a way that the people of Afghanistan
will be able to perceive tangible improvements in their
livelihoods.
The Foreign Minister of Japan, Mr. Seiji
Maehara, also explained Japan’s assistance policies to
Afghan Foreign Minister Zalmai Rassoul, present with
us today. Japan’s contribution has taken into
consideration the priority areas of the Government, as I
have mentioned, with approximately $5 billion to be
disbursed over five years.

10-55499

S/PV.6394

Stability and reconstruction in Afghanistan
cannot be achieved without the cooperation of those
neighbouring countries that have close ties with it. In
this context, Japan’s has actively maintained a dialogue
with Afghanistan’s neighbours. In addition, it is our
hope that stability in Afghanistan will be realized
through close cooperation with a number of regional
institutions. We welcome the participation of UNAMA
in a series of meetings between Afghanistan and
regional agencies.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Japan’s continued
support of UNAMA and, in particular, of the Special
Representative to the Secretary-General, and reaffirm
our commitment to assist in Afghanistan.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for
his comprehensive analysis of the situation in
Afghanistan and the presentation of the report on the
situation in this country (S/2010/463).
It is with heightened attention that we listened to
the presentation of Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan.
Events have taken place in the past few months
which can be considered key in the history of
Afghanistan. The international conference in
Afghanistan in July launched the Kabul process and its
main elements of international assistance to Afghan
authorities in achieving independent control of issues
of security and development and the gradual taking on
of primary responsibilities in these fields.
The parliamentary elections of 18 September
allowed the Afghan people to turn a new page in the
strengthening of democratic governance in their
country. Their conduct alone in such a complex
military-political situation, despite intimidation and
destabilizing actions by extremists, was a test of
solidity of the Afghan Government and security
structures.
At the same time, the military and political
situation in the country remains tense, with a trend
towards deterioration, including in previously calm
northern regions. The report includes disturbing figures
on significant increase of 69 per cent in the number of
security incidents. The terrorist activity of the Taliban

10-55499

and Al-Qaida remains the main source of danger to the
security of Afghanistan and the region as a whole.
There has been a recent increase in the number of
incursions of groups of combatants from northern
Afghanistan into neighbouring countries of Central
Asia. Armed clashes in these countries, including
Tajikistan, are extremely disturbing to States of the
region, including Russia, that share what are in effect
open borders with Afghanistan. We believe that the
Afghan security sector and the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) need to bolster their actions to
counter the spread of instability in northern
Afghanistan and across its borders.
ISAF will in the near future have to resolve
complex issues in close cooperation with its Afghan
partners. Its withdrawal without prejudice to the
stability of Afghanistan and the entire region will be
possible only after multilateral training of the national
armed forces to make them able independently to fight
terrorism, banditism and drug trafficking. A
precondition for the termination of the ISAF mission in
Afghanistan is its fulfilment of the Security Council’s
mandate.
A lengthy path remains to be traveled in
Afghanistan to implement the comprehensive strategy
for peace, security, reconstruction and integration. That
will require suppressing the terrorist threat, training
effective, combat-capable Afghan security structures,
suppressing drug trafficking, achieving national
reconciliation, creating effective mechanisms of State
authority, restoring economic potential and developing
democratic institutions. The international presence in
Afghanistan must assist in resolving these issues.
A very pressing issue on the agenda is the
intensification of international efforts to combat the
Afghan drug threat. Drug trafficking, which has fused
with terrorism, has become a threat to peace and
security. It is clear that measures undertaken in this
field are not yielding the expected results. The
alternative crops programme is important, but crime
will always be more profitable than legal trade. It is
immoral to claim that, without drug crops, Afghan
farmers will lose their livelihood. They are merely
being exploited by drug traffickers.
Steps to combat the drug industry in Afghanistan
must be comprehensive in nature and cover the entire
chain, from eradicating drug crops, destroying drug
infrastructure and marking precursors to arresting drug

9

S/PV.6394

lords and listing them on the Security Council
sanctions lists. We await relevant proposals from the
Government of Afghanistan and from those countries
whose contingents are present in the country, as well as
from the leadership of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan.
What is unexplainable in the fight against the
drug threat is the passivity of NATO, which for some
years now has failed to respond to eminently logical
proposals for forging cooperation in this field with the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO),
which is carrying out active counter-narcotics
activities. Indeed, the CSTO has just successfully
concluded the latest phase of the counter-narcotics
Operation Kanal, which was also linked to activities in
stabilizing the situation in southern Kyrgyzstan.
In order to achieve peace and security in the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, we support the
Afghan leadership’s policy of national reconciliation,
and the reintegration into Afghan society of those
participants in illegal armed groups who are not tainted
by crimes and have renounced violence, ceased armed
combat, recognized the Constitution of Afghanistan
and broken with Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups.
We believe that former terrorists can be de-listed from
the United Nations sanctions list only on an individual
basis in line with established procedure.
We welcome the increased attention paid to the
development of effective regional cooperation to
promote assistance in solving Afghanistan’s problems.
A contribution to these collective efforts is being made
by the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO),
within whose framework an SCO Afghanistan contact
group is active. This was also an item on the agenda of
August’s meeting of the Presidents of Russia,
Afghanistan, Pakistan and Tajikistan in Sochi. At its
conclusion, a joint declaration backing the Kabul
process and priority programmes in the field of
security, State governance, development of the
economy and infrastructure was adopted. The Russian
Federation will continue to step up its cooperation with
Afghanistan and a broad circle of international partners
for the successful post-conflict restoration of
Afghanistan.
We enable ISAF cargo and personnel to transit to
Afghanistan through Russian territory. We are working
with our partners on additional measures to equip
Afghanistan’s army and police. We are expanding our

10

assistance in training personnel for Afghanistan’s
security structures. We are contributing to the
reconstruction of the economy and major infrastructure
facilities in Afghanistan. This year, the Russian
Federation wrote off the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan’s remaining debt of $891 million. The
total amount of debt forgiven is $12 billion. This is an
absolute record among Afghanistan’s donors. We
continue to provide humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan. As part of our regular contribution to the
World Food Programme, we have started supplying
$5 million worth of wheat flour.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I join
my colleagues in thanking the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2010/463) and Special Representative
Staffan de Mistura for his briefing, including the
detailed update on the parliamentary elections. I offer a
warm welcome to Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, and thank him for his
encouraging remarks. I would also like to acknowledge
the presence of Mark Sedwill, NATO’s Senior Civilian
Representative in Afghanistan, in the Council Chamber
this morning.
Much has happened since the Council debated
Afghanistan three months ago (see S/PV.6351). Many
challenges remain, but progress is being made.
Crucially, this progress is increasingly directed and
driven by the Government of Afghanistan and other
Afghan authorities. The United Kingdom is committed
to working with them and with the United Nations and
the wider international community towards the goal of
a secure, stable and prosperous Afghanistan.
The Secretary-General’s report and the briefing
we just heard highlight in particular the scale of
political progress. The recent parliamentary elections,
the first run by Afghans since the 1960s, are welcome
evidence of the growing capacity of the Afghan
authorities. They successfully overcame major security
and logistical obstacles with impressive levels of
support from the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United Nations
Development Programme. I am sure that my Security
Council colleagues would agree that those Afghans
who acted as officials, who stood as candidates and
who exercised their right to vote showed great courage
and fortitude. Their participation sent a strong message
to those who wanted to deny the Afghan people a vote.

10-55499

S/PV.6394

We must now wait patiently for the completion of
the counting and adjudication processes. It is for the
Afghan authorities to investigate any reports of
irregularities in accordance with Afghan law, through
the Independent Electoral Commission and the
Electoral Complaints Commission.
Looking ahead, the United Kingdom welcomes
the focus of the Afghan authorities and UNAMA on
longer-term electoral reform, as set out in the London
and Kabul communiqués. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s report that this reform process should start
without delay.
The United Kingdom supported the findings of
the Consultative Peace Jirga in June, as well as
President Karzai’s endorsement of the Afghan peace
and reintegration programme. Both were important
steps in promoting wider reconciliation. Yesterday’s
establishment of the High Peace Council was a further
positive development. The appointment of a head of
the Council and confirmation of its membership are
priorities.
The Kabul Conference in July was further
important evidence of increased Afghan leadership and
commitment. The United Kingdom echoes the
Secretary-General’s congratulations to the Government
of Afghanistan on holding such a successful high-level
event in difficult circumstances. The Kabul process
now provides a detailed road map for the future. We
must all focus on implementing the commitments and
supporting the Afghan Government to maintain
momentum for progress and reform, including in the
important battle against corruption.
As the Secretary-General reports, the security
situation remains serious. The increase in insurgent
activity and the complexity of their attacks continue to
be of concern. The rise in the number of incidents
involving improvised explosive devices and the near
doubling of assassinations, executions and kidnappings
by insurgents threaten Afghans civilians as well as
international and Afghan officials and forces. As a
result, there continue to be many civilian casualties,
although it is important to note that the SecretaryGeneral indicates in his report that just 12 per cent of
civilian deaths are due to action by pro-Government
forces — a fall of some 64 per cent as compared to the
same period in 2009, which is an encouraging trend.

improving security across Afghanistan, not least now
that a broad timetable for security transition has been
set. The recruitment and training of the Afghan
National Army and National Police is ahead of
schedule. There are now portions of the country that
experience relatively few security incidents. The
International Security Assistance Force will continue to
work with Afghan forces to improve their capability
across the country.
I welcome the Government of Afghanistan’s
continued dialogue and exchange with its neighbours
and the wider region. As the Secretary-General notes,
bilateral talks between Afghanistan and Pakistan have
delivered concrete plans for cooperation. The
ratification of the Afghanistan-Pakistan Transit Trade
Agreement is the next important step for both countries
to benefit from the increased links.
Finally, the United Kingdom continues to support
the work of UNAMA and of Special Representative De
Mistura. Over the coming months, we look forward,
first, to UNAMA continuing to promote greater aid
coherence and effectiveness. For our part, the United
Kingdom is intensifying and reinvigorating our
development efforts in line with the Afghan
Government’s own priorities. This includes a
commitment of a 40 per cent increase in development
aid.
Secondly, we look forward to UNAMA taking on
board the lessons learned from the recent and past
elections and to working earnestly with the
Government of Afghanistan on longer-term electoral
reform in line with the commitments made in London
and Kabul.
Finally, we look forward to UNAMA supporting
political outreach, within Afghanistan and regionally,
in support of the Kabul process.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
of course like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan for the
presentation of the report (S/2010/463) and the briefing
on the situation in Afghanistan they have just made.
The representative of the European Union will
shortly make a statement, with which France associates
itself.

Against that background, building the capacity of
Afghan National Security Forces is essential to

10-55499

11

S/PV.6394

Two important events this summer have had a
significant impact on the political situation in
Afghanistan that should give us a degree of optimism.
The first and most recent event was the holding
of legislative elections on 18 September. It is a cause
for satisfaction that, despite their threats and violence,
the Taliban failed to prevent 2,500 candidates from
campaigning and more than 4 million Afghans from
voting. That is the first success, and it is an Afghan
success. However, the task is not yet finished. The
Electoral Complaints Commission should impartially
and professionally address the fraud complaints that
have been brought to it. The official announcement of
results, scheduled for 30 October, must not be delayed.
The second event was the holding of the Kabul
Conference on 20 July, under the co-chairmanship of
the United Nations and the Afghan Government, which
aimed to establish another milestone in Afghanistan’s
transition to full exercise of its sovereign authority,
which began at the London Conference last January.
That is why our leaders so strongly emphasized that the
Conference, which brought together 76 delegations
from throughout the world, had to be held in Kabul and
nowhere else. The meeting made it possible to reaffirm
the support of the international community for the
peace, reconciliation and reintegration programme that
President Karzai launched on 29 June.
That process should be carried out by Afghans
themselves. However, the international community
cannot just stand on the sidelines. Our support must
remain undiminished, so long as certain conditions are
respected: the rejection of violence, the absence of
links to international terrorism, and respect for the
Constitution, human rights and the rights of women.
The evolution of the composition of the list of
persons and entities linked with Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, established by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), has concretely
spelled out the inter-Afghan reconciliation process. We
are prepared to pursue dialogue with Afghan officials
with a view to considering the eventual removal of the
Taliban from the list if they meet the political criteria
of reconciliation.
The Kabul Conference also made it possible to
acknowledge the work done by Afghans and NATO for
a gradual transfer of responsibility for security in
various provinces and districts. Those efforts must
continue and must lead to the gradual assumption by

12

Afghans of responsibility for their own security, and
they should be accompanied by our ongoing support to
train and equip Afghan security forces. That is the best
way to demonstrate to Afghans and to public opinion in
our own countries that progress is being made.
However, we must send out a clear message that
transition does not mean departure, but an increasing
handover of responsibilities to Afghan security forces
with the assistance of the international community.
Improving governance and combating corruption are
key elements of the contract proposed at Kabul
between the international community and the Afghan
State.
The Taliban, who are responsible for the
overwhelming majority of civilian casualties, as my
British colleague has just emphasized, are continuing
their attacks and extortion and are giving no sign of a
desire to engage in dialogue. The Afghan people and
the members of the international community have paid
the price. In spite of the efforts by the Government of
Pakistan, the havens that the Afghan Taliban continue
to use there remain a matter of concern.
It is in that context that we need the legitimacy,
impartiality and expertise of the United Nations in
Afghanistan more than ever before. France
unreservedly supports the work of Special
Representative Staffan de Mistura. We pay tribute to all
the staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), who have carried out their
duties under difficult conditions.
We support the Special Representative’s priorities
under his 3+1 approach, which is in line with the
mandate provided in resolution 1917 (2010). That
re-centering is now beginning to produce results.
First, I wish to refer to the elections again in
order to commend the United Nations for its assistance
in the preparations for the poll. I should also like to
thank Mr. De Mistura for his personal involvement at
decisive points during the electoral process. That is
precisely the role of the Special Representative. He has
our full support.
Secondly, support for an inter-Afghan and
regional political reconciliation process will likely be
the most difficult and important issue to be dealt with
in the coming months. We should further work to
ensure that the United Nations plays a decisive role. In
that regard, we are prepared to consider modalities for
further involvement by UNAMA, which should remain

10-55499

S/PV.6394

President Karzai’s sole interlocutor on this issue.
However, the key to the stability of Afghanistan is also
a regional matter, and the United Nations, by virtue of
its impartiality, is well situated to bring together all
regional stakeholders around a common goal.
Lastly, the Special Representative and UNAMA
should continue to work on bringing coherence to
international assistance, along with the Afghan
Government and the Special Representative of the
International Security Assistance Force, with the aim
of moving towards the goal of aligning 80 per cent of
international assistance with national priority
programmes.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating my country’s
commitment to Afghans in their struggle to establish a
country where the rule of law, democratic and
prosperous, prevails, while ensuring that their territory
does not once again serve as a launching pad for
international terrorism. We shall continue to be part of
collective efforts by focusing our military and civilian
forces in Kapisa Province and the Surobi district.
As the President of the French Republic has often
affirmed, France will continue to be engaged as long as
necessary — and as long as the Afghans wish us to be.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me also
thank Special Representative Staffan de Mistura for his
briefing today and for his continued strong leadership
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). I am also pleased to welcome
Foreign Minister Rassoul; we thank him for his
leadership and for his statement.
The staff of UNAMA has the full support of the
United States in their challenging and important work
in assisting the Afghan people. We applaud them again
for their service and sacrifice.
Our goal in Afghanistan remains unchanged: to
disrupt, dismantle and defeat Al-Qaida and to prevent
its return. More international forces are focused on
reversing the Taliban’s momentum and providing
security for the Afghan people. We are working in
partnership with the Afghan security forces, so that
Afghans themselves can assume more and more
responsibility for their country’s security. The United
States is committed to ensuring that this transition to
Afghan-led responsibility for security is conditionsbased and irreversible and managed through a process

10-55499

agreed to by the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community at the Kabul Conference.
Some parts of Afghanistan are nearly ready for
transition now; others will require more time and effort
on all of our parts. We are providing civilian experts
and mentors for the police and the army, which are
critical to ensuring that the transition occurs smoothly.
Based upon Afghanistan’s transition plan, we will help
Afghanistan meet its goal of taking the lead on security
by 2014.
This transition does not at all lessen our
commitment to the Afghan people. The United States
will continue to provide assistance to help build the
capacities of Afghan institutions to withstand and
reduce the threat posed by extremism. We are also
helping to build up the Afghan institutional capacity to
delivery high-impact economic assistance, especially
in the agricultural sector, to create jobs, improve
governance, fight narcotics and draw insurgents off the
battlefield. Our support is focused, at the national
level, on Afghan ministries that can most directly affect
service delivery, particularly in the geographic heart of
the insurgency: the south and the east. We are also
adapting our programmes to account for local realities
and broadening our support at the provincial and
district levels to enhance the visibility, effectiveness
and accountability of the institutions that can improve
Afghan lives the most.
When representatives of more than 70
Governments and international organizations gathered
in Kabul in July, we made clear our lasting
commitment to our partnership with Afghanistan. The
Kabul Conference launched an ambitious process to
chart a vision for Afghanistan’s future. The Kabul
process reflects a commitment to accountability,
including clear benchmarks and milestones, and the
United States fully supports the priorities and goals
identified by the Afghan Government. We welcome, as
well, UNAMA’s commitment to aligning aid behind the
Government of Afghanistan’s priorities and UNAMA’s
support for the Government’s push for greater aid
coherence and effectiveness. We look forward to seeing
the United Nations integrated strategic framework, as
mentioned
in
the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2010/463), and its definition of priority areas for
United Nations engagement in support of Afghanistan’s
transition.

13

S/PV.6394

Let me now turn to the key role that the Security
Council’s Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions Committee —
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) — can play in fostering stability in Afghanistan.
We commend the 1267 Committee for its recent
de-listing of 10 Taliban individuals who are either
deceased or reconciled, as well as the Committee’s
designation of three individuals who possess strong
links to the Taliban. We continue to believe that
individuals who have ceased violence against the
Afghan State, cut ties to Al-Qaida and accepted the
Afghan Constitution should be considered reconciled
and removed from the 1267 sanctions list. We must
ensure that the 1267 list keeps pace with the evolving
threat, and we encourage the Government of
Afghanistan and all Member States to provide updates
to the 1267 Committee, as well as well-documented
listing and de-listing requests, to ensure the list’s
accuracy. Recent improvements to the Committee’s
listing and de-listing procedures will make the 1267
regime a stronger, more credible tool in our overall
efforts to combat terrorism and bolster peace and
security in Afghanistan.
Finally, let me also comment on the elections just
concluded in Afghanistan. These elections, held under
extremely difficult circumstances, were the first
parliamentary elections to be run entirely by Afghan
institutions since the fall of the Taliban in 2001. The
Secretary-General’s report and the briefing we have
just heard describe the extensive electoral preparations
by the Afghan Independent Electoral Commission and
the Afghan Electoral Complaints Commission, and the
important support provided by the United Nations.
These preparations resulted in a historic step for the
Afghan people. We applaud the courage, resolve and
patriotism of those who voted, male and female,
despite Taliban threats, intimidation and violence.
These elections would not have been possible without
the Afghan National Security Forces, which bravely
protected the Afghan people from the foes of the
democratic process. We condemn the Taliban’s attacks
on members of the security forces and on innocent
civilians seeking to do nothing more than cast their
democratic ballots. On behalf of the United States, let
me pass on my profound sympathies to those who were
injured and my deepest condolences to the families of
those who were killed.
As Special Representative De Mistura said, it will
be some time before the results of these elections are

14

finalized. Independent Afghan electoral institutions
will now count the votes, respond to complaints and
allegations of fraud and ultimately announce results
that reflect the will of the Afghan people. The United
States supports this Afghan-led process. These
elections must be credible and transparent in the eyes
of the Afghan people, who will be the ultimate judge of
their success. We support UNAMA’s plans to remain
closely engaged with Afghan institutions as they count
and tabulate results over the next few weeks.
We must not lose sight of the need for long-term
electoral reform. This must remain an important
priority, and my Government supports UNAMA’s plans
to focus on this area after the election as well.
These elections are but a single but important
step towards a stronger, more stable Afghanistan. The
United States remains steadfastly committed to helping
Afghanistan achieve the peaceful and prosperous future
that the people of Afghanistan so deserve.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his informative
briefing on the situation in Afghanistan. I welcome the
participation in this meeting of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan, Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, and I
thank him for his statement.
We once again note with concern that the security
situation in some parts of Afghanistan has continued to
deteriorate in spite of the efforts of the international
community. This insecurity remains a major obstacle to
efforts to achieve peace and stability in the country. If
not checked, this insecurity will continue to
overshadow the progress achieved by the Government
and the people of Afghanistan so far.
There is a need to sustain the momentum in the
Afghan-led peace and reintegration efforts, which
should be supported by the international community.
The holding of the Kabul Conference on 20 July was a
significant political development in Afghanistan. The
Conference proved that there is a shared interest by the
international community in helping the Afghan
Government and people overcome the challenges of
national development.
We welcome the Conference outcome, and in
particular the key commitments made by both the
Afghan Government and the international community.

10-55499

S/PV.6394

We look forward to the finalization of the framework
of the national priority programmes presented by the
Afghan Government. The international community
should align its development assistance behind the
national
priority
programmes,
whose
timely
implementation will be essential to maintain the
momentum of the Kabul process.
Despite Taliban threats and attacks aimed at
disrupting the parliamentary elections that were held
on 18 September, it is encouraging to note the
significant increase in the participation of Afghan
women.
Regionally owned initiatives stand the best
chance of success in addressing concerns that cut
across national borders. We encourage the Afghan
Government’s continued cooperation with neighboring
countries based on the common desire to increase joint
efforts in responding to security concerns and bolster
economic cooperation in the region. The conclusion of
the Afghanistan-Pakistan Transit Trade Agreement in
July was a significant development that will facilitate
the realization of the full economic potential of those
two countries.
The development challenges that Afghanistan
faces require sustained, long-term support from the
international community. A well coordinated and well
resourced civilian effort is critical to overcoming these
challenges. In this regard, we commend UNAMA for
its continued role in facilitating a coherent Afghan-led
agenda in security, governance and development. We
believe that this role is critical for the success of the
Kabul process, through which Afghans will assume full
leadership and full ownership.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I should like to express my thanks to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2010/463), as well as to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. De Mistura, for his
valuable briefing. I should also like to thank His
Excellency Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Foreign Minister of
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, for his valuable
contribution to today’s debate.
Bosnia and Herzegovina commends the
Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) and the
Electoral Complaints Commission (ECC) for their
committed efforts in organizing inclusive, transparent
and credible elections despite the difficult security
environment and logistical challenges. We encourage

10-55499

the ECC to continue investigating complaints in a fully
independent manner in order to eliminate any
assumption of fraud. Furthermore, we note the
important role of the Afghan Security Forces in
ensuring a safe environment for the electorate.
However, we are saddened to learn that, despite their
efforts, human casualties have been reported from
attacks on polling stations. While welcoming the
participation of the 397 women candidates, we firmly
condemn the intimidation of and violence against
certain female candidates and their campaign workers.
We welcomed the holding of the Kabul
Conference on 20 July, co-chaired by the Afghan
Government and the United Nations. That Conference
was of critical importance for advancing the Kabul
process, which emphasizes the need for Afghan
ownership in the fields of security, governance and
social development as a necessary precondition for a
sustainable Afghanistan. In this light, we fully support
the designed strategy for a transfer of lead
responsibility for security matters on a province-byprovince basis.
The Afghan peace and reintegration programme
represents a promising way forward towards the
establishment of a peaceful security environment. We
command the creation of its committees and we
encourage the efforts of Special Representative De
Mistura to assure broad representation of religious,
ethnic and civil society groups, including women, in
the High Peace Council of the programme.
With respect to the Consolidated List of
individuals and entities subject to sanction measures,
we support the de-listing of individuals and entities in
accordance with the guidelines of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to the resolution 1267
(1999), which provide clear procedures for placing
individuals and entities on the consolidated list and for
removing them. At the same time, Bosnia and
Herzegovina reiterates the importance of ending
impunity and bringing all alleged perpetrators of
crimes to justice. That is an important condition for
building sustainable peace and reconciliation of the
society.
Bilateral
and
multilateral
dialogue
and
cooperation are essential to addressing security
concerns and increasing economic cooperation, thereby
enhancing peaceful relations. In this respect, we
welcome and encourage the ongoing bilateral talks

15

S/PV.6394

between the Afghan and Pakistani Governments as well
as President Karzai’s participation in the fourth
trilateral summit meeting, held in Tehran on 5 August,
and the meeting in Sochi, Russia, on 18 August.
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains particularly
concerned about the rising human cost of the ongoing
conflict. The findings of the report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict in Afghanistan, released by
UNAMA, are in fact extremely alarming. We learn
with the deepest concern that casualties among Afghan
children and women have substantially increased over
the past year. Therefore, we demand that effective
measures to protect Afghan civilians are urgently given
high priority. Needless to say, we give full support to
initiatives aimed at fostering the observance of human
rights.
We are also deeply concerned about increasing
drug dependence among the Afghan population and
about the findings presented in the Afghanistan Drug
Use Survey 2009. We call upon all relevant
governmental, international and civil society actors to
increase their efforts in the area of drug prevention and
dependence treatment as an important component of
health care and development programmes.
Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina congratulates
UNAMA staff and Special Representative De Mistura
on their tireless work and dedication. We also express
our full support for the establishment of a support
office and a disaster recovery and business continuity
centre and the planned upgrading of existing offices,
which will strengthen the Mission’s activities in
support of the Afghan peace process and of
improvement of the everyday lives of the Afghan
people.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I too would like to thank
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in Afghanistan,
including the recently concluded parliamentary
elections. I should also like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Zaimal Rassoul to the Council’s meeting today. I
will limit my intervention to issues of political
developments,
elections,
security,
economic
development and the regional dimension.
We congratulate the Government and the people
of Afghanistan on the successful holding of the
parliamentary elections on 18 September 2010. With

16

many candidates competing for many parliamentary
seats, the challenges of conducting the parliamentary
elections in the face of threats of violence from diehard
insurgents were quite daunting. Nigeria therefore
salutes the courage and resilience of the Afghan people
for defying the odds and exercising their rights, noting
that they demonstrated their determination to
consolidate the country’s fledgling democracy with a
large turnout during the voting in spite of threats and
intimidation. The increased participation of women,
especially those seeking elected office, is another
demonstration of the continued commitment to
democracy.
We commend the Independent Electoral
Commission for managing and facilitating the electoral
process. We also commend UNAMA for providing the
training and the technical and logistical support needed
for the election.
As we await the full and final outcome of the
voting, the challenge facing Afghanistan’s political
leaders is to ensure that the efforts and sacrifices of the
people are not wasted. The results should therefore
reflect the will of the people. In this regard, we urge
that all the complaints filed with the Electoral
Complaints Commission be thoroughly investigated.
The partial recount of votes from seven of the
country’s 34 provinces, ordered only yesterday, should
also be painstakingly conducted. We urge all aggrieved
parties to act with caution and seek recourse to legal
channels for redress. The Electoral Complaints
Commission is encouraged to apply lessons learned
from previous elections and to resolve all irregularities
and complaints in a timely manner and in accordance
with the law.
Resolving the political impasse over the
remaining nominations to the Cabinet, as agreed at the
Peace Jirga, is equally important to the consolidation of
Afghanistan’s democratic process. We urge both the
legislative and the executive branches to act
expeditiously to resolve the impasse.
To support reconciliation and a political settlement,
there should be sustained negotiations and dialogue
between the parties. We therefore hope that the
Government’s appointment, on Tuesday, 28 September,
of the members of the High Peace Council — comprising
warlords, village elders and women — will give impetus
to the reconciliation process in the country.

10-55499

S/PV.6394

Nigeria shares the Secretary-General’s concern
about the deteriorating security situation in
Afghanistan. The more than 300 cases of attacks in the
period leading up to and during the elections confirmed
the precarious state of security in the country. Polling
centres were blown up in Kunar, Khost and Kandahar,
and rocket attacks were launched against polling
centres in populated areas of Nangarhar and Kunar,
killing several civilians. Only yesterday, Afghanistan’s
Interior Ministry confirmed a suicide attack that killed
Mr. Mohammad Kazim Allahyar, Deputy Governor of
Ghazni province, and five others in a direct attack on
his vehicle. These security challenges call for the
continuous strengthening of the capacity and state of
readiness of the Government as it prepares to assume
full law enforcement responsibilities in the country by
2014.
Nigeria
reiterates
its
support
for
the
Government’s action plan, and urges the international
community to align its resources and activities in
support of the programme and priorities contained in
the plan. The development of infrastructure should be
accorded priority, as it will stimulate employment and
help the Afghan Government to create a viable and
self-sustaining economy that is less dependent on
foreign aid. The international community has the
responsibility to support the Government’s followthrough on its renewed commitment to the dual track
of security and effective accountability to the people,
made at the Kabul Conference. The Government
should take concrete steps to ensure good governance,
tackle corruption, improve accountability, adhere to the
rule of law, and reform the justice system.
The increasing cooperation between Afghanistan
and its neighbours on cross-border crime, illicit drug
trafficking, arms smuggling and human trafficking
demonstrates the importance of the regional dimension
in confronting the challenges facing the country. In this
connection, we commend the setting-up of the highlevel Core Group to create the framework for
cooperation between the Economic Cooperation
Organization, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, the South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation and the Islamic Development Bank. We
welcome UNAMA’s participation in these efforts.
In conclusion, Nigeria expresses its appreciation
to the staff and personnel of UNAMA for their
dedication, and to Special Representative De Mistura
for his commitment to the peace efforts in Afghanistan.

10-55499

Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank Staffan de Mistura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing and able leadership of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also
welcome the presence among us of His Excellency
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, and thank him for his remarks.
Today, I would like to extend special
congratulations to the Afghan people, who once again
defied terrorist threats to vote in the Wolesi Jirga
elections on 18 September. The very holding of the
elections and the improvements made in their
organization are important developments. The
impressive number of candidates and the vibrant
campaigning testified to the determination of the
Afghan people to consolidate democratic governance.
We are concerned, however, about reports of
violence and intimidation that prevented polling
stations from opening and voters from participating.
Brazil condemns these acts, as well as the derogatory
remarks made against women candidates. Those
responsible must be brought to justice without delay.
Regarding the next steps in the electoral process,
the Independent Electoral Commission, the Electoral
Complaints Commission and its provincial offices must
be allowed to carry out their duties in conformity with
Afghan legislation and free from interference.
Unfortunately, the violence displayed during the
elections reflected rising insecurity in the country. We
note with great concern that 2010 has already become
the most violent in Afghanistan since the current
military operations began. We are particularly
saddened by the toll on civilians. The 55-per cent
increase in overall child casualties is extremely
disturbing. Brazil commends the efforts of the
pro-Government forces to reduce civilian casualties,
which now stand at 12 per cent of the total figure.
However, more must be done, especially
regarding casualties from escalation-of-force incidents,
which experienced a very significant increase.
Sustained progress in the military operations and in the
transition to greater Afghan responsibility for security
is an important element of any strategy to reverse the
current trends. A conditions-based process of the
Afghanization of security is at the core of the
commitments made at the London and Kabul
Conferences. We were therefore pleased to learn that
progress is being made in recruiting and training

17

S/PV.6394

Afghan security personnel and in strengthening the
ethnic and regional balance and human rights
preparation of troops and police.

role of agriculture in exterminating or reducing poppy
crops and drug trafficking, for example, cannot be
overstated.

Afghan forces must be provided with the enablers
and equipment necessary to perform their functions in
a very challenging environment. Continuously
enhancing Afghanistan’s ownership of its security also
requires upholding Afghan sovereignty and regulatory
powers over private military and security companies
operating on Afghan soil.

Brazil is committed to strengthening its
contribution to the stability and development of
Afghanistan. The recent decision of my Government to
open a resident embassy in Kabul was a practical
demonstration thereof. But we are not waiting for it to
happen before we step up our cooperation with
Afghanistan. Just yesterday, a technical mission led by
the Brazilian Cooperation Agency left Afghanistan
after extensive meetings to identify areas for technical
cooperation in agriculture, mining and the cutting and
polishing of gemstones. The mission was organized in
close consultations with the Afghan Government in
order to ensure that our cooperation is fully consistent
with Afghan priorities.

Continued progress is key to other aspects of the
Kabul progress, especially reconciliation and
reintegration, the regional dimension and the delivery
of governance and development to the Afghan people.
In this regard, we welcome the establishment of the
High Peace Council and note the recent appointment of
its members, including several women, by President
Karzai. Representation of Afghans from all regions and
ethnic backgrounds and women’s and civil society
organizations is an important safeguard to ensure that
the reconciliation process does not come at the cost of
the rights recently reclaimed.
The efforts to strengthen the Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board and to align its standing
committees more closely to the clusters of the Afghan
National Development Strategy are other important
steps in moving the Kabul process forward, especially
on aid coherence. In this regard, my delegation would
appreciate it if further information could be provided in
future reports on the execution of the Afghan national
priority programmes, as well as on the implementation
by the donor community of the London and Kabul
commitments on budget aid and the realignment of offbudget aid.
Brazil fully concurs with the Secretary-General’s
assessment that the Kabul process can be successful
only if it delivers at the local level countrywide. We
commend UNAMA’s efforts to support the alignment
of sub-national programmes and work plans with the
national priority programmes, as well as to build
capacity at the provincial and district levels. Making
sub-national administrations more representative of
local realities and better able to provide governance
and development is key to building stability in
Afghanistan.
Developing agriculture is of the utmost
importance in helping to lay the foundations for both
prosperity and peace in Afghanistan. The important

18

Both in the framework of international forums, in
particular the Security Council, and through an
enhanced presence in Kabul and a renewed impetus in
our bilateral relationship, Brazil stands ready to work
together with the Afghan people and its Government
towards a brighter future.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I, too, would first
like to thank Special Representative De Mistura for his
informative briefing and for his very challenging work
at the head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also welcome Foreign
Minister Rassoul to the Security Council. We listened
with great interest to and are grateful for his important
contribution to the debate today.
Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by the European Union delegation on behalf
of the European Union. In addition, I would like to
make the following points.
We congratulate the Government of Afghanistan
and UNAMA on the very successful preparations for
and organization of the Kabul Conference two months
ago. This historic event was an important signal that
Afghanistan is willing and able to take responsibility
for its security and development.
The timely implementation of the commitments
made both by the Afghan Government and the
international community is key. We welcome the first
concrete steps taken by the Afghan Government.
Maximum ownership and empowerment of the Afghan
people in the political and security sectors will be

10-55499

S/PV.6394

critical to the country’s long-term stability. The Kabul
process can succeed only if it includes all segments of
Afghan society. We welcome UNAMA’s efforts to
promote the participation of civil society, including
women’s groups, and the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission in the Kabul process and
encourage it to further pursue these efforts.
We strongly believe that the Kabul process must
also yield a peace dividend for the Afghan people. The
improvement of livelihoods and creation of sustainable
income opportunities will help to contain the influence
of extremist groups. It is important to enhance
opportunities and to profit from the valuable role of
Afghan women and girls. We also need to address the
enormous increase in criminal incidents in
Afghanistan. Law enforcement authorities and all those
who can redress this emerging challenge to civilians
have to be supported.
The holding of parliamentary elections was
another important milestone in the democratic process
of State-building. While it may be too early for a
comprehensive assessment, we wish to commend the
Independent Electoral Commission and UNAMA on
tangible improvements made in the preparation of the
elections. These polls were conducted under truly
challenging conditions, and the millions of Afghan
citizens who went to the polls in defiance of threats
and intimidation by the Taliban deserve our full
respect. It was especially pleasing to see the great
participation of young Afghans. We now expect the
Afghan electoral bodies to address fully and in an
impartial and transparent manner all reports of
irregularities and complaints that have been filed.
Beyond that, comprehensive and long-term electoral
reform will evidently also be necessary.
We appreciate the steps taken by the Afghan
Government to advance a political solution by way of
launching and implementing the peace and
reconciliation programme. At the same time, all efforts
must be undertaken to ensure that those who are
already bearing the brunt of the ongoing conflict will
not be further victimized and that human rights, and
especially women’s and children’s rights, are not
compromised in the reconciliation process.
We thank the Special Representative for his
advocacy for broad representation of religious and
ethnic communities and the female population in the
implementation of the programme. We strongly

10-55499

encourage UNAMA to continue to keep the Council
informed of further developments, including with a
view to the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1889 (2009).
During the recent Security Council mission to
Afghanistan, the Afghan authorities and the public
showed considerable interest in the review of the
consolidated list of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, which I have the honour to chair. We are
pleased that, meanwhile, this process has been
concluded, allowing for a substantial update of the list.
At the same time, the consolidated list remains a living
document. We therefore need to continue to ensure that
the list reflects the actual threat, and that means that
entries that are no longer relevant must be removed and
new threats must be reflected in the appropriate new
entries. This will evidently require continued close
cooperation between the Committee and the Afghan
authorities, and I will do my best to promote such
cooperation for the remainder of my mandate as Chair
of the 1267 Committee.
The recent report of UNAMA on the protection of
civilians reveals the escalating human cost of the
conflict. The first six months of this year have seen a
significant rise in civilian casualties. Women and,
above all, child casualties have dramatically increased
compared to last year. Anti-government elements —
and I wish to underline this — were responsible for the
vast majority of civilian deaths and injuries. Their
means of warfare — the extensive use of improvised
explosive devices and suicide attacks, the use of
civilians as human shields, the recruitment of children
and the assassination campaigns directed against their
own fellow citizens — violate the most basic principles
of international humanitarian law. It will be crucial to
hold the perpetrators of these and past crimes
accountable. Effective forms of assistance for victims
need to be provided.
On the other hand, the significant drop in the
number
of
civilian
casualties
caused
by
pro-Government forces is a welcome development. We
also welcome the efforts of the Afghan Government to
address the situation of children affected by the armed
conflict,
in
particular
the
launch
of
the
Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee on Children and
Armed Conflict, as well as the Government’s intention
to develop an action plan to prevent the recruitment of
children.

19

S/PV.6394

Finally, we wish to commend the efforts of the
Special Representative in support of regional initiatives
and cooperation in order to bring all regional actors
together around the common goal of achieving
stability, prosperity and lasting peace in Afghanistan
and the region.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing. I welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan.
China congratulates Afghanistan on the
successful holding of parliamentary elections on
18 September. This was a major event in Afghan
political life and constitutes an important step towards
achieving an Afghanistan run by Afghans and towards
peaceful reconstruction. We highly appreciate the
preparatory work that the Afghan Government carried
out in a very difficult and complex situation, and we
commend the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its support and assistance
to the country. We hope that, through these elections,
the Afghan people will further bolster consensus with a
view to the early achievement of reconciliation, peace
and development.
The process of peaceful reconstruction in
Afghanistan is now at a critical transitional stage
fraught with many challenges. In July, the Kabul
Conference on Afghanistan was successfully held. That
international Conference — the very first held in
Afghanistan — was significant: it was an important
step in the Kabul process and enriched and enhanced
the partnership between Afghanistan and its
international partners to advance the country’s
reconstruction process. In its next phase, the work of
the Security Council and the international community
must focus on implementing the communiqué adopted
at the international Kabul Conference on Afghanistan.
Peace, stability and development in Afghanistan
require ownership and leadership by the Government
and the people of that country. We support the Afghan
Government’s efforts to build its capacity to exercise
control throughout its territory. In order to achieve
fresh progress, work should continue in a balanced
manner in the spheres of economic development, safety
and security, national reconciliation, governance, the
rule of law and combating drug trafficking. We

20

encourage the Government and the people also to take
effective measures to step up economic development
and improve living standards. We support the Afghan
peace and reintegration programme formulated by the
Government, and we hope that the Government will
listen to the views of its people and their political
parties so that the political basis for reconciliation can
be broadened.
Peace, stability and development in Afghanistan
also require the sustained engagement and support of
the international community, which should, on the
basis of respect for the country’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, honour its
assistance commitments to Afghanistan. Such
assistance should be in line with Afghanistan’s national
development strategy and should respect the priorities
identified by the country itself. We should all continue
to help the Afghan Government to enhance its national
security capacity and to accelerate the building of the
police and security forces. China supports a continued
central coordinating role for the United Nations and
UNAMA in facilitating the peaceful reconstruction of
Afghanistan.
China is very concerned about the deterioration
of the security situation in the country and about the
increasing number of security incidents. We are
troubled by the increase in casualties among innocent
civilians. In our view, the transfer of security
responsibilities to the Afghan Government must be
based on ensuring the country’s security and stability.
We hope that UNAMA will do more to protect
civilians, within its mandate.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Ambassador Staffan de Mistura, Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
Afghanistan, for his briefing and for his commitment to
peace and stability in Afghanistan. We also thank
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, to whose statement we listened
attentively.
The deterioration of the security situation in
Afghanistan, as described in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/463), which reflects a
69 per cent increase in security incidents compared to
last year, saps the confidence of the civilian population
in their institutions and undermines the efforts of the
international community and the United Nations on the
ground. The high human, material and political costs

10-55499

S/PV.6394

borne by Afghanistan and the international presence on
a daily basis indicate the imperative need to
complement military action with genuine, inclusive,
regionally-centred dialogue to counteract the current
cycle of violence.
The political process, supported by military
efforts, should always be moving in the same direction
under Afghan leadership and with the necessary
international support. Here, we welcome President
Karzai’s announcement on the establishment of a peace
commission for dialogue with the Taliban.
In the light of the upcoming reduction in United
States forces in the country, the joint transition plan of
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and
the Afghan Government is of fundamental importance.
UNAMA monitoring of that plan with a view to
bolstering Government leadership and national
ownership throughout the country should faithfully
indicate whether the Government has the human,
political and financial resources necessary to fully
resume its security responsibilities. The international
community should bear in mind that, although security
and stability are Afghanistan’s most urgent need, a halt
to or reduction in military activity will not in itself
guarantee security.
In the light of the need to strengthen political
dialogue and overall planning in Afghanistan, we hail
the holding of the Kabul Conference on 20 July. It
lends momentum to a process whereby Afghans will
gradually be able to resume responsibility for their own
security, governance and economic and social
development. We welcome the Government’s actions to
advance in this process; it has begun to provide details
on the 23 national priority programmes introduced at
the Kabul Conference with the aim of identifying
beneficiaries for the short and medium term. We
consider that the chances of success for this process
will be enhanced by carrying it out in line with an
inclusive vision encompassing women and members of
ethnic and religious minorities.
We view as positive the visit to Afghanistan by
the Monitoring Team operating under the direction of
the Committee established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1267 (1999), which is tasked with
reviewing the consolidated list, which includes
individuals subject to sanctions, bearing in mind that
the ongoing de-listing process is in accordance with the

10-55499

Afghan Government’s peace and reintegration
programme, which has the support of the Council.
The work of Ambassador De Mistura, in his
capacity as Co-Chair of the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board, continues to be of particularly great
value in ensuring that commitments undertaken at the
London and Kabul Conferences are met and facilitating
the
implementation
of Afghan
reconciliation
programmes.
With respect to the rule of law, we reaffirm that
the sine qua non for building sustainable peace in
Afghanistan is the implementation of justice and
accountability processes. This includes the fight
against corruption and organized crime, especially
illegal drug trafficking.
My delegation reiterates its profound concern
over the number of children who have been killed or
injured in acts of violence related to the conflict, which
has increased by 55 per cent since 2009. This, added to
the sexual violence perpetrated against children in the
country, remains a generalized phenomenon. We call
on all parties to meet their obligations under
international humanitarian law, in particular resolution
1882 (2009).
With regard to the parliamentary elections held
on 18 September, we commend all the efforts of the
Government and the support of UNAMA and the
international community in convening them. We
strongly condemn the terrorist activities and violence
perpetrated by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other
anti-Government elements, which sought to destabilize
the process and limited citizens’ ability to vote in some
parts of the country. We are likewise concerned by
reports of irregularities during the elections. We
believe it critical for the Electoral Complaints
Commission to look carefully at the complaints
received, so that the final results to be issued by the
Independent Electoral Commission in late October
enhance the credibility and legitimacy of the elections.
This commendable effort should undoubtedly work to
the benefit of Afghan democracy and stability in the
country and the region.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by conveying my gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his report on the situation in
Afghanistan and its impact on international peace and
security (S/2010/463). I would also like to thank
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Representative of the

21

S/PV.6394

Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his
efforts and his exhaustive briefing. I also welcome His
Excellency Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan, and thank him for his important
statement.
I would like to make the following comments.
First, the parliamentary elections of 18 September were
at the very centre of our concerns, as they are a key
element of democracy. They were a test of the Afghan
electoral institutions and the entire international
community. We welcome the logistical and technical
steps that were taken to guarantee the successful
conduct of the elections in a transparent and free
manner and to avoid or overcome the shortcomings and
gaps in the 2009 presidential election. Furthermore, the
encouraging participation rate of candidates and voters
alike — and of women in particular — in these very
difficult conditions demonstrated the extent to which
Afghan society is wedded to the democratic process.
However, the security situation remains a major
stumbling block, whether in terms of threats against
and even assassinations of candidates and electoral
staff, or of situations where a number of voters were
not allowed to exercise their right to vote. Moreover,
irregularities and fraud are very serious challenges no
less important than security. That is why the role of the
Electoral Complaints Commission was essential in
limiting the negative fallout of these aspects of the
elections, in which we had a number of incidents.
Secondly, certain that a political solution is the
appropriate way to end the crisis in Afghanistan and to
ensure that all main stakeholders without exception
participate in Government, and realizing that partial
solutions are not viable, we support the reconciliation
and reintegration process and affirm the need to
implement the decisions of the 20 July Kabul
Conference in a timely way. That process must involve
every stratum of society throughout the country.
The Conference was a twofold commitment. On
the one hand, it reflected the commitment of the
Government to improving the security situation and
governance,
promoting
economic
and
social
development, and fighting drug trafficking to the
benefit of the people. On the other hand, it also
demonstrated the commitment of the international
community to backing the national Afghan
Government, bringing into play various resources and

22

means to ensure that the Government regains complete
control of its territory, and reaffirming our
condemnation of terrorist activities. We note with
alarm that the security situation has not improved in
many regions around the country. The overall number
of security-related incidents has clearly grown in
comparison to the same period last year; the number of
civilian deaths, including among women and children,
is still increasing.
Thirdly, we reaffirm the need to cooperate at the
regional level and to support neighbouring countries,
given the relationship of the security situation,
including the economy, to the fight against drug
trafficking, which is a basic source of financing for
terrorism. It is clear that peace in Afghanistan will
further the interests of all countries of the region.
Mr. Moungara-Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): Allow me, in my turn, to thank the Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
in
Afghanistan, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, whom it is my
pleasure to see and hear again as he outlines the
situation in Afghanistan. Having recently seen him at
work on the ground, I appreciate the relevance of his
views and analysis. I also welcome His Excellency
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Foreign Minister of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan, and thank him for his
statement.
Like those who have taken the floor before me, I
welcome the successful holding of parliamentary
elections on 18 September. The holding of the
elections, despite serious terrorist threats, was ample
proof of the Afghan people’s courage and
determination to turn a dark page in their history and to
live within an organized society in a climate of peace.
We deplore, however, that alongside this commitment
of the Afghan people and Government to working
towards peace, the insurgents continue to find new
ways to create havoc, harassing the Afghan security
forces, international forces and the civilian population
throughout the country.
However, the various international conferences
and forums that have been held point to an
improvement in the situation in Afghanistan. The
Government has, in fact, made praiseworthy efforts in
the areas of good governance, human rights and the
rule of law. Moreover, they have done everything in
their power to promote national reconciliation,
particularly by extending a hand to marginalized

10-55499

S/PV.6394

groups willing to engage in dialogue and become part
of the peace and reconstruction process.
For its part, the international community,
including the United Nations, has made efforts in the
form of electoral assistance, security sector reform and
in training and equipping of Afghan security and
defence forces. With regard to electoral aid in
particular, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has come into its own in its
support for various election processes, particularly the
recent parliamentary elections. It is my delegation’s
hope that the election results will be published
following the examination of complaints submitted by
various parties.
Furthermore, as Mr. De Mistura has stated,
inclusive elections were held that included, inter alia,
the overwhelming participation of women. The United
Nations agencies, for their part, have worked hard to
assist needy populations and to relocate refugees
re-entering the country who wished to return to their
places of origin.
But these efforts seem to have been cancelled out
by the unprecedented ruthlessness of terrorists seeking
to impose their will. Clearly, the current unstable
security situation is significantly undermining the
Government’s stabilization efforts and threatens, in the
long term, to discredit it in the eyes of the population.
That is why we call for increased coordination between
the international stakeholders, whether bilateral or
multilateral, and the Afghan authorities. In addition, it
is important to strengthen the logistics and financial
support provided to the Afghan security and defence
forces in order to build their operational capacities.
As members will recall, during its latest mission
to Afghanistan — a mission that you yourself, Sir, so
ably led — the Council noted the complex nature of the
security challenges in the country. Indeed, several
small groups are fighting for dominance in arms and
drugs trafficking. As a result of all of these marginal
activities, peace and the security of civilians, security
forces and international staff, including that of
UNAMA, are under constant threat.
We therefore underline the need to strengthen
regional cooperation in order to better face the
challenges to peace and security in the region. It would
indeed be unrealistic to ignore the implications and
regional dimension of the situation in Afghanistan.

10-55499

Furthermore,
we
call
for
enhanced
implementation of the decisions taken at the various
conferences on Afghanistan, including the London and
Kabul Conferences. This means, inter alia, that Afghan
priorities must be taken into account regarding longterm security and development in that country. Indeed,
the combination of the military, economic, social and
political efforts being undertaken seems, from our
point of view, to be the most appropriate approach to
achieving the goals of peace and stabilization in the
country. In that respect, we support the development
plan of the Afghan Government. We invite the donor
community to provide financial support to that plan.
Before concluding, I reiterate Gabon’s support for
the role of UNAMA and to welcome the tenacity and
professionalism of its personnel under the leadership of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. De Mistura. I must recall here the leadership of
Turkey on the issue of Afghanistan and the significant
contributions of your country, Sir, aimed at
re-establishing peace in Afghanistan.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Turkey.
I, too, would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his support and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his
comprehensive briefing. Let me also extend a sincere
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Zalmai Rassoul,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, and
reiterate our appreciation for the warm hospitality
extended to us during the Council’s mission to
Afghanistan. I would also like to express our deep
appreciation to Mr. De Mistura and the entire staff of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for their hard work and dedicated efforts in
Afghanistan.
As I am the last Council member to speak, I will
try to be brief and focus on two main issues. First, on
the elections, Turkey commends the Government of
Afghanistan for holding the second parliamentary
elections since 2001 as planned, on 18 September, in
spite of the difficult security conditions, and we
commend the Afghan people for their active interest
and participation in the elections. We condemn all
attacks and attempts to undermine the election process
by violence, and offer our condolences for those who
have lost their lives.

23

S/PV.6394

The elections were another step forward in the
consolidation of Afghanistan’s democratic institutions
and national unity. The holding of the elections was
made possible by the determined efforts of the Afghan
authorities and the support of the international
community to this Afghan-owned and Afghan-led
process. We are confident that the Afghan electoral
bodies will keep up their good work in the weeks
ahead. It is particularly important for the Independent
Electoral Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission to deal with all the complaints they
receive in a speedy, impartial and transparent manner
in order to ensure that reliable final results are
announced in due time.
The elections were a critical step in the political
process in Afghanistan. With the elections carried out
on time and, we hope, the results to be announced in
the coming weeks after all the complaints have been
dealt with, we can focus in greater depth on
Afghanization, which is the second issue I wish to
touch into.
Ensuring the durability of the achievements made
thus far is directly linked to cementing Afghan
ownership and empowering Afghans. The Kabul
Conference was a turning point in this regard. The
Afghan Government and the international community
should now focus on the implementation of the Kabul
process, the most important message of which was
Afghanization and Afghan ownership. In that regard,
we are glad to see that the Afghan Government is
showing strong political will to take this process
forward and is drawing up concrete implementation
plans. The international community should, for its part,
be steadfast in its commitments and assist the Afghan
Government in a manner that conforms to the
conditions, priorities and requirements on the ground.
As foreseen at the Kabul Conference, the phased
transfer to Afghan responsibility should be led by the
Afghans. It should be conditions-driven and should not
be interpreted to mean an exit. Long-term commitment
to Afghanistan in all forms required and requested by
the Afghans should be emphasized. Transition is
possible in an atmosphere of security and stability,
which ultimately requires political reconciliation. This
process should seek to embrace all segments of society
under the leadership of the Afghan Government, giving
them fair opportunities to serve the Afghan cause and
enable their representation. Afghanistan can overcome

24

the hurdles it has been experiencing only through
enhanced unity and solidarity at the national level.
We also firmly believe that an essential pillar of
ensuring the irreversibility of the process under way in
Afghanistan is directly linked to regional cooperation
between Afghanistan and its neighbours. This is one of
the pillars of the comprehensive approach, which
includes reconciliation. It is in this understanding that
we have organized meetings in various formats,
ranging from January to July, including two summits
and two ministerial meetings.
In conclusion, the Kabul Conference was a
beginning. Its implementation needs determined
leadership on the part of the Afghan authorities and
close coordination among the Afghan partners. In that
regard, Turkey has pursued the most comprehensive
assistance programme in its history, with various
civilian
and
military
capabilities
supporting
Afghanistan’s historic process of transformation.
Turkey’s commitment to Afghanistan is long-term, and
its assistance will continue as long as required by the
Afghans.
I resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): At the outset, I would like
to thank His Excellency the Foreign Minister of
Afghanistan, Mr. Rassoul, and Mr. De Mistura for
participating in this important debate and for their
extremely helpful statements this morning.
On 18 September, the Afghan people voted in the
first Afghan-led parliamentary elections since the
1960s. Following the challenges of the 2009 elections,
it was essential for the Independent Electoral
Commission to demonstrate an improved ability to
deliver elections. The Commission has met that
challenge in these parliamentary elections, which were
better organized than the previous ones.
Despite this, clearly, challenges were experienced
on polling day, which saw violence and has resulted in
many allegations of fraud. The violence perpetrated by
insurgents on polling day was an affront to the
democratic rights of the Afghan people. But the Afghan
authorities, supported by the United Nations,
demonstrated that it was still possible to give Afghans
the opportunity to vote. With the Afghan people, we in

10-55499

S/PV.6394

the international community now await the final,
certified results. The final judgement on the credibility
of these elections will be determined by the way in
which the IEC and the Electoral Complaints
Commission (ECC) handle the counting period. This
period may not be without controversy. The IEC and
the ECC will need to work in a transparent and
efficient manner so that Afghans can see how their
complaints and challenges are handled.
Improved election processes are but one aspect of
the overall effort in Afghanistan. Canada notes with
great appreciation the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation (S/2010/463). The report
stated that the Kabul Conference marked a milestone in
Afghanistan’s transition towards the full exercise of its
sovereign authority, and Canada fully agrees. The
sectoral plans prepared for the Conference by the
Government of Afghanistan demonstrated its increased
capacity to coordinate and lead on issues essential to
Afghanistan’s future security and stability.
However, the Conference is only the first step in
the larger Kabul process. While the SecretaryGeneral’s positive assessment of the process thus far is
encouraging, much work remains to be done. The
Government of Afghanistan needs to outline what it
believes the next steps of the Kabul process should be
and, in particular, to map out its hundred-day plan in
order for momentum to be maintained.
Essential to the Kabul process is a mechanism
that can ensure the transparent monitoring of the
commitments made. We suggest that progress on these
commitments should be communicated regularly to
Afghans so that they can increasingly hold their own
Government to account.
Central to the commitments made in Kabul this
July is the effective and sustainable phased transfer of
security responsibility to Afghan authorities by 2014.
The International Security Assistance Force will
facilitate the transition to Afghan security leadership.
But to be effective and sustainable, the transition must
be owned and accepted by the Afghan authorities and
people.
Engagement by the Government of Afghanistan
of its citizens will therefore be important throughout. It
is encouraging that the Afghan Government has shown
greater ownership in this area in recent months. The
short-term goals of enabling a security transition
should be transparently explained to the Afghan people

10-55499

and appropriate resources set aside by the Government
to that end.
Effective transition is dependent upon improved
governance, which also featured strongly in the Kabul
Conference commitments. In our view, security actors
must work closely with their civilian counterparts to
ensure that the provinces identified for transition have
met the necessary governance conditions. Concrete
steps are also required in electoral reform, combating
corruption and upholding human rights, if the
Government of Afghanistan is going to be truly
responsive to the needs of its people.
(spoke in French)
The conflict in Afghanistan cannot be resolved by
military means alone. Efforts to bring lasting peace to
Afghanistan must involve a dialogue with all parts of
Afghan society, including women and vulnerable
groups. Any viable reconciliation process in
Afghanistan must be Afghan-led, and it must reach out
to those who renounce terrorism and who declare their
respect for the Afghan Constitution.
The creation of the High Peace Council is an
important step in this regard. As the Council begins its
work, it will need to demonstrate that it can represent
the diverse interests of all people in Afghanistan,
regardless of the ethnicity, religion, tribe or gender.
The Kabul Conference recognized that regional
cooperation is vital to the long-term peace, stability
and recovery of Afghanistan. Sustained and
constructive support from Afghanistan’s neighbours is
needed to undermine the safe havens of those who
would attack Afghanistan. Such support will not only
bring stability to Afghanistan, but also to the region as
a whole. Increased stability and cooperation in South
Asia is a precondition for regional trade, something
that can increase the prosperity of the region as a
whole.
In conclusion, we are encouraged by the progress
that has been seen in the past months, as well as by the
important commitments agreed upon by the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community at the Kabul Conference. However, a great
many challenges remain. It is now time to demonstrate
to the people of Afghanistan in a practical manner our
continued support in order to help the Government of
Afghanistan keep the promises it made at the Kabul
Conference.

25

S/PV.6394

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mrs. Smith (Norway): Let me first express our
sincere support for Special Representative De Mistura,
his efforts to implement the newly refocused mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and his commitments to
Afghan ownership. In a time of transition towards such
ownership, the role of UNAMA is critical, particularly
because it is the international guarantor for the
integrity of the transition to greater Afghan leadership.
The Kabul Conference was an important step
towards greater Afghan ownership. It mobilized broad
international support and demonstrated clear
commitments by the Afghan Government towards its
own people. However, concrete implementation of the
commitments at the Conference is key, and donors
should start aligning their support with Afghan
priorities.
Norway is already contributing its part towards
alignment and coherence. Furthermore, a successful
Kabul process requires a more robust Afghan
leadership. The new national programmes presented at
the Conference need to be implemented soon and in a
sequenced way through clear targets and priority areas.
Afghan leadership and accountability are
paramount for the Kabul process to succeed. Such
leadership, in truth, must enable political processes that
are inclusive and truly national in their nature.
Otherwise, public support for Afghan ownership will
decrease.
The recent renewed attention on corruption and
administrative misruling also highlight the need for the
Afghanistan Government to show stronger political
will to combat corruption and to reform State
institutions, both of which are prerequisites for a
sustainable State-building agenda based on a contract
between the Afghan people and their Government.
Furthermore, the Kabul process can only be
successful if it really delivers at the provincial and
district levels, countrywide. Efforts towards transition,
as well as bringing the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy to bear throughout the country,
point to a more urgent need to enact a viable Afghan
subnational governance policy.
As we have emphasized several times before in
this Chamber, peace and reintegration in Afghanistan

26

should not only be Afghan-led but must also be based
on the principle of inclusiveness and conducted in
conformity with the Constitution and international
human rights. Norway supports an Afghan-led
reconciliation process, including talks with those from
the armed opposition who have renounced violence and
resumed a civilian life, as parts of a viable broader
Afghan political settlement. But this process has to be
inclusive, transparent and truly national. Reconciliation
requires broad representation of religious, ethnic and
civil society groups, including women.
In this regard, we are concerned about the narrow
composition of the High Peace Council which was
announced by President Karzai yesterday. Many
relevant groups from the Afghan community have been
left out, including civil society. We are in particular
concerned about the limited number of female
members of the Council. The participation of women is
key to any durable peace process. As next month marks
the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women, peace and security, we reiterate the importance
of its implementation in this regard.
Furthermore, it is important throughout
reintegration and reconciliation efforts not to preclude
transitional justice. Addressing issues of transitional
justice and human rights in a context of ongoing
conflict is challenging, but the Afghan people need to
be included in a meaningful way and have their rights
protected in the context of a peace process. Injustice is
no less a strategic concern than corruption or weak
governance.
Norway welcomes the establishment today of the
Human Rights Support Unit in the Ministry of Justice
and has high expectations of its role in advancing the
capacity of the Afghan Government to fulfil its
international human rights obligations in a coordinated
manner.
It is still early to judge the outcome of the recent
parliamentary elections, where preliminary results are
expected early next month. The real test will be if the
electoral institutions, the Independent Electoral
Commission
and
the
Electoral
Complaints
Commission, are able to address complaints and
irregularities systematically and impartially. It is not
too early, however, to determine the need for long-term
electoral reform and increased capacity-building of the
Afghan electoral institutions.

10-55499

S/PV.6394

Recommendations from Afghan and international
observer missions are key in this respect. Such a
process must include expanding and strengthening
civic education efforts on elections, with the particular
aim of including women and civil society groups in the
political process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Thank you for giving
Germany the opportunity to participate in this debate. I
would like to commend your Government,
Mr. President, for its continued constructive role in
promoting regional cooperation in Central and South
Asia, in particular through the Ankara Cooperation
process. We commend your hosting of the Istanbul
Summit on Friendship and Cooperation in the “Heart
of Asia” in January of this year. And we are looking
forward to the Fourth Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan, RECCA IV, in Istanbul in
early November.
Let me join previous speakers in welcoming the
Secretary-General’s latest report on Afghanistan
(S/2010/463) and in extending my thanks to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, for his very comprehensive briefing.
Furthermore, I would like to express our gratitude to
the Foreign Minister, Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, for his
valuable and important remarks.
Germany fully aligns itself with the statement of
the European Union, which will follow later.
Germany would like to briefly share its views, in
particular with regard to the following four topics:
legal processes, including reconciliation, promoting
regional cooperation, transition of full responsibilities,
and recent elections in Afghanistan.
First, the London and Kabul conferences and the
Kabul process have strongly reaffirmed the partnership
of the international community with the Afghan people
and the Afghan Government. We note with satisfaction
that the Afghan Government is engaged in
implementing the political commitments outlined by
President Karzai in his inauguration speech for his
second term as well as at the London Conference. We
strongly encourage the Afghan Government to continue
with this process and to strengthen the Afghan people’s
trust in their Government and in the democratic
process.

10-55499

We commend President Karzai for the inclusive
debate with Afghan leaders in the framework of the
Peace Jirga last June and welcome the nominations for
a High Peace Council. We encourage him and his
Government to take further steps in this direction. This
process can only be and must remain an Afghan-led
process. The international community can and will
only assume a supporting role. In this context, the
Afghanistan peace and reintegration programme is a
very important element and Germany supports this
progamme through the United Nations Development
Programme.
Second, regarding the promotion of regional
cooperation, we would like to applaud the concrete
steps taken by the United Nations Assistance Mission
to Afghanistan (UNAMA). Special credit should be
given to the Silk Road initiative and its regional
leverage. We would like this constructive regional
approach to be continued.
Furthermore, as Foreign Minister Rassoul pointed
out in his speech in the General Assembly on Monday,
the international community’s promise to the people of
Afghanistan of a life free from fear of the threat of
international terrorism remains unfulfilled.
The International Security Assistance Force and
the Afghan Government are about to enter the
transition phase, where the security responsibility will
gradually shift to the Afghan side. This will enable the
Afghan Government to fully exercise its sovereignty.
During this critical phase, we will remain a reliable
partner of Afghanistan and will continue to assist the
Afghan people in their struggle to live in peace and
prosperity and to enjoy their rights as enshrined in the
Afghan Constitution including human rights and
women’s rights. Our support to the Afghan
Government and people will also continue after
transition is completed.
Finally, this year’s Wolesi Jirga elections
constituted an important event for Afghanistan’s still
young democracy. We would like to applaud the
courage of the Afghan people for their participation in
these elections, despite the security threats. We
encourage the relevant Afghan institutions to address
all alleged irregularities and fraud in order to ensure a
credible and legitimate electoral process. The lessons
learned at these elections will also show the
importance of electoral reforms. In this regard, I would
like to underline that Germany is prepared to support

27

S/PV.6394

the efforts of the Afghan Government in preparing the
ground for future elections.
In conclusion, we would like to encourage the
Council to support Staffan de Mistura and his team by
providing the necessary political guidance. Our
expectations regarding UNAMA should remain
realistic and focused on key priorities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
appreciates the opportunity to contribute to this debate,
and thanks the Secretary-General for his latest report
(S/2010/463). We acknowledge and welcome the
presence of the Afghan Foreign Minister Rassoul and
Special Representative Staffan de Mistura and thank
him particularly for his extended briefing to the
Council.
I will focus on four issues from the SecretaryGeneral’s report: elections, the security situation,
governance, and the need for a political solution.
Final results are still some weeks away, but one
outcome of the elections held on 18 September is
already very clear: millions of determined Afghans
showed courage and determination and defied threats
of violence to elect their Parliament. We congratulate
those who voted. They are entitled to see that same
resolve mirrored in all levels of their society.
We cannot and we do not hold Afghanistan to the
measure of long-standing, mature democracies, but we
are disappointed that, in some areas, the elections
could not be conducted because of security concerns
and we are concerned at reports of widespread voter
fraud.
We encourage the Independent Electoral and
Election Complaints Commissions to maintain rigorous
oversight of the election process and, more
specifically, to deal with the reports of fraud, thereby
ensuring that the new Parliament better reflects the will
of the people and works on their behalf.
Along with other international partners, New
Zealand is committed to help Afghanistan take the lead
on security, governance, and economic and social
development. President Karzai’s commitments made at
the London Conference in January and the programme
of action endorsed in Kabul in July are benchmarks
against which Afghanistan’s progress will be measured.

28

We accept that the security backdrop makes
progress very difficult. The elections were held during
one of Afghanistan’s most violent periods since the
Taliban was driven from power. Violence has affected
Afghans, the United Nations Assistance Mission to
Afghanistan and the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF). Indeed, for ISAF, 2010 has been the
worst year of the war with, so far, more than 530
deaths, including New Zealand’s first combat fatality.
Although the security situation remains tenuous,
we do see welcome signs of improvement. We
commend efforts to build the capacity of the Afghan
National Security Forces, and are particularly pleased
to see numbers increasing ahead of target. We welcome
the increase of nearly 40,000 ISAF troops, and also
President Karzai’s commitment at the Kabul
Conference that Afghan National Security Forces will
have nationwide, lead responsibility for security by the
end of 2014. We will help to facilitate and support that
process in Bamyan Province.
Better security will increase opportunities for
improved governance, social programmes and
economic development. But the benefits of improved
governance must be evenly distributed, and they must
be sustainable. And they must withstand the scrutiny of
those who provide the support and the funding.
Corruption remains a central obstacle to
Afghanistan’s progress, and it must be relentlessly
addressed. Corruption is corrosive; it destroys
capacity; it undermines public and international
confidence. We look to the Afghan Government to
make better progress on addressing corruption and
governance issues. That will ensure that with the
support of the international community, Afghanistan
will increasingly be able to stand on its own.
The new parliament has an important role to play
in ensuring confidence in central government and
ensuring that the central Government is connected to
the provinces, so that together, central and provincial
governments can form a cohesive whole. We
specifically encourage the parliament to find ways to
break the nine-month deadlock that has prevented
President Karzai from completing his cabinet.
In Bamyan, New Zealand works on the basis that
capable, credible governance remains critical to
effective development. We have increased development
spending, appointed a development adviser and put the
Provincial Reconstruction Team under civilian

10-55499

S/PV.6394

leadership for the first time. We have appointed our
first Ambassador resident in Kabul. This is consistent
with international efforts to balance military and
civilian contributions and with Bamyan’s transition to
Afghan leadership across all areas of security,
governance and development.
By itself, fighting will not secure Afghanistan’s
future; only a political solution can bring lasting peace.
That solution must further isolate hard-core insurgency
leaders and encourage the majority back into
mainstream society. Compromises will be required on
all sides, but New Zealand would be alarmed if this
process saw the return of the very people who were
ousted nine years ago and would be dismayed if a
political settlement included official tolerance of
repression of women and minorities. We and others
have not put our people in harm’s way in support of
such outcomes.
We will continue to watch for the longer-term
outcomes of the Peace Jirga hosted by President Karzai
in June. The establishment by the President of the High
Peace Council this month is a promising start, but we
do need to see results.
Afghanistan’s neighbours also have an important
role to play in achieving a political solution. New
Zealand was encouraged when Pakistan backed the
reconciliation process in January, and we welcomed the
Pakistan-Afghan declaration on bilateral cooperation in
June. Pakistan obviously has an interest in a stable
State on its western border, so we look forward to its
closer, positive engagement with Afghanistan.
Cooperation on essential matters such as border
control, trade, policing drug trafficking and combating
the insurgency will be essential to help ensure a better
future for the region.
Next year will be the high-water mark of
international military involvement, with around
150,000 troops from nearly 50 contributing countries
in Afghanistan. New Zealand soldiers were among the
first to join the campaign against terrorism nearly ten
years ago, and today we continue to stand with the
people of Afghanistan as they grow as a nation. They
have our support in that growth and they have our
support in achieving that outcome.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.

10-55499

Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): I would like to begin,
Mr. President, by extending my sincere felicitations on
the successful Turkish presidency of the Security
Council and on your able guidance of the Council’s
work during this month. I will also compliment the
Afghan Minister for Foreign Affairs, who is here, and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Staffan de Mistura, because I think this time there is a
lot of change in the Secretary-General’s work. He is
emphasizing a change for the better. There seems to be
progress. I think that for the first time there is
something to be fairly positive about. On the basis of
thr quarterly report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/463), I would like to congratulate all of them
for the achievements and the movement forward in
Afghanistan.
Over the years, the Secretary-General’s reports
have become a credible pronouncement on progress
and setbacks in Afghanistan. I am happy to note that in
the latest report, progress outweighs setbacks. That
trend must be sustained.
The report of the Secretary General under
consideration today has rightly mentioned the Kabul
Conference as the major political development of the
last three months. The Conference was a landmark
event. Its outcome, the Kabul process, has generated
the optimism of a destination in sight.
The Kabul process clearly spells out the
respective roles of the Afghan Government and the
international community in terms of joint commitments
and detailed benchmarks. As the Afghan Government
assumes greater responsibilities in areas of security,
governance and economic and social development, it
will need the continuous support of the international
community, and this must be forthcoming. It is our
sincere hope that parties on both side of this equation
will fulfil their mandated tasks. We agree with the
Secretary-General that for the Kabul process to
succeed, our efforts must be focused on priority areas
with appropriate sequencing and coordination.
The Secretary-General has also cautioned that
optimism and progress achieved in Afghanistan
continue “to be overshadowed by the deterioration in
the security situation”. He has rightly observed that in
the context of security, the Government’s efforts to
implement peace and reintegration programmes are
particularly important.

29

S/PV.6394

In a society suffering from four decades of war,
the vexing question of security cannot be addressed by
another war. Military action alone is not and will not
be a solution to Afghanistan’s problems.
We share the view expressed by the SecretaryGeneral that a viable reconciliation process is vital for
durable and long-term peace in Afghanistan. Pakistan
supports an Afghan-led and inclusive reconciliation
process to bring the opposition groups into the political
mainstream. We therefore welcome the establishment
of the High Peace Council in Afghanistan. It is our
hope that the Security Council will continue to be a
willing partner of the Afghan Government in the
reconciliation process.
Pakistan has always emphasized the importance
of regional unity in dealing with challenges of security
and development in Afghanistan. The immediate
neighbours of Afghanistan have a special role to play
in its stability. Pakistan is engaged with other countries
in a number of important regional initiatives on
Afghanistan. Those initiatives aim at a greater regional
connectivity with a view to promoting economic and
commercial cooperation and rooting out the menaces of
narcotics, terrorism and extremism.
Pakistan is deeply committed to strengthening its
ties with Afghanistan in all areas. Our bilateral
relations are marked by close cooperation in all fields.
There is continuous dialogue and regular exchange of
visits at the highest levels. President Hamid Karzai
paid an important visit to Pakistan this month. The
joint statement issued on the occasion of his visit
charts the future trajectory of our bilateral relations.
Earlier, our two countries had successfully
concluded the Transit Trade Agreement, upgrading a
similar agreement signed in 1962. We have pledged to
continue with development projects in Afghanistan,
despite our known constraints as a result of the
unprecedented floods in Pakistan. We are also engaged
in security and intelligence cooperation with
Afghanistan, including through the Tripartite
Commission, which also includes the United States and
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF).
Pakistan has commended the Afghan nation and
Government and the Independent Election Commission
on the successful holding of Wolesi Jirga elections on
18 September. These elections demonstrated the
commitment to strengthening democratic traditions and
institutions in Afghanistan, despite numerous

30

challenges. And for those who know the region well, I
am sure Staffan would confirm how difficult it is to
bring democracy there.
We call for early and voluntary returns of the
nearly 3 million Afghan refugees who still live in
Pakistan. We note progress in this area, with the
voluntary return of 91,583 refugees from Pakistan in
past three months, as noted in the report. This is a
gratifying step forward. We would stress the need to
strengthen reintegration programmes for refugees
within Afghanistan’s development strategy.
Here I should like to say that there are corridors
that for centuries have led from Afghanistan eastwards
into the heart of India. I think the largest Afghan-led
kingdom was in Madyar Pradesh; it went by the name
of Bhopal. Interestingly, while in North Waziristan, we
are combating terrorism — and the Orakzai tribe
specifically — this largest kingdom in India, Bhopal,
was an Orakzai kingdom. This shows that it is not
sanctuaries that people need to worry about; it is
centuries of travel into these areas, which remain
where they are. People will come and go. Drawing
lines, as we have done — whether it be the Durand or
the Maginot in France, which certainly did not stop
Hitler — does not stop anyone. People carry around
centuries of history and will continue travelling on the
routes that they know and accept.
The United Nations, through its Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), under the able
leadership of Staffan de Mistura, is playing a
commendable role in the country. And the progress we
see today is, I think, something that we can credit to
him and the great work he has done in the short period
that he has been there. Pakistan greatly values
UNAMA’s activities in the areas of governance
assistance, aid delivery, judicial reforms, coordination
among donors, humanitarian assistance, the eradication
of poppy cultivation, counter-narcotics, and landmine
removal. I take this opportunity to reiterate our
readiness to provide all possible assistance to Special
Representative de Mistura and his team.
As the international community completes the
first decade of engagement with Afghanistan after the
Bonn process, it must remain steadfast in its
commitments and introspective in its conduct. Next
month, the Security Council will consider the mandate
of ISAF. Meanwhile, the Afghan Government will also
be following up on the Kabul Conference and the

10-55499

S/PV.6394

reconciliation process. These are important landmarks
in our journey to rebuild Afghanistan. Let the history
of Afghanistan be our guiding star on this challenging
journey.
I conclude with one aspect of that history. The
Durand Line was created under the Government of the
Amir Abdur Rahman. While today the area is
considered a sanctuary, at the time his people asked,
“Why have you given away half our country”? He
answered, “I put the people I did not want on the other
side of that line”.
The President: I
representative of India.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Sir, for having convened
today’s debate on the situation in Afghanistan. We are
grateful for the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/493) and are appreciative of the briefing by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Staffan de Mistura. We also thank Mr. Zalmai Rassoul,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, for his
statement.
The Kabul Conference marked a new phase in the
partnership between the Afghan Government and the
international community: the Kabul process and a
renewed commitment to a secure, prosperous and
democratic Afghanistan. The Conference demonstrated
the Afghan Government’s determination to take full
responsibility for Afghanistan’s own development,
security and governance, and the international
community’s willingness to realign international
assistance in accordance with Afghanistan’s priorities
and action plans. The success of the Kabul process will
largely depend on detailing and implementing the
commitments flowing from the Kabul Conference.
The holding of the National Assembly elections
on 18 September, in which over 2,500 candidates
contested, was an important step forward in
strengthening
the
democratic
framework
in
Afghanistan. We appreciate the leading role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in providing overall coordination of
international support to the electoral process.
India and Afghanistan enjoy a relationship based
on history, civilization, trade and cultural exchanges,
and shared values and interests stretching back
thousands of years. India is committed to the unity,

10-55499

integrity
and
independence
of
Afghanistan,
underpinned by democracy and cohesive pluralism and
free from external interference. India has contributed to
these goals through our development partnership,
which is implemented entirely in accordance with the
priorities of the Afghan Government and people. Our
assistance programmes are spread all over Afghanistan
and cover all aspects of development: humanitarian
assistance, infrastructure, institution- and capacitybuilding, small-scale quick-gestation projects, and
agriculture. The ultimate aim of our assistance, which
presently stands at over $1.3 billion, is to strengthen
the capacity of the Afghan State and people to stand on
their own feet in the areas of governance and services
for the Afghan people.
Afghanistan’s
stability
and
economic
development depend significantly on its neighbours
and the region as a whole. Afghanistan’s greatest
economic potential perhaps resides in its immense
potential as a trade, transport and energy hub, and as a
bridge linking Central, West and South Asia and the
Gulf. Its prosperity also depends on the consumer
market of nearly 1.5 billion people in the South Asian
subcontinent. The recent reports of Afghanistan’s great
mineral wealth also open up possibilities for mining
and investment.
But if Afghanistan is to realize its full potential in
these areas, its neighbours need to come together to
forge greater regional cooperation and facilitate trade
and transit. Growing economic interdependence will
also help to wean disaffected youth away from
insurgency and militancy and to create a zone of
co-prosperity in the region. We support the wishes of
the Government of Afghanistan to take the lead in this
direction.
Peace and reintegration efforts in Afghanistan can
succeed provided they are fully Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned and bring all sections of Afghanistan’s
population together, and provided they abide by the
redlines agreed to at the London Conference: giving up
violence, cutting off all links with terrorism, and
accepting the democratic and pluralistic values of the
Afghan Constitution, including women’s rights.
The international community must learn lessons
from
past
experiences
in
negotiating
with
fundamentalist and extremist organizations, and ensure
that any peace process is conducted in an inclusive and
transparent manner. Adequate capacity of the Afghan

31

S/PV.6394

security forces and other Afghan institutions is a sine
qua non for protecting Afghanistan’s sovereignty,
plurality and democracy. The gains of the past nine
years stand to be squandered if this aspect does not
receive the attention that it deserves as the
international community ponders its next steps
regarding Afghanistan.
The international community should also ensure
that there is no selectivity in dealing with terrorism. The
fight against terrorism cannot be compartmentalized.
One cannot distinguish between Al-Qaida and the
plethora of terrorist organizations that have imbibed the
goals and techniques of Al-Qaida. The security and
stabilization of Afghanistan will remain a distant goal
unless we are able to isolate and root out the syndicate of
terrorism, which includes elements of Al-Qaida, the
Taliban, the Lashkar e Toiba and other terrorist and
extremist groups operating from within and outside
Afghanistan’s borders. It is therefore essential to ensure
that support, sustenance and sanctuaries for terrorist
organizations from outside Afghanistan are ended
forthwith.
As we debate today, it is worrisome that there has
been a continued and continuing deterioration in the
security environment. The Secretary-General’s report
notes that there has been a 69 per cent increase in
security incidents compared to the same months in
2009.

Let me start by thanking the Foreign Minister of
Afghanistan for his important statement, and reiterate
the support of the European Union to the efforts of the
Afghan Government. I also wish to join others in
expressing our support for the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2010/463) on the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and thanking
Special Representative Staffan de Mistura for his
dedication and tireless efforts in Afghanistan. We value
very highly the cooperation between UNAMA and the
European Union.
The European Union commends Afghanistan on
the recent holding of its second parliamentary elections
since 2001. While it is too early to make a full
assessment of the polls, the European Union wishes to
highlight the thorough preparations, which were
largely ensured by Afghan institutions and have
incorporated some of the lessons from last year’s
elections. Above all, we pay tribute to the millions of
Afghans who courageously exercised their democratic
rights under such challenging circumstances. The
European Union deplores the loss of life and condemns
all those who have sought to undermine the electoral
process, including through acts of violence.

The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Pedro
Serrano, head of the delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations.

We now look to the Independent Electoral
Commission and the Electoral Complaints Commission
to address irregularities and complaints in a
transparent, impartial and principled manner. This will
be the real test in the weeks ahead. We also trust that
all will be done to ensure that all women who have run
for office and won can take up their mandates.
Moreover, it will be necessary to reach out to areas in
which the turn-out was very low due to lack of security
so as to avoid the further disenfranchisement of parts
of the population. Beyond these elections, it remains
highly important to strengthen Afghanistan’s electoral
framework. The European Union acknowledges the
Afghan Government’s pledges made at the Kabul
Conference in this regard, and is committed to
supporting such electoral reforms in the future.

Mr. Serrano: I thank you very much, Sir, for
giving the floor to the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Iceland; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia align themselves
with this declaration.

More generally, the European Union welcomes
the results of the Kabul Conference and regards its as a
success, in particular as it mobilized broad
international support for and Afghan buy-in to the
overall transition process. Our focus must now be on
making the concrete implementation plans a reality and
on assisting the fulfilment of the benchmarks which
were set. What is required more than ever is strong
political will on the part of the Afghan Government to

In conclusion, the international community as a
whole has made a great contribution to assisting
Afghanistan to stand on its own feet. The Kabul
Conference was a big step in the right direction. It is
important that the international community remain
steadfast in its commitment to supporting Afghanistan.
We welcome these efforts and are fully supportive of
them. We support the good work done by UNAMA.

32

10-55499

S/PV.6394

see necessary reforms through and the unwavering
strong support of the international community,
including for much needed capacity-building.
The European Union is acutely aware that
improving governance and development is a long-term
process and has therefore repeatedly committed itself
to a bold and long-term engagement in Afghanistan. As
Council members are aware, the European Union is
highly committed to helping not only to meet
humanitarian needs, but also with reconstruction and
stabilization in Afghanistan. During the period
2011-2013, we will increase assistance to some
€200 million per annum. The European Union as a
whole is investing nearly €1 billion every year,
focusing our assistance on the areas of the rule of law,
governance, rural development, agriculture and health.
Between 2002 and the end of 2009, the European
Commission’s support to Afghanistan alone amounted
to €1.8 billion, including €282 million in humanitarian
assistance. Given the worsening humanitarian situation
in areas of the country, the European Union will
continue to focus resources on addressing the basic
needs of the population, and calls on other partners to
take a similar approach. More broadly, the Plan for
Strengthening EU Action in Afghanistan and Pakistan,
adopted in October 2009, provides the framework for
EU engagement across a range of sectors in the
country.
Much of the transition will hinge on the
Government’s ability to ensure security and to obtain
the necessary support from the population. This will
require not only tangible results in terms of
socio-economic development, but also continued
institutional reform, including of the police and the
judicial system — two priority areas of EU assistance.
The EU Police Mission is in fact contributing to the
build-up of civilian policing, including the reform of
the Afghan Uniformed Police and the Afghan
Anti-Crime Police. Enhanced efforts are also necessary
to ensure transparency and tackle corruption and to
make progress in the field of reintegration and
reconciliation.
As we highlighted in this Chamber earlier this
year, this process needs to be Afghan-led, inclusive and
conducted in conformity with the Constitution and
Afghanistan’s international commitments, including on
human rights. As we shall soon all commemorate the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325

10-55499

(2000) on women, peace and security, the European
Union wishes in particular to highlight the importance
of respecting women’s rights and their role in this
process. Despite some progress made regarding the
situation of women and girls, much more has to be
done in this respect.
Equally, the European Union continues to be
concerned by the reported increase of civilian
casualties, in particular affecting Afghan children and
women, with the Taliban and other extremist groups
being responsible for the escalation of the human cost
of the conflict.
The European Union also actively supports
dialogue between Afghanistan and its neighbours, as
well as practical regional cooperation, and welcomes
an enhanced role of the United Nations in that regard.
In closing the European Union wishes to thank
Special Representative De Mistura and his staff for
implementing an ambitious and refocused UNAMA
mandate under difficult circumstances. We also
commend the Afghan Government’s commitment to
reform and its intensified efforts. We encourage
everyone to fully seize the opportunities of the current
mobilization of international attention and assistance in
support of progress towards security and prosperity for
Afghanistan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): While Italy aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union, I would also
like to add a few comments. The parliamentary
elections of 18 September represented another step in
the right direction towards a democratic, open and
sovereign Afghanistan whose future is shaped by the
will of the Afghan people themselves. My country
therefore commends the Afghan authorities for their
timely and proper organization of the balloting and the
millions of Afghans who courageously exercised their
democratic rights in such a challenging environment.
We also express our gratitude to the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and particularly to Special Representative De Mistura
for this morning’s very useful briefing, and especially
for his pivotal role in coordinating the numerous
initiatives aimed at providing international support to
these elections.

33

S/PV.6394

Although the process continues, we think that for
the elections to be credible, the Afghan electoral
institutions must be able to operate in a fully
independent, transparent and professional manner. It is
in the interest of Afghanistan to strengthen its electoral
institutions at all levels, and Italy is ready to work with
the Afghan Government and Parliament to ensure that
the lessons learned are fully taken into account in order
to reform and improve the electoral system as a whole.
Elections are part of a transition process that was
streamlined at the Kabul Conference as a monitored
and conditions-based strategy aimed towards Afghan
responsibility
in
security,
governance
and
development. The process must be founded on those
conditions, which must be met through a joint
sustainable effort. In this context, we deem it necessary
to establish a transition-enabled environment by
strengthening civilian cooperation and improving the
capacity of the Afghan National Security Forces.
Enhancing the training and mentoring of Afghan forces
is also part of the transition strategy.
This process also requires major endeavours in
the area of justice, rule of law and governance. Italy
remains convinced that development and governance
are interlinked and must evolve in parallel; otherwise,
real advancement will not be sustainable. Thus
supporting governance mechanisms will create the
conditions necessary to expand the sovereignty of
legitimate institutions and to respond to people’s needs.
Italy has expanded the portion of its civilian
effort dedicated to capacity-building. We take part in
the European Union multilateral efforts and count on
the excellence of the Italian national school of public
administration to train Afghan diplomats and civil
servants and to provide assistance to Afghan
anti-corruption police.
In addition, my country is committed to fostering
the rule of law, the justice sector, the promotion of
human rights and the role of women in Afghanistan. To
live up to our commitment, we will continue our
long-standing effort, which so far has provided training
for 3,700 judges, prosecutors and officials and also
established in Kabul a gender unit comprised of nine
female prosecutors aimed at protecting women from
abuse.
While we will spare no effort to support the way
forward agreed upon at Kabul, we call upon the Afghan
authorities to take further steps in order to make

34

progress and ensure the practical realization of the
commitments made at the Conference. We also
encourage further efforts by the international
community to channel its funds through the Afghan
budget and support the Afghan national development
strategy; and by the Afghan authorities to establish a
set of checks and balances aimed at ensuring the
independence of key anti-corruption agencies.
My country confirms its commitment to ensuring
the highest level of Afghan ownership and it is already
channelling most of its funds through the Afghan
budget and supporting national programmes within the
framework of the aforementioned strategy.
Italy considers it essential to recognize that in the
framework of the Kabul process, reintegration and
possibly reconciliation are necessary. We believe that
those who renounce violence and terrorism and pledge
to respect the Constitution should be given the chance
to participate in the reconstruction of their own
country.
However, to be acceptable to the Afghans and to
our public opinion at home, those endeavours must
remain within the red lines set at the London
Conference. We should all play a consistent diplomatic
role to bring regional actors to the side of Afghanistan.
More than ever, we remain persuaded that regional
cooperation is essential to stabilize the country. It will
encourage better coordination of the existing
international and regional initiatives under the aegis of
the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Thank you, Sir,
for convening this open discussion by the Security
Council on Afghanistan. We welcome the regular
briefings provided by Special Representative Staffan
de Mistura and we are very pleased to welcome the
Foreign Minister, Mr. Rassoul, back to New York.
These discussions highlight the real stake that
we — the international community — has in
Afghanistan’s stability and our commitment through
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) to help Afghanistan address its many
challenges.
Over the past year, Australia has built up its
civilian engagement in that country. Since the London

10-55499

S/PV.6394

Conference in January, we have delivered a 50 per cent
increase in our civilian commitment. We now have
over 50 civilian personnel, including in Uruzgan
Province,
where
we
head
the
Provisional
Reconstruction Team.
We have also increased our development
assistance to Afghanistan by 50 per cent this year, to
around $106 million and I think that brings us to about
$700 million delivered in development assistance since
2001. In doing this, we are aligning ourselves with the
priorities outlined by the Afghan Government itself
under its national development strategy and we are
channelling at least half of our development assistance
through Afghan Government systems, consistent with
the undertakings we made at the Kabul Conference in
July.
These civilian enhancements are very important,
but they build also on Australia’s military contribution
to Afghanistan which, as the Council knows, now
consists of something over 1,500 Australian Defence
Force personnel.
Australia
strongly
supports
the Afghan
Government’s goals and planning for the assumption of
full authority for security and also Afghanistan’s plans
on the transition process. I will not go through all of
my talking points because I think we are all in
agreement on those points. We note, however, that
transition is not just about security. It is also about
improving governance capacity and the development of
conditions necessary for stability. We recognize that
military efforts alone will not end the conflict and that
a long-term solution requires political effort and
ultimately reconciliation between the Afghan
Government and the insurgents. We therefore welcome
the Afghan-led process on reconciliation and
reintegration, aimed at winning over marginal
supporters of the insurgency through targeted
programmes.
In that respect, Australia also welcomes the
Afghan
Government’s
announcement
of
the
appointment of almost 70 people, including women, to
the new High Peace Council and its Special Peace and
Reintegration Sub-Committee.
While Australia, like others, is naturally
concerned that the recent parliamentary elections were
affected by violence and fraud, the fact that so many
ordinary Afghans had the courage to cast a vote in the
face of threats and intimidation — and I note the dark

10-55499

ink on the fingers of both the Foreign Minister and
Mr. De Mistura — clearly shows how much they value
a better future for their country. This was an Afghanled and Afghan-managed process; Afghan security
forces provided the security for polling places and did
an effective job; and, as pointed out by Mr. De Mistura
elsewhere, they had the courage to acknowledge where
their limitations were and to accept that not all polling
places would be open. So we have a balance of
optimism and honesty in this process.
In due course it will also be important, however,
that the allegations of misconduct are investigated by
Afghan authorities in accordance with Afghan law. And
the Afghan Government knows that, in the medium to
long term, it needs to make progress in meeting its
commitments to electoral reform to provide for fair and
transparent elections in the future.
All of Afghanistan’s neighbours share critical
interests in Afghanistan’s security and long-term
stability and can play a constructive role in promoting
Afghanistan’s social and economic development. I
therefore listened with great interest to some of the
speakers on that subject late this morning. In this
regard, UNAMA’s efforts to encourage regional
countries to cooperate in halting the narcotics trade and
the illegal movement of people as well as to support
Afghanistan in its efforts to achieve security and
stability are very much welcome.
There have been setbacks and there will be more,
but we are also seeing real progress. In 2002, 9 per
cent of Afghans had access to health care; today that
figure is 65 per cent. Afghan women hold almost a
quarter of all seats in Afghanistan’s National Assembly,
a stark contrast to conditions under the oppressive
Taliban rule. The number of teachers has almost
doubled since 2002, and access to education has grown
dramatically.
We need to build on this progress. It is important
that the Afghan Government and its international
partners, including Australia, remain committed to and
focused on the tasks at hand: combating the
insurgency, fighting corruption, and improving
governance and the delivery of essential services to the
Afghan people.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. De
Mistura, if he wishes to respond to some of the
comments.

35

S/PV.6394

Mr. de Mistura: If I may, I will take the liberty
to also respond on behalf of my friend, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, in saying that
everything we heard has helped us a lot. The Security
Council’s support of and guidance to the Afghan
Government and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan are crucial. We need it and we
need to hear it, because the next months are going to be
even more challenging in view of the two areas on
which we will be focusing in particular.
I wish to thank the Council members on behalf, if
I may, of His Excellency the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and myself.

36

The
President:
I
thank
the
Special
Representative for his comments. I wish to repeat that
we are also thankful to His Excellency Mr. Zalmai
Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan, for his participation in
today’s meeting, as well as for his insightful statement.
We wish him all success.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

10-55499
