UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1876’”

MEETING:

NEW YORK

19 JANUARY 1976
ulb\s l*lg&4 iqy
JUN 12 jtcjil

CONTENTS
PLl&J

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1876) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda ..I.........I.....,..,,,,....*...,,,.,....,.....

1

The Middle East problem including the Palestinian question.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1876

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol’S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the OfJicicrl Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
cd
Dwisions
qf the Security Corrncil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1876th MEETING

Pwsideni:

(United

Held in New York on Monday,

19 January

Mr. Salim A. SALIM
Republic of Tanzania).

2. The PRESIDENT:
I have received letters also
from the representatives of the German Democratic
Republic, India, Morocco, the Sudan and the Yemen
Arab Republic, in which they ask to be invited, in
accordance with rule 37 of the provisional
rules of
procedure, to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council’s agenda. I propose, if there is no
objection, to invite those representatives td participate
in the discussion, in conformity with the usual practice
and with the relevant provisions of the Charter and the
provisional rules of procedure. There being no objection, I shall invite those representatives
to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber, on the usual understanding
that they will
be invited to take a place at the Council table when
they wish to address the Council.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania. Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania and United States of America.

Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

The Middle
question

agenda (S/Agenda/I876)

of the agenda
East problem

Adoption

including

the Pafestinian

At the invitution
of the President,
Mr. Florin
(Germun Dernocrutic
Republic),
Mr. Jaipul (India),
Mr. Zuirni (Morocco),
Mr. Mduni
(&dun)
und
Mr. Strllum (Yemen Arab Republic) took the places
wscrvd
for them ut the side of the Council chumher.

of the agenda

The Middle East problem including
Palestinian question

1976, at 3 p.m.

3. Mr. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
The United States has followed with great interest the
course of the debate so far and has noted attentively
the statements and positions laid before us by both
concerned and interested parties. It is certain that the
issue before us-the
issue of peace in the Middle
East-remains
one of the most complex and difficult
issues that can be imagined. Some of the statements
presented to the Council have taken us back to the
or.igins of the problem-and
we have considered it in
many dimensions.

the

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance
with the
previous decisions taken by the Council [1870th-1875th
meetings],
I invite the representatives
of Egypt,
Guinea, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Mauritania,
Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, the United
Arab Emirates and Yugoslavia, in conformity
with
the usual practice and with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and the provisional rules of procedure, to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
In accordance with the dedision taken by the Council
{/870th meeting],
I invite the representative
of the
Palestine Liberation
Organization
to participate
in
the discussion.

4. If there are two things we can learn from the
events which have been reviewed during the past week
in the Council, one is surely that war, violence,
terrorism and resort to force have seriously aggravated
ihis problem over the last several decades and we
are noti dealing with the consequences
of this
violence. Another lesson is that the relatively rare but
very significant steps which have been made towards
interim arrangements to avoid war and towards longrange peaceful solutions have been possible only when
parties to this problem could operate within an agreed
framework. The basic truths before us are that, to
avoid conflict, there must be contact and negotiations,
and that to maintain a negotiating process there must
be a framework within which the parties have agreed
to negotiate.

A t thlj in rdtu tion cJ‘thc Prcsidmt , Mr. A h&l Meg&
(Egypt), Mr. Shuruf (Jordun);
Mr. Alluf (Syricrn .Aruh
Republic) und Mr. Khnddoumi
(Puit>stinc Liberution
Orgunizution)
took plaws
ut the Security
Council
tuhlr; Mrs. Jcunm Martin CissP (Guitleu), .Mr. AlShaikhly (Iruy), Mr. Bishuru (Kunwit),
Mr. El Huswn
(Muurituniu),
Mr. Jutnul (Qutur), Mr. Brrroody (Snudi
Arvrbiu), Mr. Ghobash (United Arvrb Emircrtcs)
und
Mr. Pctrit ( Yugoslmiu)
took the pltrws
wscrwd
for
them trt the side of the Council chumher.

1

5. One -of the greatest contributions
the Security
Council has made in its notable history was to establish that framework. In 1967, after months of negotiation and effort, Security Council resolution 242 (1967)
was adopted. In 1973, it was reaffirmed and augmented
by’ resolution 338 (1973). These two resolutions, and
the will to apply them, have been the foundation
for the progress that has been made, and they continue
to provide hope for the future.
6. Our discussions over these last days have offered
many possibilities of changes to or augmentation
of
these resolutions and variations for the basic framework. We have listened as these ideas were put
forward; we understand the sentiments and the concerns behind many of them. But in spite of these
interests and concerns, we cannot escape the reality
of the situation whereby, when all parties have agreed
to a framework, all of them must agree to changes in
that framework. Changes imposed on the parties and
unacceptable to any one of them, however great the
good will, will not work. That framework reflects
the enormous complexities and interrelationships
of the
issues involved in a settlement, and to modify one part
of it risks destroying it entirely. We believe it would
be a setback for the chances of achieving true peace
in the Middle East for the Council to conclude its
current debate by adopting resolutions which would
have the effect of leaving no commonly
accepted
basis for further negotiation.
7. Where would we. go from there? With the
increasing complexity of each step and each year, the
process of building a new foundation for peace, of
establishing a new process becomes a more difficult
task. It is for this reason that the United States feels
that endangering this agreed framework in order to
achieve results here in the Council which would in
themselves not guarantee a solution, or even progress
towards a solution, is not worth the risk.
8. We believe that there is enough leeway in the
present arrangements to achieve progress if there is
the will to use them, that all the problems before us
can be dealt with most effectively. by the negotiating
process and that such changes as may be required in
our approach must be worked out in the Geneva
process. It is at Geneva or at a preparatory conference
that matters of procedure, such as the question of
additional
participants,
and of substance can and
should be addressed. Having succeeded in establishing
an agreed framework of procedure and principles for
a settlement and in creating conditions for the establishment of the Geneva Conference as a forum in which
the implementation
of those principles can be negotiated, the Council should not now seek to prejudge
the work of that Conference.
9. As we have stated before, the United States is
prepared to co-operate with all the States involved on
all the issues. We are aware that there can be no
durable solution unless we make every effort to

promote a solution of the key issues of a just, and
lasting peace in the area on the basis of Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), taking
into account the legitimate interests of all the peoples
of the area, including the Palestinian
people, and
respect for the rights to independent existence of all
States in the area. We are committed to a peace settlement which resolves all the issues in the conflict
-withdrawal
from occupied territories, the right of all
States in the area to live within secure and recognized
borders, the reciprocal obligations of the parties to live
in peace with each other, and all the other questions
which must be dealt with in the’negotiating
process.
We are also aware that all these elements are inextricably tied together by resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) in what the former representative of the United
Kingdom,
Lord Caradon, described as “a balanced
whole”.
10. My Government
is dedicated to making every
effort to achieve progress towards peace in the Middle
East in this year. We have learned and profited from
the deliberations
of the Council and the ideas that
have been put forth here. We believe our strongest
duty, however, is to preserve the process ‘for peace
that we have all worked so hard to construct -and to
use it so that the problems before us can be met and
overcome. We are confident that progress can be
made, and we are committed to achieving it. The peace
and safety of the world demand nothing less. Our
actions both in the Council and afterwards will be
guided by our best judgement of what is necessary
for us to advance towards, and to avoid impeding,
the achievement of thisobjective.
11. Mr. VINCI (Italy): The debate we are having on
the complex problem submitted for the consideration
of the Council is a very special one and somehow
different from others. In saying so I certainly do not
intend to underestimate
or minimize. the importance
of other disputes or conflicts with which the Council
has had to deal. Most of the previous speakers have
noted how long the Council has been seized of the
Middle East problem. It is a fact. What 1 mean, in
referring to its special nature-and
I believe everyone
here and outside this chamber would agree with meis that our debate touches a special chord in each
of us. The question of the Middle. East, the crisis of
the Middle East, is not, indeed, just a regional dispute.
Its dimensions,
in all fields-political,
economic,
historical,
cultural, moral-go
far beyond the geographical area of the conflict. That is why the longstanding dispute between the’ Israelis and the Arabs
was from the beginning, and became more and more,
a matter of universal concern and of far-reaching
consequences: in world politics as well as in the
economy of our planet.. There is hardly any country
throughout the world which has not been involved
or affected by it in some way or the other.
12. When I speak of the effects, I have in mind not
only the disruptive influence the conflict has exercised

Jerusalem and the sea-Christians
of various denominations, Moslems of different sectarian persuasions.
There was a traditional
mutual respect between all
these various communities
which lived and worked
together in the same place under foreign administration
in such a way that no single nationality could consider
,&elf as being obstructed in the pursuance of its
‘regional, cultural and communal life.

on world politics, on our national economies; I have
in mind also the effects we have felt individually,
from whatever part of the world we come. I cannot
think, in fact, of anyone I know in this house or
elsewhere who has remained personally unaffected
and has not felt somehow involved in the conflict. It
is not simply because the Arabs and the Israelis have
fought now for over 30 years, both with guns and
with all the ammunition
provided by diplomacy and
human ingenuity.
It is because none of us could
remain indifferent and not feel emotionally
involved,
however different the degrees of intensity, in this
tragedy of our times, which is identified by the rivalry
between Jews and Arabs for a land considered holy
by the three great monotheistic religions.

17. However, the existing equilibrium,
both inside
Palestine and in the Arab world, was broken in the
aftermath of the Second World War. The access to
independence and sovereignty of a number of countries in the area was followed by the creation of the
State of Israel, which met strong opposition
and
counteraction
from the neighbouring States, old and
new. What accompanied or came after this event was,
on one side, a voluntary migration of Jews from nearly.
all parts of the world towards Israel and, on the other
side, non-voluntary
movements of populations; a flow
of Arabs from the newly formed State of Israel towards
neighbouring countries and another one later towards
Israel of Jewish refugees from the Arab countries in
the Middle East and North Africa.

13. Without going over the whole historical background, I will restrict my remarks to our life period.
Now, who belonging to my generation and to my part
of the world will ever indeed forget the plight of the .
Jews during the Second World War? Who will ever
forget the dead, the mass destruction of a people,
accomplished at a rate never witnessed before? Then,
the search for the answer to a traumatic question:
how had that been possible? A traumatic question,
however, which cannot .be addressed to the Arabs
and least of all to the Palestinian people. They had
no responsibility in those tragic events and they cannot
be made accountable for what happened in the late
1930s and in the following years. During the war and
afterwards many or most of the survivors of that
genocide, in a surge of despair and of human dignity,
went to Palestine and joined their forces with those
of their co-religionists
in a common undertaking,
the
building of a nation of their own in the land of their
forefathers.

18. It all amounted unfortunately to another tragedy
of our times-a very sad epilogue to the Second World
War and the seed of four subsequent bloody and costly
regional wars. And the Arab people of Palestine were
deprived of the State to which they were entitled. I
should leave to future historians the task of placing
where they belong the responsibilities
of this mishap.
I do not think we need their help to identify the
objective causes of the more recent strong resurgence
of the Palestinian question.

15. So I should like to sketch another picture which
runs.paral!el
to the one I have just described. While
the harassment of the Jewish minorities has been for
centuries a current, I may say, a recurrent, affair in
Europe, thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of
thousands of Jews have lived, mostly unharmed, all
over North Africa and the Middle East. There Arab
populations and ,Moslem rules allowed them most of
the time to prosper, as well as to maintain and
develop’their
own culture and rites.

19. In fact, recent and less recent events are generally
well known and there is no need -for- me to go -over
them. The resulting present situation, which is the one
we have to deal with, is far from being reassuring. It
is true that there have been some improvements
since
the convening of the Geneva Conference, mainly as
a result of the three Disengagement
Agreements
engineered by the Secretary of State of the United
States between Egypt and Israel .and between Syria
and Israel. But ominous signs are still present. What
is happening in Lebanon reminds’us every day that
even the most unpredictable
and tragic events can
occur as long as the confrontation
does not come to
an end. That is why we ask if this is not a time when,
as recently stated by the Foreign Minister of Italy,
Mariano Rumor, “We should help the parties directly
involved to overcome courageously and*far-sightedly
the contradictions which for too long have crystallized
a situation which is primarily contrary to their own
basic interest.”

16.1 In Palestine itself, as we all know; the wheel of
history had turned in such a way, over the centuries,
that only a small fraction of the Jewish population had
remained. In fact the Arabs became the majority and
other peoples settled as well in the old land between

20. This is one more reason to regret sincerely, now
we have heard with great interest mixed with emotion
the views forcefully expressed by -many spokesmen
of Arab Governments and people, that the voice of
Israel has not sounded at the same time in this chamber.

14. On that day, on 14 May 1948, the creation of
the State of Israel was hailed in many partsof the
world as an act of justice implying,
as it did, the
recognition
of the right to self-determination
and
statehood of the Jewish people. Unfortunately,
human
justice is not perfect. For one reason or other, owing
to our human frailty, someone is left out to pay for
it. This is. a case in point.

3

It is our earnest hope that the Israelis, following
our deliberations, willchange their mind, realizing that
they can better serve their vital interests here.

framework for a just and lasting peace and set up the
machinery for negotiations.
At the same time the
Council should give new momentum to the negotiation
process aiming at a revival of the Geneva Conference.
In other words, Italy stands by resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), which provide the basic principles and
framework for an over-all settlement of the problem.
And we feel that no constructive move could be made
by the Council unless the validity of those two resolutions were reaffirmed in our conclusions, whatever
form those conclusions might take.

21. In the meantime, because of the circumstances
in which it is taking place, because of its participants,
this debate can serve some useful purpose. This is
certainly what we and, I am sure, all the other members of the Council had in mind when we decided to
undertake in harmony a comprehensive review of the
Middle
East situation,
including
the Palestinia
question.

27. To sum up the position of my delegation: we are
ready to consider any concrete proposal or suggestion
which can advance the solution of the Palestinian
problem and at the same time bring us nearer to the
just and lasting peace in the Middle East we all
advocate. To achieve this objective, an over-all settlement to be negotiated between all the parties concerned
must be based on Israeli withdrawal from the territories
occupied in the 1967 war, on the right of all the States
in the area, including Israel, to live within recognized,
secure and guaranteed frontiers and on the recognition
of the political rights of the Palestinian people to a
national identity and to a homeland.

22. What we heard so far has not weakened our
confidence. On the contrary. As a matter of fact the
current debate has enabled the representatives
not
only of many Arab countries and of the Palestine
Liberation Organization
(PLO), but also of Member
States from other parts of the world, to air the views
they hold on the item under consideration.
23. It will not take me long to give the contribution
of my own delegation to the current debate, since my
Minister for Foreign Affairs has on several occasions
made clear the views which Italy holds on the Middle
Eastern situation as well as on the Palestinian problem.
I myself have done so in the General Assembly and in
the Council.

28.

Mr. BOYD (Panama) (interpwtution
jiiom Spnnmy first statement or 12 January [1870th
I presented to you, Mr. President, the members of the Council, the Secretary-General
and the
Secretariat staff our best wishes, and on this occasion
I should like to express thanks for the kind words of
welcome which have been addressed to us in this
chamber now that we, after a short time, have come
once again to the Security Council.

id):
In
nlceting],

24. I shall start by saying that since 3 October 1970
the Italian Government has maintained that the Palestinian question cannot any longer be considered a simple
problem of refugees. It is a political problem which
requires a political solution. Its importance has not
ceased to increase, as the convening of this series of
meetings of the Council and the current debate indicate
clearly enough. As far as Italy is concerned, my
Government had long before our present deliberations
recognized the national rights of the Palestinian people,
including their right to a homeland.

29. We are confident that the debate will proceed
constructively,
thanks to the co-operation which we
will surely~receive from each and every member of the
Council. It will be an honour for us to work closely
with each and every one of you, and in particular
with the delegation of Guyana, which, in addition to
representing Latin America, as we do, is a member of
the group of non-aligned
countries in the United
Nations. We should like to associate ourselves with the
representative of Guyana’s words of condolence to
the representative of China on the death of Chou Enlai, who was a distinguished
statesman and worked.
tirelessly for 50 years to make his country great and to
bring about a better understanding
of international
problems.

25. Consequently,
we also came to the conclusion
that no just and lasting peace could be established in
the Middle East without a solution of the Palestinian
problem. The questions which, in our view, the Council has to face now are mainly two. First, how can
we ensure those rights for the Palestinian
people
without upsetting the delicate balance of the rights
and legitimate
interests and expectations of all the
parties concerned--“a
balanced whole”, as defined
by the father of resolution 242 (1967), Lord Caradon,
as the representative of the United States reminded
us-in
order to reach a just and lasting peace?
Secondly, how can we bring the Palestinian people
into the peace-making process?

30. As long ago as November 1975, the majority of
the membership of the United Nations decided that
the Council would meet on 12 January 1976 to discuss
the Middle East problem including the Palestinian
question. As is well known, the decision to meet here
was taken when we renewed the mandate of the United
Nations Emergency Force (UNEF) and the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF).

26. My delegation has not at this stage any full
ready answers to these two difficult questions. We
feel, however, that the Council, in seeking constructive replies to these two questions, should be careful
not to alter or undermine previous decisions which
have laid down the main guidelines, established the

31. Panama played quite an important
drafting and subsequent .impiementation
4

role in the
of resolu-

tion 340 (1973), whereby it was decided to establish
UNEF on 25 October 1973, and we have followed
with great interest everything relating to the peacekeeping efforts made in the Middle East. after the
war of October 1973. We have always been in favour
of peace in the Middle East and that was demonstrated
by our contribution
lasting for more than a year, until
towards the end of 1974, when battalions 1 and 2 of
the Panama National Guard served with distinction
in the Sinai area as an integral part of UNEF, carrying
out the mandate which had been decided’ on in the
Security Council.
32. In studying resolution 381 (1975), whereby it was
decided that the Council would continue the debate on
the Middle East including the Palestinian question,
taking into account all relevant United Nations resolutions, we have felt that we have an obligation to go
into the history and the background of our participation
in that important and sorely tried part of the world.
Also, we feel that we have a duty to make further
efforts and contributions
to a just and lasting peace
in the area.
33. We believe that the United Nations Force in the
Middle East is very necessary for the maintenance of
tranquillity
there and if we are to create the kind of
atmosphere needed for peace arrangements. It is only
fair to recognize that during the period since November
1973 some very praiseworthy efforts have been made
by Egypt and Israel to improve the existing situation.
It is only fair to recognize also that, in agreeing to
the renewal of the mandate of UNDOF in the Golan
Heights, the Syrian Arab Republic has ,given us an
opportunity
to take steps to .improve the difficult
circumstances prevailing in that part of the world, in
an effort to prevent the resumption of hostilities.
34. We sincerely believe that the worst thing would
be to try to maintain the st~fr4.r yrdo. We consider.that
most aspects of the Middle East question and their
possible solution have been dealt with acceptably for
all the parties in resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973),
provided we now add certain basic elements relating
to recognition of the legitimate political rights of the
Palestinian people.
35. We regret the absence of Israel from this debate,
which we all hope will reach constructive conclusions.
We feel it is fully justified for the PLO to be with us
here because this question is closely connected with
the rights which it is defending. Panama, like the
overwhelming
majority of the United Nations, was
in favour of the participatioqof
the PLO in our debates,
after the’ summit conference at Rabat in November
1974 recognized the PLO as the sole representative
of the Palestinian people, which should be consulted
on all matters relating to the Palestinian people.
36. Our primary concern for the immediate future is
to contribute to having the Council’s decisions serve
to bring about the resumption of negotiations in the

Geneva Conference, as of is known, with the participation of all the parties concerned. We are pleased
that the major Powers are interested in accelerating
the negotiating process in the interests of a peaceful
settlement of the Middle East problems. We are all
aware that it would be very difficult to maintain the
spirit of detente and that peace in the world would be
fragile if the two super-Powers cannot reconcile the
conflicting interests of their respective allies.
37. ‘The course of events in the Middle East over
the past few years has convinced us that it is necessary
to give credit where credit is due and to do what is
necessary if we wish to prevent a new crisis. To try
to maintain the stcrrus yuo in respect of the most
fundamental
problems of the Middle East is to play
into the hands of those who wish to maintain situations
of force there-which,
inevitably,
would lead us to
violence.
38. From everything that we have heard, the wisest
thing, we believe, would be to support the formulation
encouraging
the convening of the Geneva Peace
Conference, on the understanding that the role to be
played there by the Secretary-General
on a day-today basis will be more important and that the Security
Council will be kept abreast of progress made there.
39. At the present time Panama is seeking support
in the international
community
for the elimination
of
a colonial enclave which has divided our territory
into two parts, known throughout the world as the
Panama Canal Zone. Panama knows the meaning of
frustration and pain endured by those who are impatiently waiting for the recovery of effective sovereignty over their land, and for that reason we cannot
fail to support those who demand that the inalienable
rights of our peoples be recognized.
40. Respect for the inalienable rights of all the peoples
of the world to self-determination,
to the exercise of
sovereignty over their territories, and to the enjoyment
of territorial
integrity is the principle which is the
cornerstone of. peace and security throughout
the
world. The violation of that principle has always
endangered secinity in the area concerned and on many
occasions, as in the case of the Middle East, has been
the cause of a breach of the peace in the area.
41. Panama is well aware of that fact from its own
historical experience, for we have endured 72 years of
foreign interference’
in our territory,
which has
prevented us from fully exercising our sovereign rights
over part of our national territory. incidents related to
that matter brought about in 1964 a breach of peace
and security in the area, all of which appears in the
records of the Security Council. From that time on
we have been negotiating with the United States to
seek a settlement safeguarding our sovereign rights,
aware that failure at the negotiating table can mean
violence once again. The situation prevailing in the
Panama Canal Zone is contrary to the Charter of the

:

United Nations because it obstructs our right to
national unity and is not in keeping with respect for
territorial integrity, which the States represented here
have pledged.

torial inviolability
and,political
independence of the
.States of the region, through measures including the
establishment of demilitarized
zones;
“4. R&tjj%ms,
as in earlier recommendations,
the desirability
of establishing
an international
regime for the city of Jerusalem, to be considered
by the General Assembly at its twenty-second
session.“’

42. We very much&admire the knowledgeable wav in
which the members of the Council andother delega-1.
tions that have participated in the deliberations on the
Middle East have spoken out, and we are pleased at
the sincere wishes that have been voiced here for the
attainment
of a formula that would advance the
movement
towards a peaceful settlement
of this
complex problem.

44. That draft resolution, which was not supported
by the Arab delegations, received the favourable vote
of Israel. We have always supported the basic principles set forth in the Latin American draft resolution. For that reason, we believe that resolution 242
(1967), which was adopted a few months later, deserves
our entire support, inasmuch as it contains the same
principles of negotiation and agreement whereby the
parties should be able to reach a satisfactory settlement
of the Palestine question, provided that it now be
recognised, in good faith, that it is no longer just.,a
refugee problem, and that consequently this subject
can no longer be discussed solely as a humanitarian
problem, but must be approached on the basis of a
political settlement in accordance with the principles
of self-determination
contained in the Charter and in
United Nations resolutions.

43. In our conviction that this is of historic interest,
I wish to recall that during the fifth emergency special
session of the General Assembly, the Group of the
Latin American States in the United Nations, on
30 June 1967, submitted
a draft resolution,
which
was rejected but which, because it contained the basic
elements for effective peace, I should like to read out.
The operative part of that Latin American
draft
resolution reads as follows:’

“ 1. Urgently

requests:

45. In the international
field Panama has always
condemned the use of force and has reaffrrmed the
principle of the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of
territory through the use of force or by military
conquest.

“((I) Israel to withdraw all its forces from all
the territories
of Jordan, Syria and the United
Arab Republic occupied as a result of the recent
conflict;

46. The withdrawal of Israeli forces from all territories occupied in the 1967 war and respect for the
territorial
integrity and security of all countries in
the area, including Israel, must be linked with respect
for the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people if
a-formula for a just and durable peace in the Middle
East is to be found.

“(h) The parties in conflict to end the state of
belligerency,
to endeavour to establish conditions
of coexistence based on good neighbourliness
and
to have recourse in all cases to the procedures’
for peaceful settlement indicated in the Charter of
the United Nations;

47. If we consider the probiem as a whole,‘we can
establish the principles which should underlie a settle:
ment, or at least’ point the way to that. settlement,
bearing in mind the just aspirations of the-parties to
the conflict. The, delegation of Panama believes that
it would be a great event indeed for peace in the area
if we could establish a Palestinian State that would
include Gaza and the West Bank of the Jordan, and if
the Arabs could accept, for their part, israel’s right to
live within secure and recognized boundaries.

“2: Recrffirtns ’ its conviction
that no stable
international order can be based on the threat or use
of force, and declares that the validity of the
occupation or acquisition of territories brought about
by such means should not be recognized;
“3. Requests the Security Council to continue
examining the situation in the Middle East with a
sense of urgency, working directly with the parties
and relying on the presence of the United Nations
to:
“((I) Carry out the provisions
graph 1 (cr) above;

of operative

48. It is with deep sorrow that we note the tragic.
internal civil war in Lebanon which has brought death
to thousands of human beings and caused incalculable
material loss. We would express the hope that the
groups involved in the present conflict, the leaders of
all sectors and, in general, the Lebanese people. will
help put an end to that fratricidal struggle and will
do their utmost to restore peace and order. We share
the concern of the Secretary-General
that the conse-

para-

“(h) Guarantee freedom of transit on the interna-.
tional waterways in the region;
“(c) Achieve an appropriate and full solution of
the problem of the refugees and guarantee the terri6

satisfaction that we- see you, the representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania,
who has dedicated
himself to the struggle for the freedom and independence of all peoples, presiding over these historic
meetings of the Council while it considers an item of
great significance to the world at large and of crucial
importance
to the future and the fate of the whole
Arab nation. It was indeed a pleasure and a rare
privilege for my delegation and for me personally to
have had the opportunity to work with you during the
last year of Iraq’s term on the Council. I wish to
thank you and, through you, all the other members of
the Council for allowing my delegation to participate
in this debate.

quences of so much bloodshed, suffering and pain
might precipitate ~anew crisis involving neighbouring
countries, which in turn would endanger peace in
the area. Panama will defend at every turn Lebanon’s
right to maintain its unity and territorial integrity, and
hopesfor a speedy reconciliation among its inhabitants.’
49. As a non-aligned country, Panama believes that
the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Lima.in August 1975,
was quite right in declaring that
The interest of security and peace in the world
rests on the immediate implementation
of relevant
United Nations resolutions and.. . a just and durable
peace in the Middle East must be based on the two
following principles:

54. I also wish to.convey our sincere best wishes to
the new members of the Council and to express our
gratitude and lasting appreciation to them .and to a!!
the other Council members who have enabled the
representative of the PLO, representing the Palestinian
people, to participate in this debate which concerns the
future of that people more than any other. The stand of
those delegations that voted for the participation of the
PLO in the present debate will be recorded in the
annals of the struggle of the Palestinian people and it
will not be not be forgotten. A!! that has happened
in Palestine since 1917 was the outcome of the violation
of law and justice, and since 1947 of the violation of
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
itself in a manner that adversely affected the fate and
the very existence of a whole nation. We are now still
dealing with the consequences of these violations.

‘,‘l. The immediate
and unconditional
withdrawa! of Israel from a!! the territories occupied
since 5 June 1967;
“2. The exercise by the Palestinian people of all
their national rights, including their right to return to
their country and to self-determination
and politica!
independence.“2
50. The Revolutionary
Government
of Panama,
considering that the overwhelming
majority of our
people are Catholic, believes it has the obligation
to recommend that Jerusalem, in accordance with the
wishes of the Holy See, be recognized as having a
special status with international
guarantees, so that
Catholic worshippers and, in genera!, adherents of the
three major religions of the world can have, among
other things, free access to the Holy Places, freedom
of residence and freedom of worship. and ..so that
historic sites in the Holy City may be preserved and
safeguarded. If those principles are supported by the
great majority of the international community, it is our
duty in the Council to reconcile the views, bearing in
mind the legitimacy of each and every one of them.

55. It would appear, however, that at long last the
world has come to realize that no peace can be
established in the Middle East unless and until the
wrongs -committed
in Palestine and the injustices
inflicted upon the people of Palestine are rectified and
redressed. This can be achieved only on the basis of
principles of law and justice and the implementation
of the principles and decisions from which no nation
openly dissents.

51. Panama, which considers itself a friend of the
Arab countries and of Israel, concludes its statement
by calling for a search for a reasonable solution
which would reflect the .constructive spirit with which
we are imbued as the only way that can lead us. to.
peace in the Middle East.

56. The United Nations bears a special and major
responsibility
in the question of Palestine. Under
unprecedented
and
scandalous
United
States
coercion-words
used by the then Secretary of
Defense, the late James Forresta!, in his diaries”-the
General Assembly illegally recommended
the partition of Palestine. Of course, nothing in the Charter
bestows upon the United Nations the power to partition a country or to create new States,Nor
does the
United Nations have the mandate or the capacity to
convey title, as the Organization cannot assume the
role of territorial sovereign. To its credit the Security
Council has not attempted to implement
the recommendations adopted by the General Assembly. The
glaring inequity of the resolution recommending
the
partition of Palestine was nowhere more evident than
in the fact that the indigenous
Palestinian
Arabs
constituted a majority even in the area allotted to the
proposed Jewish State. Be that as it may, and perhaps

52.. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative -of Iraq. In accordance with established
practice, I now request the representative
of the
Palestine
Liberation
Organization
to withdraw
temporarily from his Seat at the Council table in order
that his place may be taken by the representative of
Iraq. I invite that representative to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
53. Mr. AL-SHAIKHLY
(Iraq): Mr. President, my
delegation finds itself seated again at the Council table
much sooner than it had expected. It is with profound
7

because of this most anomalous situation, the rights of
the Palestinian Arabs in the Jewish State were placed
under the guarantee of the United Nations; consequently, the sovereignty of the Jewish State was
permanently
limited by the very resolution which
envisaged its establishment.
Like no other State
Member of the United Nations, the Zionist State
was admitted to membership
in the United Nations
on certain conditions, which the Zionists have signally
failed to fulfil. Like no other State within the Organization, the Zionist State is subject to the jurisdiction
and
control of the United Nations.

60. Members of the Council who maintain that the
unjust and unbalanced resolution 242 (1967) of November 1967 is the only viable framework for a peace
settlement are deluding themselves and avoiding the
real issue Iraq has always believed that resolution
242 (1967) cannot be the basis for a settlement because
that resolution in effect rewarded the aggressor for his
aggression. The unfortunate
truth about resolution
242 (1,967) is that it sought to consolidate a fait
accompli imposed by force, rather than to establish
the framework for a peace with justice, in accordance
with the principles of the Charter and of international
law.

57. In its resolution 181 (II) of 29 November
1947
the General Assembly reserved to itself the power to
control and supervise Israel’s acts concerning the
Palestinians, the refugees, boundaries and Jerusalem
issues. On every one of these issues, the Zionist
State has displayed nothing but intransigence, blatant
violation and defiance of the more than 200 resolutions adopted in the United Nations since 1948 concerning Palestine and the Arab-Israeli conflict. None of
these resolutions has been respected by Israel. No
other State has defied the authority of the United
Nations in such a manner or eroded the prestige and
the effectiveness of the Organization to such an extent.
The Security Council has on several occasions warned
Israel that it would take steps to give effect to its
decisions, but it has never carried out its warnings. It
is now quite evident that without effective international action in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter the Zionists will never comply with United
Nations resolutions or abandon the fruits of their
military conquests or undo the wrongs and injustices
inflicted upon the Palestinians.

61. As to the question of the occupied Arab territories, should an aggressor be allowed to dictate the
terms for his compliance with the provisions of the
Charter and the principles of international law? lntemational law does not countenance the laying down of
such terms and conditions; the withdrawal must be
prompt and unconditional.
It was President Eisenhower who stated on the occasion of an earlier
Israeli aggression that if a nation which attacked and
occupied foreign territory in the face of United Nations
disapproval were allowed to impose conditions for its
own withdrawal, then we would have turned back the
clock of international
order. Resolution 242 (1967)
was, above all, an attempt to erase forever the name
of Palestine and to obliterate forever the national
rights of the people of Palestine.
62. The pretext put forward by the Zionists for their
boycott of the present debate in the Council is the
presence and the participation
of the PLO as the
legitimate
representative
of the Palestinian
people.
But the fact is that the Zionists, and their American
backers, would have opposed the participation
of
any representative of the Palestinian people. -For the
mere appearance of any Palestinian
entity or any
independent
Palestinian
factor in the Middle East
undermines
the Zionist faits accomplis,
brings the
Zionists’ policies back to 1947 and leads the intemational community
to a major reappraisal of the basic
equities of the whole question of Palestine. Ironically,
the refusal of the United States Government
to
recognize the national rights of the Palestinian people
implies recognition of the fact that the Zionist claims
to national rights were achieved only at the expense of
the legitimate rights of the people of Palestine.

58. The Zionists have declared that they would not
accept an .imposed solution.. Such a stand is ~tu -be
expected from the wrongdoer. But those who support
the view that no solution can or should be imposed
by the United Nations or by the great Powers are in
fact urging another war upon the victims of Israeli
aggression. They are suggesting that the fait accompli
imposed by the Zionists in 1948 and 1967 by force of
arms can be undone only by force of arms.
59. There is now almost unanimous agreement on
the fact that Palestinian national rights have to be
taken into consideration.
And yet the Power which
has assumed the role of the main arbiter still cannot
bring itself to acknowledge
the existence of such
rights, and talks only of “interests”.
That same
Power appears now to acquiesce in the acquisition
of territories by force of arms, in fact aiding and
abetting the aggressor and supplying him with arms
and assistance which enable him further to consolidate
the colonization of the occupied territories. They seek
to legitimize
not only the new conquests of 1967
but also the conquests of 1948, which went beyond the
territory allotted to the Jewish State in the partition
resolution.

63. The endless myths fabricated by the Zionists to
justify their political aims not only concerned, of
necessity, the Palestinian people, to the extent of
denying their very existence, but also involved the
Jews and Judaism. The adherents to a faith were
claimed to be a people with a national entity and
an international
legal status. The Zionists further
claimed for the Zionist State the right and the competence to legislate on behalf of this national entity,
as they also claimed the right to impose national
obligations upon that same entity. A colonialist political
movement based on ethnic and religious discrimina8

tion was identified with Judaism. This colonialist racist
movement was further declared to be the liberation
movement of all Jews throughout the world-in
Asia,
Europe and America. If Zionist claims are to be
believed,
Zionism is the liberation
movement
of
Chancellor
Kreisky
of Austria and Mr. Henry
Kissinger, the Secretary of State of the United States.

67. Furthermore, Iraq strongly objects to the creation
of States based solely on highly arbitrary criteria of
religious affiliation and ethnic exclusivity. Those are
the criteria of racism and racial discrimination.
The
grave dangers arising from the precedent of the
establishment of such a State should be clearly visible
for all the world to see in what is now happening in
our part of the world. How many other religious and
ethnic groups will attempt to emulate the Zionist
experiment?
How many other Israels will be established by force and bloodshed around the world? The
international
community
could do much worse than
begin to consider the possibilities of the restoration
of a secular, democratic entity in Palestine. Iraq fully
supports the proposal put forth by the PLO and repeated here by their representative on the establishment of such a democratic and secular State in Palestine. It is a noble and far-sighted vision, deserving ’
all support an encouragement.

64. Not content with merely clearing the land of
Palestine of its majority of indigenous Arab population
by means of coercion, terror and dispossession, the
Zionists had to use equally coercive measures to
uproot Jewish communities
throughout the world in
order to settle and colonize the conquered territories.
But the majority of Jews chose not to settle in the
Zionist State, and, significantly,
now more Jews are
leaving it daily. Ben-Gurion declared to his Cabinet
on 5 August 1948 that “generations
have not in vain
suffered and struggled to see onfy 800,000 Jews in this
country. It is the duty of the present generation to
redeem the Jews in the Araband Europeancountries.”

68. What are the prospects of achieving any positive
and effective action as the outcome of the present
debate? The outlook is, frankly, not encouraging;
one permanent member of the Council which is allied
in every way but in name with the aggressor has
already made it clear that it would oppose any changes
in the iniquitous resolution 242 (1967), by which it
means that it will veto a call for the withdrawal of the
Zionist aggressors from all the occupied territories and
that it will veto any resolution which would recognize
the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people.
The United States does not appear to be interested
at present in these issues. According to press reports,
Mr. Kissinger
instead warns the Zionist Foreign
Minister that his country’s security could be jeopardized by developments
in Angola. Such remarks
could only mean that the self-styled arbtter of peace
in the Middle East is using the Zionists and the
influence they wield in Congress in order to get that
body to approve American involvement
in Angola on
the pretext that America’s actions in Angola will also
affect Israel. The Zionists’ intercession would in turn
enable them to elicit further guarantees and concessions from the United States Government. Meanwhile,
the Israeli Prime Minister has declared at Tel Aviv that
the Zionists have sufficient military power to give
military
backing
to their freedom
of political
manceuvre.

65. Thus the Zionist emissaries started their drive to
uproot the Jews from those countries. There were
suddenly periods of swastika epidemics in Europe.
In Arab countries the measures had to be more drastic.
Nothing was more galling to the Zionists and more
damaging to their cause than the refusal of the Jews in
Arab lands to be “redeemed”
by the Zionists.
Furthermore,
the Zionists had to find an excuse for
their refusal to allow the return of the Palestinian
refugees. They had to force into effect a so-called
exchange of population.
66. Since the time when the Zionist conference held
in New York in 1942 had come out with what was
known as the Biltmore Programme,
Iraq had been
designated by the Zionists as the land where the
Palestinians should be settled. Iraq was thus’a special
target and the Iraqi Jewish community
a special prize
to be captured by the Zionists. Hence, Zionist agents
were sent to throw bombs into the Jewish synagogues
and cafes of Baghdad. The facts about this Zionist
plot started to come out in Israel. I refer anyone
interested in pursuing this subject further to The
Jerusrrle~~~
Post of 21 July 1964, Ha’olnm
Hmeh of
27 April and 6 June 1966, and Bird Punther of 9 November 1975. These facts started to appear as the
Oriental Sephardic Jews became increasingly
disenchanted with the Zionist State, where they had
become underprivileged,
second-class citizens in the
Ashkenazi-dominated
establishment.
Iraqi Jews in
particular, who had left Iraq as immigrants,
not-as
refugees, began to speak of the privileges and the
position they had enjoyed in Iraq before the Zionists
stepped into the picture. These developments led the
Revolutionary
Command Council in Iraq to adopt a
decision allowing all Iraqi Jews to return to their
homes in Iraq, guaranteeing them compensation and
equality with all other Iraqi citizens, in accordance
with the laws of the land.

69. It is in this context that one would have to view
the nature of the struggle that the Palestinians and the
Arabs would have to ,wage in order to attain justice
for themselves and peace in their lands. The representative of the PLO, Mr. Khaddoumi,
concluded his statement before the Council by stating that “our people will
continue its just struggle by all legitimate means to
attain its legitimate goals” [1870th meding, pcuu. 1891.
I should like to reiterate here that Iraq stands ready
to play its part in that struggle in full solidarity with
its brothers. Our struggle is one and indivisible.
We
are strengthened in our resolve by our belief that the
non-aligned,
the Islamic, the African, the socialist,
9

and all peace-loving
peoples
justness of our cause.

see and support

the

70. The PRESIDENT:
I now request the representative of Iraq to withdraw from the Council table so
that the representative
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization may resume his seat. The next speaker is
the representative
of India. In accordance with
established practice, I request the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic to withdraw temporarily from the
Council table in order that his place may. be taken by
the representative of India. I now invite that representative to take his seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
71. Mr. JAIPAL (India): Mr. President, may I say
how very happy I am to see you presiding over the
-Council at this time when it is engaged in a debate on
what is, perhaps, the most important question of the
day. May 1 also express to you, and through you to
the Security Council, my thanks for the courtesy of
granting my deiegation’s. request to participate in the
current debate.
72. India was a member of the Special Committee on
Palestine established by the General Assembly on
15 May 1947 to deal with the Palestine question.4
Since then we have taken a continuing
and close
interest in it, and we participated
as a member of
the Security Council in the discussions that led to the
adoption of its resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
73. May 1 also say that my delegation was happy to
de. that.the PLO is participating
in this debate. The
decision of the Security Council to invite the PLO is
a wise one and is based on common sense. Mr. President, you had made it clear at the outset that the
invitation to the PLO was not made under rule 37 or
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure. You were,
of course,’ perfectly right. It was, indeed, an crd hoc
decision, entirely
within the competence ‘of the
Security Council, which is master of its own procedures. It was a decision that stemmed from General
Assembly,
resolutions 3236 (XXIX),
3237 (XXIX)
and 3375 (XXX).
74. The General Assembly, having accepted that the
PLO represents the Palestinian
people, naturally
expects it to be invited to participate in ‘meetings of
the Security Council on the Palestinian question. More
so because the General Assembly considers that the
Palestinian people’is a principal party in the.establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
In that context, the General Assembly, furthermore,
has recognized the right of the palestinian people to
national independence and sovereignty. These decisions of the General Assembly cannot be without
interest to the Security Council.
75. When the Palestine question was discussed in
the Security Council ,in February 1948, the Security
Council received some very sound advice from the

delegation of the United States of America. The
representative of the United States at that time stated
that “the recommendations
of the General Assembly
have great moral force.. . the Security Council, although
not bound under the Charter to accept and carry out
General Assembly recommendations,
is nevertheless
expected to give great weight to them”.s We are glad
to see .that this piece of good American advice has
made its impact on several members of the Security
Council.
76. However, some ‘members of the Security Council
seem to have reservations. One member has stated,
quite rightly, that the PLO is neither a State nor a
Government. What is it, then? The PLO is not.acypher.
It is an entity that represents a people belonging to
areas that are stateless and that are under illegal
foreign occupation. There is such a thing as stateless
territory in, international
law. Parts of the former
mandated territory of Palestine have the legal status
of statelessness, and no State, not even the United
Nations, is competent to dispose of that stateless
territory. Only the people of that, stateless territory
have the competence to do so.
77. A famous authority
Kelsen, has the following

on international
law, Hans
to say on this subject:

“At the moment the Government of the United
Kingdom withdrew from Palestine that territory was
in a legal status of statelessness until the newState
of Israel was established and recognized by other
States, but that part of Palestine which is not
under the control of Israel legally will remain a
stateless territory until a recognized government is
established there.”
78. There is one other matter on which I should like
to comment. One member of the Council has spoken
of the legitimate interests of the Palestinian people.
What these interests are has not been defined, nor
how they derive their legitimacy, but it is apparently
admitted that, whatever the interests may be, they
are legitimate.
When interests have a legal basis and
are recognized as legitimate, do they not acquire some
measure of the quality of rights? I am speaking not
about the rights of States but about the rights of
peoples.
79., The Preamble to the Charter of the United
Nations begins with the words “We the peoples’:.
These words were borrowed from a famous document
belonging to a fampus former British colony which
Mr. Ivor Richard will not have any difficulty. in
identifymg.
The Charter speaks in the Preamble of
equal rights of men and women and of nations large
and small. Article 1, paragraph 2, of the Charter and
Article 55 speak also of equal rights of peoples. I
submit that Palestinians are a people and are entitled
to equality of rights in terms of the Charter.
80. The General Assembly has accepted that the
Palestinian people have certain’national
rights. In our

opinion, the Security Council should do the same. In
fact the Security Council accepted the existence of
rights for Arabs in Palestine as early as 1948. I am
referring to the preamble to resolution 50 (1948),
adopted by the Security Council on 29 May 1948,
which states:

“Desiring to bring about a cessation of hostilities
in Palestine without prejudice to the rights, claims
and position of either Arabs or Jews”.
Those words were obviously taken from Article 40 of
the Charter of the United Nations. It seems to us that
the clear intent of the Security Council was that no
military advantage should accrue to the conqueror
and that nothing should prejudice the rights, claims
and position of either Arabs or Jews. In 1948 the
Security ,Council spoke of the rights of Arabs and
Jews ,and not of their interests. Is it now seriously
contended that Palestinian Arabs had certain rights on
29 May 1948 and that they have since lost those rights
and acquired only legitimate interests? The concept
that some people have rights and others only interests
is not tenable. Nor, in our opinion, does it conform to
the democratic character of the Charter.
81. The time has come for the Security Council to
establish a framework of principles and procedures for
resolving the Middle East problem and the Palestine
question. Its resolutions 242 (1967) and 33g (1973),
which we supported, did put an end to the fighting,
and if they have failed to bring about a just and lasting
peace settlement it is surely because the Palestinian
question has remained neglected. In addition .to the
elements mentioned in resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), the Council,
we hope, will stipulate the
national right of the Palestinian
people to have a
State of their own, and this is, of course, without
prejudice to the rights of the State of Israel. The
rest is a matter for negotiation and compromise.

ment of 12 January. He said: “The Security Council
should... consider the only remaining
alternative:
namely, to recognize our people’s national...
rights
and to assist it in realizing its national aspirations”
[187&h meeting, para. 1#4].
84. The PLO has come to the Security Council in
search of a peaceful, just and honourable solution,
and that in itself is a significant development
for an
organization
that had once despaired of a peaceful
solution. Therefore, one cannot fail to be touched
by the confidence of the PLO in the Security Council.
This is clearly a moment for the Security Council to
provide’ meaningful
leadership rather than paralyse
itself with its,own special brand of procedural virtue.
85. The PRESIDENT:
The next SDeaker is the renresentative of Morocco. In accordance with established
practice, I would request the representative of Egypt
to withdraw temporarily from his place at the Council
table in order that it may be taken by the representative of Morocco. I now invite that representative to
take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.
86. Mr. ZAIMI
(Morocco)
(intc~rprPtcrtioJ1 jiwtt
Frmch):. Mr. President, first of all I should like to
convey to you the sincere congratulations of my delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. The fact that the presidency is now
occupied by a young .and dynamic son of Africa is
something that fills us with both joy and pride. Allow
me to thank you and the members of the Council
for being kind enough to give me an opportunity
to
participate in this important debate.
87. My delegation has followeti very closely the
course of this discussion. We are indeed deeply
gratified that the question of Palestine and the chronic
state of crisis of the Middle East which has resulted
from it are more and more becoming understood in
their concrete reality by the international community.

82. We share the regret of others that Israel should
have thought it necessary to refrain from participation
in this debate. Frankly, we cannot see what Israel
would lose by participating
in this debate. Whatever
its misgivings
and apprehensions,
and however
justified they may be, we do ‘not see any rational
alternative to negotiations between the principal parties
concerned in a realistic, enlightened
and forwardlooking manner. The burden of the past certainly
weighs heavily on all, including Israel, but is the time
not yet ripe for paying attention to the promise of peace
for the future?. In this regard the great Powers have a
crucial role to play, a role which is expected of them
by the United Nations in the interests of international
peace and security.

8% The international
community has in fact become
aware of the actual components of the problem and
has been able .to identify what has to be done in
order to bring about a true and genuine solution. That
awareness has been particularly
reflected in the
relevant resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
at its twenty-ninth and thirtieth sessions, resolutions
which reaffirm the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people to sovereignty and independence in their own
homeland and which restore to them their right to
express through
their own representatives
their
desires concerning their future and their views on
the conditions which must necessarily precede a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East.

83. In conclusion, I should like to draw the attention
of the Council to the simple, straightforward request
made by the representatives
of PLO in his state-

89. The extremely wise decision which was taken by
*the Security Council to invite the authentic representatives of the Palestinian people to participate in this

of Zionist colonies in the occunied Arab territories.
The underlying significance of that reply can be hidden
from no one. It is indeed a desperate measure to
destroy an entire people and completely to obliterate
the Arab character of the territory. Both the people
and the territory are embarrassing witnesses of this
unforgettable
crime. Israel is attempting
in vain to
avoid facing up to reality, which, however, is as
clear as the light of day. Peace in the Middle East
can be brought about only with the consent of the
Palestinian people, and it certainly cannot be brought
about in spite of it.

debate further illustrates this general awareness of
the state of flagrant injustice of which that valiant
people has been a victim for more than three decades.
90. I shall be stating nothing new if I here reaffirm
something which has become self-evident. Although
we very much value all the laudable efforts which have
been made by various people to defuse the explosive
situation which has prevailed and which continues to
prevail in the Middle East, we are still profoundly
convinced that the objective conditions for a real solution are, first, the exercise of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people to independence and national
sovereignty in their country and, secondly, the withdrawal of Israel from all occupied Arab territories.
These are the two sine yuct non conditions
if a
just and lasting peace is to be brought about, and
this is the foundation on which all the required guarantees must be based.

95. The PLO, which is the authentic representative
of the Palestinian people, has given to the world proof
of a very advanced stage of political maturity. It has
won the admiration
of all by fully shouldering its
historic responsibilities
in a serious search for a
political settlement and through its vision which has
always been focused on the future.

91. A number of those who have spoken before me
saw fit to refer to the genesis of the item we are now
considering. They did this with the perfectly justified
desire of uncovering the roots of the evil and of allowing
the historic facts to speak for themselves. Therefore,
I see no reason why I should revert to it myself.
Suffice it to say that everyone agrees that unless the
rights of the Palestinians in Paletine are satisfied, no
solution can possibly be viable.

96. The situation in the Middle East is undoubtedly’
an explosive one. The intransigence of Israel may well
plunge the region once again into an adventure fraught
with incalculable
risks. The Security Council, the
United
Nations
body which is responsible
for
maintaining peace and security throughout the world,
is therefore required to do its duty fully. Safeguarding
peace and security is something which can and must
be done not only after hostilities have broken out,
but also and above all by exercising moral support
for those who have been stripped of their rights and
by leading the usurpers to face up to the facts and to
revise their selfish designs.

92. Furthermore,
all those who have spoken before
the Council have agreed that the efforts made hitherto
by the Security Council in order to resolve the problem
of the Middle East must be supplemented or updated
so as to take into account all the facts, particularly
those which have only recently become known to
the international community.
Faced with this international effort to understand the problem and to seek
sincerely for a settlement of it, Israel is sinking further
into the murky depths of a policy of unprecedented
obstinacy.

97. In his statement made on 12 January, Mr. Khaddoumi, the representative of the PLO, said:
“However,
I should note the deliberate absence
of Israel from this discussion. Why is Israel not
present? What is its pretext for boycotting
the
Council’s meeting? Israel is absent simply because
the representatives of the people of Palestine are
invited to take part in these deliberations.
This is
symbolic of who is anxious to participate in the
process of peace-making
and who is deliberately
eager to frustrate the will of the Council.”
[Ihid.,

93. After having sabotaged ail the attempts at peace
from the mission of Count Bemadotte right up to that
of Mr. Jarring, Israel has responded to the real terms
for a just and lasting solution to the problem by
adopting the policy of putting its head in the sand.
Israel refuses to admit that the price of peace and
security in the region cannot be anything less than its
withdrawal from the Arab territories which it occupies
by force. Israel, while insisting on its right to exist, is
frantically
endeavouring
to have the rights of the
Palestinian people to existence and national sovereignty in their country forgotten by the rest of the
world.

ptwrr.

140.1

We trust that members of the Council have grasped the
meaning of that message.
98. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Guinea. In accordance with established
practice, I now request the representative of Jordan to
withdraw temporarily
from his seat at the Council
table in order that his place may be taken by the
representative of Guinea. I invite that representative
to take a place at the Council table and to make her
statement.

94. The reply that Israel found to the appeals made by
the international community for recognition and fulfilment of the rights of the Palestinian people and for
the restoration to them of the territories seized from
their owners was simply a massive and blind bombing
of the Palestinian refugee camps and the proliferation

99.

Mrs. Jeanne Martin CISSE (Guinea) (intcrprcttrThat the problem of the Middle

tiou .fkonr F~~wc~l~):

_
12

East including the Palestinian question-should
be discussed in the Security Councii with you, Sir, a
distinguished representative of the United Republic of
Tanzania, as President is, for all peace-loving peoples,
an event full of significance and a source of encouragement. Indeed, Mr. President,
you-Salim
Ahmed
Salim-are
a harbinger of peace as your name suggests,
and you have always devoted yourself to the defence
of the oppressed. Your human qualities and your
energy as a vigorous fighter have been widely
recognized and have earned you esteem. We proudly
consider your record as the very able Chairman of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples
a contribution
of a youthful Africa to a world anxious
for justice, peace and security.
100. I shall not dwell on the strong bonds between
our two countries and our two heads of State. Through
you, may I be allowed to pay a sincere tribute to the
courageous people of the United Republic of Tanzania,
which has been unswerving in its support for national
liberation movements, to which it has always opened
its towns, thus going a long way to promoting
the
fulfilment of the legitimate aspirations of their peoples.
101. For all those reasons, my delegation is convinced
that the present work of the Council will contribute
to a clarification of the Middle East situation including
the Palestinian question.
102. It is truly heartening for the delegation of the
State-Party of Guinea to see the PLO participating
in the present debate, and we bid them welcome.
Their presence does credit to the Security Council for
more than one reason and should make it possible for
us to take a more just approach to this question.
103. On this historic occasion we should like to pay
a tribute to the courageous struggle of the Palestinian
people under the leadership of the PLO, and we should
like to renew our unconditional
support for them and
our complete solidarity with them in their just struggle
to recover their national rights to self-determination,
freedom and independence.
104. If constant efforts by the Security Council over
more than a quarter of a century have not led to a
genuine peace in the Middle East, it is, we believe,
because every solution that has been advanced has
been nothing more than an attempt to make do, to cepe
with circumstances,
and because the international
community
has failed to live up to its responsibilities.
Resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 seemed at
the time to be most appropriate and, if carried out,
would have been a decisive step towards a progressive
settlement of the conflict. Like many other resolutions
relating to the conflict, that resolution remained a dead
letter. Europe, and even more the United States, held
out hopes which did not come to fruition. Why was

that so? Simply because we were preoccupied
effects and seemed to care little for causes.

with

105. I do not wish to go into the whole history of the
Palestinian tragedy, but shall instead confine myself to
a few salient features. For more than a quarter of a
century the Palestinian people have lived with suffering
and with hope. Ever since the League of Nations
placed the countries of the Fertile Crescent-Palestine,
Lebanon, Syria and Iraq-under
a British and French
Mandate, Palestinians have had no other status than
that of a colonial people. Because Palestine was
deemed to be a country preparing for self-determination, it can be said that its people had a much happier
fate then than today, because they were on the
threshold of independnece, in accordance with Article 22 of the League of Nations’ Mandate. Regrettably,
that self-determination,
indeed that independent.e,
turned out to be a dream because, in contrast to what
happened to Lebanon, Iraq and Syria in 1947, Palestine
was arbitrarily
used to solve a European problem,
the Jewish problem.
106. The League of Nations wished to accommodate
the Jews who had been driven from Europe, and
thereby committed agrave injustice vis-a-vis Palestine.
Instead of helping it to recover its sovereignty as had
been planned, it lent itself to a plot against that country
which then found itself under a much heavier yoke
-the new-style colonialism.
A strife-torn country, its
inhabitants
maltreated,
imprisoned,
tortured
and
driven from their lands, its traditions and customs
is what the
scorned, its hopes frustrated-that
Organization,
manipulated
by imperialism,
gave to
the Palestinians
instead of selfdetermination
and
independence.
107. At the beginning of this year 1976, breaking with
an unjust past, the Security Council took an important
step forward by welcoming the delegation of the PLO
to this assembly. In so doing, the Council has in a
sense rehabilitated
the history of the Organization.
The participation.of
the PLO as the authentic representative of the Palestinian people in the present debate
will, we are convinced,
make it possible for the
Security Council to move positively towards a just and
definitive settlement of the Middle East problem.
During the very long discussion’on the question
I&.
of the Middle East too many untruths have been
spoken and have contributed
to sowing confusion
amongst us. However: history has taught us that it is
not with lies and intimidation
that a battle can be won.
The moment of truth has come. The PLO, a courageous
fighter for peace, justice and truth, has come before the
Security Council.
109. It is at this important time in the history of the
Organization that Israel has chosen to be absent. Its
absence is clear proof of the intentions of the Israeli
authorities to perpetuate war and threats, to refuse to
comply with their duty vis-a-vis the Organization,

namely, to participate
peace in the area.

in the restoration

At the invitution
of the President. Mr. Alarccin
(Cuhu) took the plaw rcssrwd for him ut the side of
the Council c-hcrmkr.

of justice and

110. In any event, we are convinced that. regardless
of the difficulties and obstacles, the people of Palestine
will succeed in recovering their usurped homeland,
for neither killing, nor bombs, nor intimidation
can
put out the flame of the just struggle of a people
which is determined to prevail.
.

115. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative
of the German Democratic’ Republic.
In accordance with established practice, I request
the representative of the PLO to withdraw temporarily
from his seat at the Councif table in order that his
place may be taken by the representative of the German
Democratic Republic, whom I now invite to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

I

111. The time has come for the Security Council
to join with the new forces which are fighting for the
restoration of peace and justice in the Middle East
by settling the Palestine question on a basis other than
the much-discussed resolution 242 (1967), which rightly
has been rejected by the parties concerned because it
has been shown to be inadequate and unsuitable..

116. Mr. FLORIN
(German Democratic Republic)
(interpretation
from Russian): Mr. President, at the
outset of my statement may I express my gratification
at having the honour of being able to speak at a time
when you, the representative of an African State with
which the German Democratic Republic has the closest
and most friendly relations, are presiding over this
body. We know you and value you highly as a tireless
champion of the liberation of peoples from colonialism.
I should also like to thank the members of the Council
for allowing the ‘delegation of the German Democratic
Republic to participate
in the discussion of ‘this
L/
important item.

112. For some time now the world public, reading the
American press, has felt hopeful regarding the position
of the United States concerning the new situation
which has arisen in the Middle East. The statement
which we have just heard from the representative of
the ,United States, Mr. Moynihan,
unfortunately
did
not come up to those expectations.

117. The Security Council has before it a problem
-or, rather, to be more accurate, a set of problemsrelating to the Middle East and demanding general
attention, since what is at stake is peace and security
not only in that region but elsewhere,

113. The position of the United States has not been
as firm as the world expected; in any case, the United
States Government has not lived up to its responsibilities in the search for a settlement to the problem.
In our view, those who hold the key to the problem,
those who can push open the door to a settlement,
as others have said in this gathering, should help us
and should relieve us of the anxiety which we have felt
now for more than a quarter of a century. We believe
that the Security Council should always be guided by
the principles of the Charter and, in particular, should
endorse the proposal put forward by the PLO-namely,
that full importance should be accorded to Article 36
of the Charter and that General Assembly resolutions
3236 (XXIX) and 3376 (XXX) should be implemented;
with pressure being brought to bear.on Israel to decide
to withdraw from the lands it has usurped.

118. My Government
has frequently had occasion
to express its view regarding the root-causes of the
Middle East conflict, and has come out in favour of a
peaceful, lasting and just settlement. The delegation of
the German Democratic Republic views it as its duty
to take part in the present discussion particularly
since, pursuant to resolution adopted by: the General
Assembly
at its thirtieth
session6 the German
Democratic Republic became a member of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People.
119. That session of the Assembly represented a
further step forward in the history of the struggle of
peoples for peace, security,, disarmament and social
progress against the imperialist policies of aggression,
oppression and exploitation,
and in favour of the right
of all peoples to enjoy a peaceful life in secure conditions,, including the right to have their own State.
This was reflected in particular in a number of resolution adopted at the ‘thirtieth session .of the General
Assembly, whose purpose it was to overcome the
situation which had arisen’ in’.the Middle -East !as a
result -of Israel’s continued ‘aggression, and to give
fresh impetus to efforts to bring about a comprehensive
political settlement.

114. The PRESIDENT:
Before calling on the next
speaker, I wish to inform members of the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Cuba containing
a request that he be invited, in
accordance with rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure, to participate in the discussion of the item
on the agenda. I propose,‘if
I hear no objection, to
invite the representative of Cuba to participate in the
discussion in conformity with the usual practice and’
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and the
provisional rules of procedure. There being no objection, I invite that representative
to take the. place
reserved for him at the side of.the Council chamber,
on the usual understanding that he will be invited to
take a place at the Council table when he wishes to
address the Council.

120. The discussion of the situation in the Middle
East and the Palestinian question at the thirtieth sesj
14

sion of the General Assembly, and the adoption of
the relevant resolutions, showed with abundant clarity
that the overwhelming
majority of States Members of
the United Nations could no longer tolerate a situation
‘in the Middle East which endangers world peace. In
‘this connexion, it was ‘Cmphasized that the reason
for the tension and the ongoing conflict, as well as
for the constant threat of an outbreak of overt military
clashes in that area, was the continuing aggression
of Israel, which obstinately refuses to withdraw from
the Arab territories occupied in 1967, and has refused
to recognize the legitimate rights of the Arab people
of Palestine, including their right to create their own
State:

socialism, it is second nature to be on the side of
other peoples struggling against imperialist,
colonial
and racist oppression-whether
it be in the Middle
East or in the southern part of Africa.
125. It is a source of,hdnour and pride to the people
-of the German Democratic Republic that it stands side
by side with the people of Palestine struggling for the
realization of its inalienable rightsjust as it also stands
side by side with the people of a young African State
which is obliged to defend itself against the aggression
of South African racists, for our people-the
people
of the German Democratic Republic-has
itself had to
wage a bitter struggle against the designs of imperialism
and for the recognition of its own rights.

I2 1. The German Democratic Republic, as a member
of the socialist community,
has never failed to emphasize that a just long-term solution to the conflict
in the Middle East cannot be brought about unless
the legitimate
rights of the people of Palestine are
guaranteed. The twenty-ninth
and thirtieth sessions
of the General Assembly have confirmed that the
overwhelming
majority of Member States hold the
same view. This’ can be seen, for example, from
General Assembly resolutions
3236 (XXIX),
3375
(XXX) and 3414 (XXX), which were quite rightly
referred to by many of those who have spoken before
me.

126. My delegation warmly welcomes the decision of
the Security Council to invite the representatives of the
PLO to participate in the discussion of the Middle
East problem including the Palestinian question. This is
indeed an encouraging sign. Like other socialist States,
the German Democratic
Republic is’ in favour of a
comprehensive political settlement for the Middle Fast
conflict,‘one
which will guarantee a durable and just
peace in the area. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the German Democratic Republic; Mr. Oskar Fischer,
in his statement of 24 September 1975 at a plenary
meeting of the thirtieth
session of the General
Assembly, stressed that “Partial
steps-and
this is
shown by the present situation-cannot
replace the
necessary comprehensive
solution to this problem.“’
Today this is a view that is shared by most States.

122. We are very pleased to state that a realistic
view has prevailed in the Security Council-namely,
that the Palestinian question is not simply a, matter
of refugees and thus a purely humanitarian
issue,
but, rather, a decisive political
issue, one which
affects war and peace. On the basis of this assessment,
we have to adopt the proper approach to finding a
solution to this problem. Unless’the inalienable rights
of the Arab people of Palestine are exercised, there
will be no peace in the Middle East.

127. We are profoundly convinced that the’ongoing
process of detente in the world provides us with
favourable conditions to remove the military hotbed
existing in the Middle East. We firmly reject the desires
of a certain Power to provoke a, world war by
exacerbating the Middle East conflict and to warm its
hands over someone else’s’conflagration.
Peace in the
Middle East can be achieved. provided that Israel
withdraws completely
from all the Arab territories
it occupied in 1967 and that the legitimate and inalienable rights of the Arab people of Palestine are realized,
including its right to create its own State. Only in
this way can real conditions be created to guarantee
the secure existence and development of all States in
that region.

123. The statement made by the Chairman of the
Executive Committee
of the PLO, Yasser Arafat,
more than a year ago in the General Assembly marked
an important milestone in further understanding the
Middle East problem. Since them, an ever-growing
number of realistic politicians
are becoming more
aware that, if one soberly assesses the situation in
the Middle East, one cannot fail to acknowledge that
the PLO is the sole legitimate representative of the
Arab people of Palestine and that it should be invited
and should be involved in the search for a solution
of the Middle East conflict on an equal footing.

128. It is time now to renew the work already started
by an existing international
machinery, namely, the
Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East. In
the opinion of my Government,
it goes without saying
that the only legitimate representatives of the Arab
people of Palestine should participate in the work of the
Conference from the very outset and on an equal
footing-and
I refer the PLO.

124. The people of the German Democratic Republic
has always supported and continues to support the
Arab people of Palestine and its representative
the
PLO. This falls into line with a basic principle of my
State’s foreign policy, which has consistently
and
unswervingly
shown active solidarity
towards the
national liberation movements. For the people of the
German Democratic Republic, which in the exercise
of its right to self-determination
chose the course of

129. As wk are aware, the Goveniment
of Israel
continues completely to ignore the numerous resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council
aimed at defusing the situation in the Middle East ‘and
15

bringing about a political settlement of the conflict.
Obviously,
the ruling circles in Israel have not yet
grasped that an aggressive policy based on the Zionist
concept of aggression is doomed to failure. How can
we otherwise appraise the uninterrupted
aggression
of Israel, which is referred to in the Secretary-General’s
report on the basis of information from United Nations
observers in the Middle East. The broad political,
military and economic support which is given to Israel
by a number of States has in no way helped to make
the aggressor aware of political realities an necessities.

be in conformity with the need to bring about a speedy,
just and durable peace settlement in the Middle East,
and that the Security Council will be equal to its
responsibilities
under the Charter of the United
Nations.
135. The PRESIDENT:
The last speaker is the
representative of the Yemen Arab Republic. In accordance with the established practice, I request the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to withdraw
temporarily
from the Council table in order that his
place may be taken by the representative of the Ymen
Arab Republic. I now invite that representative to take
that place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

130. After the thirtieth session of the Genera1 Assembly had shown that the aggressor and his accomplices were in a state of international
isolation, the
ruling circles in Israel preferred to withdraw into
isolation. This is not the sort of position which can
help to bring about the discussion of the Middle East
problem as a whole and with the participation
of all
parties. Once again it has become clear who is
genuinely concerned with establishing a durable and
just peace and who is not.

SALLAM
(Yemen
Arab
Republic):
136. Mr.
Mr. President, permit me at the beginning of my
participation
in this debate to associate myself and
the delegation of the Yemen Arab Republic with the
sentiments expressed in tribute to the memory of a
great man, a great son of China and a great son of
Asia, Mr. Chou En-lai. He was a great leader, an
outstanding statesman and a faithful architect of the
modem history of the People’s Republic of China.
The Government
and people of the Yemen Arab
Republic regret his passing away and consider that
his death was a great loss not only to the People’s
Republic of China but also to humanity as a whole.

131. In referring to Israel’s position, we cannot fail
to advert to the serious responsibility
borne by those
States which help to raise Israel’s military potential
or block any condemnation of the criminal aggressions
perpetrated by it. After all that has happened-particularly Indo-China-the
ruling circles in Israel should
finally realize that times have changed. There will
not be peace in the Middle East, nor will there be
any security for Israel, as long as that State continues its aggressive and annexationist
policy and
as long as the thinking and actions of its Government
are determined by annexationist
plans.

137. At sad moments like these, it is an even greater
pleasure and honour for me to congratulate
you;
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January
1976. Your excellent qualities, your statesmanship,
your vast experience as a diplomat of the United
Republic of Tanzania and the fact that you are the
Chairman of the Special Committee-all
that, in addition to your magnanimity,
is a guarantee for us that
under your presidency the Council deliberations will
have fruitful consequences which will lead the international community to peace and security.

132. Today, as I listened to the statement made by
the representative
of a permanent member of the
Security Council, I realized once again how diflicult
it is to learn from the past, to grasp what is happening
and to take a courageous step forward in order really
to promote the achievement of those goals that have
been so eloquently referred to here. A just and secure
peace in the Middle East must be sought today. The
decision must not be put off. Otherwise, it might
well turn out to be too late. It has been stated here
repeatedly and aptly, by speakers who have preceded
me, that a great deal of time has been wasted and many
opportunities
to reach a peaceful settlement of the
conflict have been lost. Peace in the Middle East
should not and cannot depend on purely tactical
concepts connected with a pre-electoral campaign in
any country, even if it is a permanent member of the
Security Council.

138. It also gives my delegation
great pleasure
-although
the Yemen Arab Republic is not a member
of the Security Council-to
congratulate the five new
*members of the Security Council. We feel profound
satisfaction, too, that the rightful representative
of
Palestine, the PLO, is assuming its responsibilities
in
the deliberations
of the Council on an equal footing
with all Members of the United Nations.
139. The General Assembly on 10 November
1975
adopted its resolution 3375 (XXX), which calls for the
invitation of the PLO, the representative of the Palestinian people, to participate in all efforts, deliberations
and conferences on the Middle East.

133. The States on whose assistance and support
the Israeli aggressor depends should revise their
position, so that a realistic appreciation
of what is
happening will be made in Tel Aviv.

140. The Security Council on 30 November
lY75
adopted its resolution 381 (lY75), by which it decided
in subparagraph ((I) to continue the debate on the
Middle East problem including the Palestinian ques+

134. My delegation would voice the hope that the
results of this series of Security Council meetings will
16

tion, “taking into account all relevant United Nations
That resolution was reaffirmed by the
resolutions”.
Security Council’sdecision,
with 9 members voting in
favour, to invite the PLO to participate in the deliberations of the Council on the Middle.East
including the
Palestinian question [S’~LJ1859rh meeting].

directed against the Arab Republic of Egypt was a clear
manifestation of the expansionist policy of the Zionist
State, which attempted unsuccessfully to annex the
remaining parts of Palestine and to occupy the Sinai
peninsula. The same expansionist Zionist policy was
manifested once more in the perfidious aggression of
1967 by which Israel occupied the whole territory of
Palestine, the whole Sinai peninsula and the Syrian
Arab Republic’s Golan Heights.

141. Now the rightful renresentatives
of the core
issue of the Middle East problem are here, after three
long decades of struggle and suffering, are here in
front of the United Nations organ res,ponsible for
maintaining
international
peace and security. The
Security Council today is duty bound to support the
caI1 of ‘the international
community
to enforce the
implementation
of the relevant United Nations resolutions and to seize this opportunity to lay the foundations of the terms of peace in the Middle East, taking
into account all relevant United Nations resolutions.
If this Council fails to take a step forward on the way to
establishing peace and security in the Middle East
and if it fails at least to take punitive measures
against the aggressor, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, the Council will then have to
bear the responsibility
of leaving the Middle East
problem as it is, to the discretion of the aggressor and
his supporters to choose between peace and war.

145. Instead of seizing this opportunity
to maintain
a durable and lasting peace in the area based on right
and justice, Israel went on to consolidate its occupation
against the will of the whole international community.
The October war of liberation of 1973 provided Israel
and the world with conclusive evidence that the Arab
people would not allow their rights to be neglected or
their territories to ,remain under Israeli occupation.
In spite of the clear victory of the Arab people in the
October war of liberation,
the Zionist intransigent
policy gained momentum
and more settlements were
established in the occupied Arab territories.
This
intransigent policy of the Israelis cannot be explained
in terms of logic or in terms of the human desire for
coexistence in peace with friends and neighbours. The
only explanation for this phenomenon is that Zionism
does not flourish in a peaceful medium, and that
consequently
intransigent
international
Zionism is
preparing the Israelis and our Arab Jewish brothers
to commit suicide.

142. The tragedy of the creation of the Zionist State
is the unique tragedy of our time, a diabolic design
directed against the land and the people of Palestine.
The tragedy was initiated in 1898; in 1917 land was
promised under the Balfour Declaration to the Zionists
by those who did not have the right to make such a
promise; and in 1947 the issue first came to the United
Nations with the abhorrent and unjust recommendation
that Palestine be partitioned. The partition resolution,
resolution 181 (II), was adopted by the General Assembly on 29 November
1947 by a small majority.
That resolution was a clear and manifest violation of
the Charter, the principles of human rights, and the.
territorial integrity of Palestine.

146. The Yemen Arab Republic has more than once
declared that it would welcome the return of its Yemeni
Jewish brothers who left Yemen during 1947-1948 to
join the herds of Jews to be sacrificed by intransigent
international
Zionism on the altar of the “big lie”,
the Zionist empire. The Arab Jews are our blood
brothers, our kin. We greatly desire to live in peace
with them, as we have lived before. We do not wish
to see our Yemeni Jewish brothers, or for that matter
any of our Arab Jewish brothers, to be led by the
nose to the altar as a sacrifice to the “big lie” or on
the pretext of enforcing Israeli terms of peace. The
alternative to war is’peace, and peace can be brought
about within the framework of the United Nations
resolutions which call for the withdrawal of the Israeli
forces from all the occupied Arab territories and the
restoration of the inalienable
national rights of the
Palestinian people.

143. In spite of that infamous partition resolution,
which gave 55 per cent of the land of Palestine to a
minority of 32 per cent, Zionist invaders went beyond
these limits, and new waves of European settlers began
to flood the remote comers of the land of peace, newcomers with hatred in their hearts and revenge in their
blood-revenge
not against their persecutors but
against their blood brothers, their kin; The terrorist
Zionist gangs spread through the land like fire,
spreading havoc, terrorizing men, women and children
and forcing them to flee, leaving behind their home%
and property. The abominable, acts of the Zionist
terrorist gangs against the Palestine people will never
be forgotten by the Arab people, or for that matter
by the Jewish people themselves.

147. Therefore it is imperative that the Council adopt
a constructive and concrete resolution which will put
the Middle East problem including the Palestinian
question in its proper perspective and on course
towards peace and security in the region. The Yemen
Arab Republic in this respect affirms the constructive
role of the Geneva Peace Conference and the indisputable right of the PLO to participate in the deliberations of the aforementioned
Conference on an equal
‘footing with all Members of the United Nations. The
General Assembly has recognized this right of the
Palestinian people, and we feel that it is high time for

144. . Closely in accordance with the historical fact
that Israel and the Zionists have never at any time
entertained the idea of peace in Palestine or in the
Middle East region as a whole, the 1956 aggression
17

the Security Council to follow suit and to demonstrate
to the world community that the United Nations organ
responsible for the maintenance of peace and security
in the world is convinced that the Geneva Peace Conference must be reconvened with the full participation
of the representatives of the PLO.

of mass destruction, then it is my delegation’s conviction that history will repeat itself and that frustrated
international Zionism will lead humanity to sit under
the pillars of the Philistines’ temple where, according
to an epic narrative in the Old Testament-the book
of Judges-Samson killed himself and his oppressors,
the Philistines, in an act of suicide and frustration.

148. It is also essential and in line with the establishment of a just and durable peace in the area that
friends of Israel should not supply the Zionists with
arms, but supply them with a white cane with no
magic powers to assist them in finding the way to
peace and security among their blood brothers and
their kin. However, if the Zionists, with their intransigent policy, continue to make believe they can still
force a peace settlement without justice through their
efficient international news media, which propagate
distorted versions of the historical facts of the Middle
East conflict, and through the development of weapons

! See Alt.1123.
s See James Forrestal, Thr Forrrstd
Diurics,
W. Mills and
E. S. DufIield, eds. (New York, The Viking Press, IWl), p, 363.
4 See General Assembly resolution 106(S-I).
s See

Qfficiul Rmmls

of

tha

Scrwrity

CITIZEN,

2S3rd meeting.
6 See General Assembly resolution 3376 IX:XXI.
7 See O#iciul
Rrwds
c$thc Ganm~l
Pkwwry
Maatings,
2360th meeting,

Aswmhly,~Thirtirth

Third

Ymtr,
Scssicm,

;

18

,
Litho

in United

Nations.

New

York

00400

83.60801-May

1984-2,200
