Rel!olutionl! adopted on the reportl! of the Second Committee

the magnitude of the problem makes it far beyond the
means at present available to most of the countries
concerned and requires the mobilization of considerable
human, financial and technical resources, and concerted
international action,
1. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1128 (XLI) on the world campaign for universal literacy, adopted unanimously on 26 July 1966;
2. Invites, in the name of human solidarity, Member
States, international organizations, non-governmental
organizations, foundations, institutions and private enterprises to provide continuing and effective financial,
material and technical support for the world campaign
for universal literacy ;
3. Expresses the hope that additional resources will
be made available to the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization for the world
campaign for universal literacy in the manner which
each State may deem appropriate;
4. Makes an urgent appeal to the conscience of the
world to support world-wide efforts to eliminate mass
illiteracy by providing the necessary and indispensable
means to this end.
1494th plenary meeting,
15 December 1966.
2206 (XXI). Second session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development

The General Assembly,
Considering that the second session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development will
provide a forum for the further examination of major
issues of trade and development, including the consideration of further action for the implementation of
the recommendations adopted at the first session of
the Conference,
Emphasizing the need for the Conference, at its
second session, to concentrate in particular on a limited
number of fundamental and specific subjects with a
view to achieving practical and concrete results by
means of negotiation aimed at securing the greatest
measure of agreement,
Stressing the need for adequate preparatory work to
ensure the success of the second session of the Conference,
Expressing the hope that the preparation for the
second session of the Conference will result in new and
determined efforts on the part of all States members of
the Conference to achieve substantial progress both in
the implementation and in the further elaboration of
international policy on development,
Noting with interest the recommendation of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity at its third session,
held at Addis Ababa from 5 to 9 November 1966, that
a meeting of the developing countries should be held
at the ministerial level to prepare for their participation
in the second session of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development,
1. Decides to convene the second session of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
at New Delhi from 1 February to 25 March 1968;
2. Calls upon the Trade and Development Board and
its subsidiary bodies to take into account the objectives
outlined in the first three paragraphs of the preamble
of the present resolution in their preparations for the

39

second session of the Conference, and to attempt to
identify the issues on which preparatory work will have
progressed sufficiently to enable specific programmes
of action to be drawn up at the second session of the
Conference by means of negotiation aimed at securing
the greatest possible measure of agreement;
3. Urges the Governments of the States members
of the Conference to ensure effective participation in
the second session of the Conference and to make the
maximum efforts, both in their preparations for the
second session and during the deliberations of the
Conference, to ensure its success, bearing in mind the
objectives referred to above;
4. Invites the specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the regional economic commissions and the United Nations Economic and Social
Office in Beirut to pay special attention, in their programmes, to preparations for the second session of the
Conference, and to take such steps as may be feasible
to extend their full co-operation in ensuring its success ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General of the Conference
to begin forthwith the preparatory work for the second
session in the light of th~ guidance given by the Trade
and Development Board and its subsidiary bodies,
which will meet in the interim, in co-operation wherever
possible with the regional economic commissions, the
United Nations Economic and Social Office in Beirut
and the appropriate international organizations.
1497th plenary meeting,
17 December 1966.
2207 (XXI). Technical assistance in trade and
related fields

The General Assembly,
Having considered Trade and Development Board
resolution 31 (IV) of 23 September 1966 on technical
assistance in tr_ade and related fields,
Taking note of the statement made by the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development on this subject at the fourth session
of the Board,27
1. Endorses the recommendations contained in Trade
and Development Board resolution 31 (IV);
2. Decides to amend paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 2029 (XX) of 22 November 1965
so as to include the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development as a
member of the Inter-Agency Consultative Board of the
United Nations Development Programme.
1497th plenary meeting,
17 December 1966.
2208 (XXI). International monetary reform

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report entitled International
Monetary Issues and the Developing Countries,28 prepared by the Expert Group on International Monetary
Issues of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, and of the comments made thereon by
the members of the Conference, including the memo21 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/6315/
Rev.1), part two, para. 177.
2 8 United Nations publication, Sales No.: 66.II.D.2.
