asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6954

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6954th meeting
Thursday, 25 April 2013, 11.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gasana/ Mr. Nduhungirehe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Rwanda)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Briens
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Menan
Mr. Meek
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its sixth session (S/2013/63)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-31305 (E)

*1331305*

S/PV.6954

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its
sixth session (S/2013/63)
The President: Under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Abulkalam
Abdul Momen, former Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of
Bangladesh, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Ranko Vilović, Chairperson
of the Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Croatia, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/63, which contains the report of the
Peacebuilding Commission on its sixth session.
I now give the floor to Mr. Momen.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): On behalf of the
members of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), I
am pleased to present the report of the Commission on
its sixth session as contained in document (S/2013/63).
We recall that it was you, Mr. President, in your
previous capacity as Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission IN 2011, who presented the report of
the PBC on its fifth session (see S/PV.6805). We are
grateful for having this year’s briefing, Sir, under your
country’s presidency of the Council.
This year’s report of the Peacebuilding Commission
is organized around the main functions and work of
the Commission, placing particular emphasis on the
results achieved and the challenges and opportunities
relating to the impact of the Commission in the field
and its relations with United Nations Headquarters.
It mainstreams the implementation of relevant
recommendations from the 2010 review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture (S/2010/393, annex)
and has incorporated a forward agenda for 2013 as an
implementation framework for those recommendations.

2

Allow me to highlight a number of issues of
particular importance from the report. First, the
reporting period saw particular attention focused on
institutional consolidation, which is crucial for the
Commission’s future role and impact. The Commission
launched an ambitious exercise to improve and clarify
its working methods, especially as they relate to its
linkage and collaboration with the work of key actors
in the field.
Secondly, during the reporting period, the
Commission continued its focus on facilitating the
work of country configurations in order to achieve
the Commission’s goals on the ground. To that end,
the Commission had embarked on a work programme
designed to support the Commission’s engagement
with the six countries on the agenda, namely, Burundi,
the Central African Republic, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Liberia and Sierra Leone. The peacebuilding process
in each of those six countries is at a different stage,
presenting different opportunities and posing different
types of challenges.
Some highlights of the Commission’s countryspecific engagement during the reporting period
included, first, support for the launching of a national
reconciliation strategy and for the first regional hub for
security and justice in Liberia; secondly, support for the
successful holding of elections in Sierra Leone; thirdly,
resource mobilization for the peacebuilding pillar of a
new poverty reduction strategy in Burundi, including
through support for the successful organization of the
Conference of Burundi’s Development Partners held in
Geneva in October 2012; and fourthly, the initiation of
a resource-mapping exercise in Guinea with a view to
supporting the development of a national aid management
and coordination system. I thank the leadership of the
respective countries for their commitment and support,
without which the Commission would have not been
able to achieve its goals.
Conversely, the disruption of the presidential
electoral process through an unconstitutional change
of Government in Guinea-Bissau on 12 April 2012
undermined the progress in peacebuilding that had
begun to take place in that country. That and the violence
witnessed in the Central African Republic towards the
end of 2012, which has led to the challenging security,
humanitarian and political situation of today, underlined
that the role of the Commission’s engagement needed to
be more comprehensive, targeted and well coordinated.
In addition, and in the absence of a broader, more

13-31305

S/PV.6954

vigorous and continuing national commitment, and in
the absence of coordinated efforts to address the root
causes of instability, the role of the Commission in
certain situations remains seriously challenged.

Council, continued during the reporting period,
underscoring the recognition of the African Union’s
central role in support of peacebuilding efforts on the
continent.

Thirdly, in parallel to the Commission’s focus on
country-specific engagement, the work undertaken
by the Commission on policy development in 2012
has given priority to partnerships as an area which
gives substance and value to the Commission’s main
functions in sustaining attention, forging coherence
and mobilizing resource for the six countries on its
agenda.

Fifthly, partnership with United Nations principal
organs is of no less significance. The report stipulates
that members elected from each of the three principal
organs need to lead the efforts to deepen and substantiate
the relations with the Peacebuilding Commission. That
is an area in which we expect to see further advances
in 2013. In 2012, however, in view of the need to
strengthen the links with United Nations field missions
and enhance the impact in the field, the Commission
placed particular emphasis on the relationship with the
Security Council and had a very meaningful interactive
dialogue with the members of the Council in July 2012.
The consideration of the Commission’s report on its
fifth session last July in the Security Council offered
an opportunity to revive the discussion on what the
2010 review described as the potential to create a new
dynamic between a more forthcoming Security Council
and a better-performing PBC.

The work of the Commission has therefore focused
on strengthening the partnership with the World Bank
and the African Development Bank. The Commission
has taken important steps towards the promotion of the
better alignment of national peacebuilding priorities
in the countries on the agenda with the engagement of
both banks in those countries, thus ensuring a greater
degree of coherence of efforts, as well as sufficient
focus on peacebuilding objectives in those countries.
Given the nexus between peace and development, the
Commission is also pursuing a thematic focus on job
creation and rule-of-law assistance in partnership with
banks and other stakeholders. The Commission sees an
important linkage between those efforts to strengthen
partnerships with key financial institutions and the
work undertaken by the Peacebuilding Fund in support
of peacebuilding priorities in the countries on the
agenda.
In that regard, the Commission has continued its
regular dialogue with the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF)
Advisory Group and the Peacebuilding Support Office,
with a view to further strengthening synergy and
harmonization.
Fourthly, the Commission sought to deepen its
working relationship with key actors in the field,
especially with senior United Nations leadership. An
informal dialogue with the Executive and Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General in agenda
countries was launched in April 2012. The dialogue
represented an important step in clarifying areas
of mutual complementarity. That is certainly a
crucial partnership requiring deeper and continuing
commitment and support from the Commission’s
membership and the United Nations top management.
In addition, dialogue with regional organizations,
including the African Union Peace and Security

13-31305

Suggestions aimed at energizing the relations
between the two bodies have been followed up,
including through the Commission’s Working Group
on Lessons Learned, which explored in November
2012 the scope of the Commission’s advisory role to
the Council on transitions of United Nations missions
in countries on the agenda. The Commission could
potentially demonstrate value added by supporting a
process of drawdown and withdrawal of United Nations
missions that is not only grounded in sound analysis
and in country-specific realities and national needs,
but also ensures that the international community
remains committed to, and cognizant of, the essential
links between peace and socioeconomic development
beyond the lifetime of United Nations peacekeeping
and political missions.
Much discussion has taken place around the
extent to which the Commission is delivering on the
high expectations that accompanied its creation in
2005. Therefore, 2012 was a year when the question
of the collective responsibility and commitment of the
membership took centre stage in the Commission’s
deliberations. I must say that while we collectively
managed to instil some sense of urgency with respect to
this topic, the task of translating such commitment into
concrete actions and contributions remains unfulfilled.

3

S/PV.6954

To that end, the High-level Event on “Peacebuilding:
The way towards sustainable peace and security”,
which was presided over by the Prime Minister of
Bangladesh in September 2012, brought together,
for the first time, a number of Heads of State and
Government, Ministers and senior officials from among
the Commission’s broader membership. The consensus
political declaration that emanated from that event
reaffirmed and reinvigorated the political commitment
to the key principles, objectives and priorities that the
Commission has consistently promoted, at both the
policy and the country-specific levels.
Finally, I cannot emphasize enough the need to
envisage a new paradigm for South-South and triangular
cooperation which could reinforce national ownership
in peacebuilding through focused support on national
capacity development and institution-building in
critical peacebuilding priorities. That is an area which
requires further commitment from Member States and
the United Nations system at large. The Peacebuilding
Commission is uniquely positioned to become a
platform for the development of this new paradigm
by piloting concrete projects of cooperation in the
countries on its agenda. The Peacebuilding Commission
can certainly facilitate the matching of needs identified
by those countries with the most relevant experience
and expertise, especially from the global South.
In closing, I must underscore that the Commission
continues to receive direct and substantive support from
the Peacebuilding Support Office. As the Commission
further seeks to strengthen linkages and ensure deeper
collaboration and synergy with the PBF and other
stakeholders, including philanthropic actors, civil
society and the private and business sectors, the role of
and the support received from the Office will become
even more crucial.
The pace at which the United Nations and the
global peacebuilding agenda are evolving testifies to
the urgency of the need to address sources of protracted
instability and the drivers of relapse into conflict. To that
end, we can no longer afford to remain in the custody
of a traditional and business-as-usual approach to the
link between security and socioeconomic development.
We shall continue to face systemic challenges, but we
must commit to facing them with the requisite resolve
and determination. We have to take bolder and more
courageous steps in support of sustainable peace and
security.

4

The President: I thank Mr. Momen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Vilović.
Mr. Vilović: Allow me to thank the Rwandan
presidency for taking the initiative in organizing
this briefing on post-conflict peacebuilding and to
express my appreciation for the opportunity to deliver
these remarks in my capacity as Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
The annual briefings to the Security Council
represent valuable opportunities to apprise the
Council of the Commission’s work, perspectives and
priority areas. My predecessor’s presentation of the
Commission’s report on its sixth session has shed light
on where the Commission stands today with its countryspecific engagement, institutional consolidation
and policy-development efforts. Stemming from
our founding resolutions, the main purpose of the
Commission is to provide advice to the Council, and
I believe that today’s briefing offers an opportunity to
reflect on the envisaged scope of, and prospects for, the
Commission’s advisory role to the Security Council.
The Commission approaches its advisory function
to the Security Council from the conviction that it can
play a useful role in helping the Council manage an
increasing workload. By focusing on and sustaining
broader international attention to situations which may
not be on the Council’s immediate radar, the PBC is
supporting the Council in ensuring that the energy and
resources invested in addressing and stabilizing conflict
situations are preserved and protected for the long term.
At the same time, we are convinced that this is a shared
responsibility requiring improved two-way interaction
between the Council and the PBC as well as much better
clarity as concerns roles and responsibilities in relation
to the other operational actors involved.
Members of the Council will recall last year’s
debate and interactive dialogue under the Colombian
presidency, which highlighted a number of issues
related to the Commission’s advisory function to the
Security Council. Those issues were captured in a
summary that was shared with the Council and is
contained in document S/2012/791. Today, I wish to
build on elements of that summary.
First, three of the missions in countries on the PBC
agenda are in the process of drawdown and transition.
We believe that the Commission can and should play
a role in support of the Council’s consideration of

13-31305

S/PV.6954

drawdown and transition strategies in those countries.
Drawing on the synergies with the Peacebuilding Fund,
the PBC’s advice in such situations could focus on
assessing progress in national peacebuilding efforts
and challenges facing those efforts; the level of support
from and commitment on the part of the international
community beyond the United Nations system; and
the specific capacities required for the United Nations
presence to continue to support long-term peacebuilding
efforts. Therefore, the Council could usefully benefit
from interaction with the PBC during the consideration
of the outcome of technical assessment missions and the
drafting of the Council’s resolutions on managing the
transition processes. In that regard, it would be helpful
if the Council were more explicit about the tasks that
the PBC should undertake in support of United Nations
leadership and actors in the field. The Working Group
on Lessons Learned has worked closely with members
of the Integration Steering Group and has developed
pertinent findings on the possible role of the PBC in
those transition contexts.
Secondly, where the PBC continues to be engaged
following the transition and exit of a United Nations
mission in a country on the PBC agenda, the Council
could also benefit from periodic updates on progress
with regard to peacebuilding and risk factors. That would
ensure that the Council remains abreast of countryspecific peacebuilding-related developments that might
require attention. The continuing collaboration between
the PBC, the Peacebuilding Support Office and all lead
United Nations departments and relevant entities in
that regard is crucial.
Thirdly, in situations where the peacebuilding
process in countries on the PBC agenda faces serious
challenges, the Security Council could draw on the
PBC’s perspectives as it considers options for its
response and formulates its strategy. The situations in
Guinea-Bissau and the Central African Republic serve
as reminders that peacebuilding is a process fraught
with many risks and that there is a need for a coordinated
response and strategy, which need to be adapted to
evolving national and regional developments. Where it
is engaged, the PBC can be viewed by the Council as
a useful instrument of the international community’s
strategy to address and reverse similar situations. At the
same time, the Commission recognizes that a crucial
element of its advisory role to the Council is to ensure,
while working closely with the senior United Nations
leadership in the field, that a timely and appropriate

13-31305

analysis of risk factors and drivers of conflict is
brought to the attention of the Council placed for its
consideration and action.
The areas and situations presented here are
inherently dynamic. There is, therefore, also a need
for dynamic information-sharing with the Council on
country-specific developments, opportunities and risks.
The Chairs of the PBC country-specific configurations
continue to value the opportunity to formally brief the
Council on the situations in the countries concerned.
We believe that more regular and substantive exchanges
could possibly be of most value to the Security Council
ahead of the Council’s field visits to countries on the
PBC agenda, upon the return from a PBC field visit
to those countries, in the process of the imminent
drawdown and exit of United Nations missions, and
in situations presenting an obvious challenge to the
peacebuilding process. We also invite the penholders of
Security Council resolutions to seek the advice of the
respective Chairs of the country-specific configurations
when drafting resolutions concerning countries under
consideration by the PBC.
In addition and most recently in its resolution
2086 (2013), the Council emphasized the need to
harness the Commission’s role in advancing and
supporting an integrated and coherent approach to
multidimensional peacekeeping mandates in countries
on its agenda. There is clearly a need to take forward
that recommendation and have additional clarity on the
scope of the Commission’s advisory role in anticipation
of relevant future referrals from the Council. We look
forward to discussing those and other suggestions in
the context of the planned informal interactive dialogue
with the Security Council to be held tomorrow.
Let me conclude by reaffirming that the PBC
is committed to enhancing its impact in the field by
empowering national actors to own and lead the
peacebuilding process and by ensuring that the United
Nations and other key actors are positioned to help
them achieve that goal. We are cognizant of the fact
that the PBC needs to continue to sharpen its tools
and learn from the lessons of its engagement. We are
also convinced that, as a parent organ providing nearly
25 per cent of the Commission’s membership and
having referred five out of six of the countries on the
PBC agenda, the Council needs to contribute to those
efforts. We must, therefore, work together to develop a
practical and meaningful partnership.

5

S/PV.6954

The President: I now give the floor to the members
of the Security Council.
Mr. Meek (United Kingdom): Thank you, Sir, for
convening this briefing this morning. Let me also begin
by thanking the current and previous Chairs of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) for their briefings.
In March this year, the Council adopted resolution
2097 (2013) on Sierra Leone, paving the way for the
transition of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone. That is a real success story. As a
Council, we paid tribute to the work of the United Nations
system and the international partners. That work was
instrumental in supporting the Government of Sierra
Leone in its efforts to build a secure peace following
the brutality of war. Sierra Leone is an example of why
the United Kingdom believes that the United Nations
plays a vital role in helping national Governments and
communities recover from the scourge of war. That is
why we are the largest contributor to the Peacebuilding
Fund, providing almost $20 million a year, and we will
shortly fulfil our promise to spend 0.7 per cent of gross
national income on official development assistance. We
have committed to spending one third of that rising aid
budget in fragile and conflict-affected States.
The United Kingdom welcomes the recent report
of the Peacebuilding Commission (S/2013/63). The
report shows that the United Nations is moving forward
on key peacebuilding issues and that the Commission
is adding value in a number of areas. The Burundi
donor conference, held in October last year, raised
$2.6 billion for that country’s peacebuilding priorities.
The Peacebuilding Commission visits to Monrovia and
Freetown provided political counsel and support as the
Missions there started to draw down, and in countries
across its agenda, the Peacebuilding Fund is providing
much-needed financing. But much work remains.
The United Kingdom remains a friend of United
Nations peacebuilding, and as friends, it is important
that we are honest. We believe the PBC has not
fully realized the potential that was envisaged for it
when it was established in 2006. We must all share
responsibility for that gap and work together to
develop the Commission into the effective, efficient
organization that it could and should be. The United
Kingdom sees three key areas for action.
First, the Commission must focus more on activities
that add value and have a real impact on the ground in
the countries on its agenda. The recent achievements

6

of the country-specific configurations should act as an
example for the Commission as a whole, and we would
like to see a much greater emphasis on country-specific
work. That should align with and take forward the New
Deal for Engagement in Fragile States, putting into
practice the Deal’s principles for engagement.
Secondly, in order to free up time and resources
to focus on countries on the PBC agenda, we must
significantly reduce the level of process and procedure
here in New York. More meetings on organizational
issues, processes and procedure means less time
available for country-focused work. The Commission
should meet less frequently and with substantive
agendas containing clear and necessary decisions to
take.
Thirdly, the Commission must continue to
strengthen relationships with United Nations missions
in those countries on its agenda. As we have seen from
some of the successes of the past year, the Commission
is most effective when it works through the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and augments
their work. The configuration Chairs should use their
convening power in New York to bring the international
system together around the work of the in-country
mission and the Government of that country.
We believe that improvement in those areas will
build the foundation for a stronger relationship between
the PBC and the main United Nations organs. With
greater focus and drive to achieve results, the PBC can
provide valuable advice to the Security Council and the
General Assembly. We look forward to the next review
of the PBC, in 2015, which will be an opportunity to look
critically at where the Commission has been successful
and where it has not. The United Kingdom stands ready
to engage constructively in those discussions over the
coming months and years. We should be ambitious in
our drive to reform the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture to ensure that it reaches its full potential
and has tangible and positive effects for the countries
on its agenda.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I thank
Ambassador Momen and Ambassador Vilović for their
briefings.
Last year we witnessed both progress and setbacks
in the peacebuilding efforts of the United Nations.
Liberia, Sierra Leone and Burundi have achieved
tangible results in their efforts to develop a national
reconciliation strategy, including the successful

13-31305

S/PV.6954

conduct of elections and resource mobilization for
a new poverty-reduction strategy. By contrast, the
Central African Republic and Guinea-Bissau relapsed
into conflict and have yet to restore constitutional order.
Tolstoy once wrote that happy families are all alike,
but every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.
Similarly, the ways in which peace is maintained often
resemble one another, while when it is disturbed, it is
disturbed in different ways for different reasons. That
is why a one-size-fits-all solution cannot work for every
conflict. Peacebuilding is constantly evolving, a process
informed by trial and error. It is therefore important
to draw lessons from both successes and failures. It
goes without saying that peacemaking, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding overlap and intertwine with each
other. For peacebuilding to be effective, therefore, early
peacebuilding tasks should be carefully incorporated
into all multidimensional peacekeeping mandates from
the beginning. Since a particular success story does
not guarantee the same result in another case, every
situation requires its own tailored prescription.
That need for a flexible response, however, presents
the Security Council with a dilemma. The instruments
that the Charter of the United Nations grants to
the Council must be used with greater consistency
and predictability. That is where the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and the Security Council can
find room for mutual cooperation in the service of a
common goal. The PBC’s architecture enables a flexible
response to each specific situation through its platform
of country-specific configurations. The Commission
can be more receptive to the particular requests of
countries on its agenda and can work with them
through its unique advocacy role, building partnerships
and marshalling resources, while the Security Council
focuses on its primary responsibility for international
peace and security. The PBC is a fund-raiser, promoter,
counsellor and adviser. In that regard, the essence of
cooperation between the Council and the PBC lies in
their division of labour.
The transition from political mission to country
team is the phase that requires the greatest cooperation
between the two bodies. In order for a transition
to proceed coherently, national development plans
must be made in consultation with the Government,
development partners and civil society, starting with
the initial planning stage. Resolution 2097 (2013),
adopted last month, extending the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone, is

13-31305

a good example; the role of the PBC in the gradual
drawdown of the political mission in Sierra Leone was
properly stressed.
All successful peacebuilding includes some
common factors: substantial progress in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) and security
sector reform (SSR); strong national ownership;
active regional engagement; and the strong support
of the international community. Support for SSR and
DDR should be a particular priority in post-conflict
peacebuilding. We have often witnessed how postconflict societies with less successful SSR and DDR
processes quickly relapse into conflict. We hope that
the Secretary-General’s report on the assessment
of United Nations support for SSR, prepared by the
Inter-Agency Security Sector Reform Task Force, will
provide comprehensive and systematic direction for
future efforts.
The significance of national ownership cannot
be overemphasized. National actors should be
empowered to own and lead the peacebuilding
process. Without engagement at the grass-roots level,
resilient peacebuilding will be elusive. Democratic and
inclusive leadership is also indispensable for national
reconciliation. The United Nations should work together
with legitimate Governments with a view to integrating
peacebuilding efforts into their national development
strategies.
Development plans in a post-conflict society are
not sustainable without stable resources. We commend
the Chair Group’s dialogue with senior officials of
the World Bank, and expect the PBC to continue its
cooperation with financial institutions, especially the
World Bank and the African Development Bank. As
suggested in the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile
States, the product of the Fourth High-level Forum on
Aid Effectiveness in Busan in 2011, we should continue
to develop an integrated development strategy and to
align those resources to get results.
My delegation hopes that the Security Council
will continue to cooperate with the PBC to maximize
the achievements of peacebuilding based on mutual
comparative advantage.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The chief task of peacebuilding is to
eliminate the root causes of conflicts and preventing
their resurgence. All of that must be primarily based
on States’ internal efforts, since in that area the role of

7

S/PV.6954

the United Nations and regional organizations is one of
support for national efforts. Peacebuilding assistance,
given its long-term nature, should provide incentives
for national Governments to rely on their own strengths.
In that context, aid can be multidimensional and can
extend to diverse areas: reaching and implementing
peace agreements; stabilizing security; strengthening
Government institutions, human rights, the rule of law
and national reconciliation; and aid to development. The
mobilization of international aid must be coordinated,
so that it deals with the principal problems and
supplements national efforts.
As far as the United Nations is concerned, we are
obliged, unfortunately, to conclude that, despite all
the efforts of peacekeeping missions, peacebuilding
offices and Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) country
configurations, aid to post-conflict countries remains
fragmentary. The importance of improving coordination
and the division of labour between participants in
the process, and of systematizing the peacebuilding
processes, is obvious. The existing architecture’s
potential is far from being fully realized.
In our view, therefore, the relevant United Nations
entities should implement their peacebuilding activities
on the basis of their mandates in order to ensure the
necessary legal basis for their own actions. Complying
with the principles of respect for the sovereignty of postconflict States and recognizing national responsibility
and national priorities for peacebuilding should be
absolute imperatives. The Government of the country
concerned, representing the interests of the whole
of society, must play a leading role in providing that
responsibility.
In our support for the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission as one of the central intergovernmental
bodies for coordinating peacebuilding assistance,
we note the added value represented by the valuable
consultative assistance it gives to the Security Council,
when requested, concerning countries on the Council’s
agenda. Within its existing mandate, the Commission
should contribute to dealing with important crosscutting
issues relating to peacebuilding that are relevant to
the entire United Nations system and that require
comprehensive discussion with Member States within
the framework of United Nations specialized entities.
Russia is an active participant in the activity of the
PBC and is committed to improving its effectiveness.
We are convinced that the Commission is a unique

8

intergovernmental body and that we should. therefore,
make full use of its potential. In that regard, it is essential
that the Commission find solutions that are acceptable
and supported by all its members. The key to that is
to improve its standing and increase, commensurately,
the interest in its work by the broader international
community.
Much remains to be done to optimize and improve
the results of the Commission’s activity. In a number of
countries on its agenda, significant results have been
achieved in terms of alleviating the causes of conflicts,
strengthening State institutions and coordinating and
mobilizing resources. However, there are also the
examples of Guinea-Bissau and the Central African
Republic, where we see a drastic deterioration of the
situation. In those cases, peacebuilding was clearly
insufficient. It is clear that formulas that work well in
some contexts do not always work well in others.
In that connection, we would like to underscore
once again the importance of the responsibility of
national Governments for the peacebuilding process
and in determining priorities, as well as the need to
precisely determine peacebuilding assistance, tailoring
it to the needs of individual States during the specific
time frame. It is counterproductive to promote the most
recent trends in peacebuilding, especially those based
on a universal model, at the expense of the pressing
needs of States.
There is no doubt that peacebuilding is a political
process. However, it is also clear that assistance for
economic development, addressing pressing social
problems and job creation can mitigate political
conflicts. The United Nations funds and programmes
play a key role in that regard.
In taking stock of the activity of the Commission
in 2012, I would like to express my appreciation
to the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh,
Mr. Abulkalam Momen, for his work as Chair of the PBC.
The past year has been eventful for the Commission,
and we welcome the results it has achieved.
A number of challenges for the future were
identified in the Commission’s report (S/2013/63). The
programme is ambitious and aimed at enhancing the
effectiveness of the Commission’s work in coordinating
international peacebuilding efforts and in formulating
recommendations to ensure continuous coordinated
international assistance to the countries on its agenda,
as well as the streamlining of its working methods.

13-31305

S/PV.6954

We are convinced that the current Chair of the
Commission, the Permanent Representative of Croatia,
Mr. Ranko Vilović, will continue to move forward
those endeavours.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for including
the issue of post-conflict peacebuilding on the agenda
of the Security Council during your presidency. I
would also like to thank Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul
Momen of Bangladesh and Ambassador Ranko Vilović
of Croatia for their statements.
The Organization, through regular debates on postconflict peacebuilding, provides the members of the
Council with the opportunity to assess the work being
done on the ground by the Peacebuilding Commission,
the country-specific configurations and the countries
on its agenda. The importance of the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission should be measured by its
real contribution to the process of reconstruction and
reconciliation and the establishment of the rule of law.
Those actions are carried out over the long term, and
the results are often not quantifiable in the short term.
Taking into account the issues that fall within
the comprehensive framework of reconstruction and
development calls for the participation of as broad a
group as possible of different actors, both national and
international, in particular the United Nations system,
in the identification of priorities. It is important that we
place greater emphasis on such an approach.
My delegation welcomes the fact that, in recent
years, collaboration with and listening to the main
beneficiaries have helped advance the agenda of the
United Nations in the field of peacebuilding. The credit
for that result is due to the Commission itself and the
peacebuilding country teams.
Togo believes that post-conflict peacebuilding
remains, first and foremost, the responsibility of the
State concerned. It goes without saying that the State’s
role is a determing factor in ensuring the success of that
endeavour, because it is up to that country to define the
priorities and establish a framework for cooperation and
partnership with the support of national, international
and regional actors.
However, it seems that, in defining priorities,
there is a problem of non-inclusiveness — of not
taking into account the interests of various parts of
the population. For example, the identification of the

13-31305

needs of vulnerable groups, in particular those of
women and children, is crucial in the peacebuilding
process. Women are the main victims of conflicts, so
it is fitting that they should be involved in all phases
of the peacebuilding process. Moreover, an inclusive
approach that takes into account all needs will facilitate
the participation of all actors and will later strengthen
national ownership of the actions undertaken within the
peacebuilding framework.
Another aspect relates to the assistance that should
be made available to post-conflict States, which are still
fragile, whatever their size and economic potential. It is
therefore important that States in the region, financial
institutions and the international community as a whole
provide their support to those countries and help them
to establish frameworks for sustainable cooperation and
partnerships, which, in our opinion, are what determine
the success of peacebuilding. In most cases, the interest
attached to a country, especially one emerging from
conflict, is determined by the wealth of its land and
not really by the need to ensure that it does not fall into
another conflict as a result of a lack of adequate support.
Since the creation of the Commission, however, we
are happy to see that the Commission is increasingly
working to reverse that kind of tendency. That is why we
believe that the African Solidarity Initiative, launched
by the African Union on 13 July 2012, which aims to
encourage and motivate African States to support the
efforts of reconstruction and development in countries
emerging from conflict and to strengthen their capacity
to that end, should be supported.
Another factor in the success of any peacebuilding
process is the coordination of actions. Given that
many institutions are involved in the peacebuilding
process, we must ensure that a framework is in place
to coordinate all the actions undertaken, so as to
avoid duplication and wasting resources and energy.
That coordination should make it possible to create
frameworks for exchanging experiences in order to
adopt actions that have been successful and consider
how the implementation of those actions can be adapted
to other countries that find themselves in similar
situations. We note with satisfaction that the report
(S/2013/63) under review shares that view. It is essential
that the Security Council provide its support in order
to implement the recommendations contained in the
report.
How long a post-conflict country remains on the
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission depends on

9

S/PV.6954

the progress achieved on the ground. In most cases, the
countries concerned and the institutions that support
them take time to establish the transitional mechanisms
between peacebuilding and the country’s assumption
of control over its situation. My country believes that
those kinds of mechanisms should be established at the
beginning of the process.
Togo continues to believe that the various tasks
assigned to the Peacebuilding Commission by the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council demonstrate the
commitment of those bodies to providing assistance
to countries emerging from conflict. They must act
in a spirit of cooperation and complementarity. The
international community should continue to sustainably
support the Commission in its efforts to promote peace
and security in post-conflict countries with a view
to ensuring that the country does not slip back into
violence.
In conclusion, my country would like to take the
opportunity of this debate to express its deep gratitude
to the Peacebuilding Commission for the satisfactory
results achieved in some countries, such as Liberia,
Sierra Leone and Burundi. Togo commends the efforts
of the countries, organizations and institutions that
support the daily work of the Commission and the
country configurations.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to convey my gratitude to Ambassador Momen and
Ambassador Vilović for their briefings.
During the past year, the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) has continued to very actively implement the
tasks entrusted to it under the relevant mandates of
the General Assembly and the Security Council to
attempt to assist post-conflict States in rebuilding
themselves, and it continues to play an important role
in that respect. Bangladesh, during its chairmanship
of the PBC, undertook the initiative in September of
organizing a high-level meeting of the PBC, thereby
lending renewed momentum to the work in the field of
peacebuilding. China wishes to express admiration for
that sterling work.
It is also necessary to recognize that peacebuilding
is a long-term, complex, difficult and comprehensive
task. In the current context, it is facing a great many
new obstacles and challenges. This state of affairs
requires serious consideration that could result in an

10

appropriate response on the part of the international
community.
The Chinese delegation would like to make the
following comments.
First, respect for the ownership of relevant
States should be one of the principles underlying all
peacebuilding. Post-conflict countries bear the main
burden for peace and security in their own territories,
and the international community should fully respect
their sovereignty and the will and provide constructive
assistance pursuant to the priorities determined by
those States themselves. We advocate working on
an equal footing with less arrogance, more friendly
consultations and fewer attempts to force recipes on the
affected countries.
Secondly, we want to help post-conflict countries
to devise comprehensive strategies for post-conflict
reconstruction in accordance with their own
specificities. All our histories are different; all our
specific circumstances are different. There is no single
model for peacebuilding. The international community
should fully abide by and respect the cultural traditions
of the countries concerned, listen attentively to their
views and not just mechanically copy existing templates.
The international community should give this in-depth
consideration.
Thirdly, socioeconomic development should be the
main way to build peace. In its peacebuilding efforts
in post-conflict States, the international community
has longtended to focus on human rights, the rule
of law and security sector reform, perhaps without
granting sufficient attention to economic and social
development. Real investment is often lacking. We
urge the international community to grant heightened
attention to the socioeconomic development of States
by providing them with more genuine assistance.
Assistance should not come with preconditions.
We hope that the PBC will look at where it can add
value, assist countries in mobilizing the necessary
resources, and coordinate the efforts undertaken by the
international community as a whole.
Fourthly, there is a need to pursue efforts aimed
at improving the working methods and effectiveness of
the PBC. We support the PBC in its desire to improve its
internal working methods, learn lessons, identify best
practices, and improve coordination and cooperation
with the main United Nations bodies, including the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the Economic

13-31305

S/PV.6954

and Social Council, among others; to involve the
international financial institutions, such as the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund; and to fully
listen to relevant regional organizations. It is important
for all of us to work together to achieve progress in
peacebuilding in post-conflict countries.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, allow me to thank the delegation of
Rwanda for having organized this informative meeting.
We would also like to express our appreciation to
Ambassadors Abulkalam Abdul Momen and Ranko
Vilović for their briefings on the recent evolution of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). We also appreciate
the 29 January report of the Commission (S/2013/63).
For Guatemala, the Peacebuilding Commission,
despite its complex architecture and its growing pains,
which have had their ups and downs, is an important
institutional link between the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council, the General Assembly
and the Bretton Woods institutions. We therefore
believe that its creation marked an important milestone
in the institutional development of the United Nations.
It became clear during the debates organized
under the Colombian presidency of the Council in July
(see S/PV.6805) and that of Morocco in December
2012 (S/PV.6897) that there is a consensus that the
Peacebuilding Commission has not yet reached its full
potential. At the same time, there also appears to be
a consensus on the enormous potential of that forum
to draw on the efforts of the Security Council in
peacekeeping in order to cover the reconstruction and
transformation stages leading to the normalization of a
country emerging from conflict.
In that regard, the United Nations has the experience
of more than six decades in addressing the needs of
societies in conflict with respect to peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and peace consolidation
and in trying to prevent countries that have emerged
from conflict from relapsing. The stages of those
different categories are not necessarily sequential;
they overlap and support one other in a reciprocal
manner. The link between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, which is the matter before
us today, is therefore especially relevant.
Ambassador Vilović noted that the main purpose
of the Commission is to provide advice to the Council,
particularly when it relates to countries on the agenda
of the Council that form part of a specific country

13-31305

configuration. With all due respect, we believe
that of equal or even greater importance is the role
contemplated in paragraph 2 of General Assembly
resolution 60/180, which refers to the need of all
interested actors in a country-specific situation — and
these certainly include the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission — to act in a coordinated
manner and, as the English expression has it, “be on
the same page”. Those coordinated efforts are also
reflected in the 2012–2013 strategy prepared by the
Peacebuilding Support Office.
Under either of those functions — advisory or
coordination — it should be recognized that there is
still a long way to go, as I said earlier, to meet the
expectations placed on the PBC when it was created.
To fulfil those expectations, there are undoubtedly
concrete actions that could be taken by the Commission,
and others that we can and should take in the Security
Council. I will mention five points.
First, although resolution 60/180 grants the Security
Council the opportunity to appoint seven members
of the Commission, including the five permanent
members, nothing prevents other Council members
from being elected as part of the representation of the
General Assembly or the Economic and Social Council.
In fact, that has happened. Last year, 11 members of
the Council were also members of the Commission, and
we have seen cases in the past — we have one such
case at the present time — whereby Council members
have presided over country-specific configurations.
Presumably, those representatives who are members
of both forums ought to bear in mind the potential for
seeking closer cooperation and mutual support.
Secondly, the Council should continue and broaden
the past practice of inviting the Chairs of the countryspecific configurations to take part in our discussions
when the country concerned is on the Council agenda.
That practice could also be expanded to other contexts,
such as informal consultations among Council members
and the country-specific configuration, when countries
that are in the process of peacebuilding slip back into
a recurrence of conflict. The current situations in the
Central African Republic and Guinea-Bissau are such
examples.
Thirdly, when drafting mandate renewals for
peacekeeping operations, it would be worthwhile to
include, when appropriate, some linkages to the agenda
of the Peacebuilding Commission. Our experts should
at least bear that possibility in mind.
11

S/PV.6954

Fourthly, and here I am borrowing an idea
from Ambassador Vilović, we should consider the
participation of the PBC in the technical assessment
missions that are carried out prior to the gradual
drawdown of a peacekeeping operation.
Fifthly, when a Security Council mission travels to a
PBC country-specific configuration, that configuration
should be involved. Similarly, when a PBC mission
travels to a country that is on the agenda of the Security
Council, consultations between both bodies should take
place.
Before concluding, I would like to refer very
briefly to Ambassador Momen’s statement, which
is organized around the main functions and work of
the Commission, placing particular emphasis on the
results achieved and the challenges and opportunities
related to the impact of the Commission in the field
and its relations at United Nations Headquarters. We
particularly appreciate the comments from Ambassador
Momen and would like to thank him for the fact that
during his presidency he launched, in September of
last year, the initiative of organizing a high-level event,
entitled “Peacebuilding: the way towards sustainable
peace and security”, which was presided over by the
Prime Minister of Bangladesh. The consensus political
declaration that emanated from that event reaffirmed
and reinvigorated the political commitment to the key
principles, objectives and priorities of the Commission.
In summary, we have the impression that both
bodies — the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission — tend to function too much like two
distinct and separate compartments, with minimum
communication sufficient only to fulfil formalities
and apparently with little enthusiasm, as was pointed
out in the recent publication by the non-governmental
organization Security Council Report dated 18 April
2013, which focused precisely on that subject. If I may
be allowed to make a personal comment, as a member
both of the Security Council and the PBC, I believe
that it is within our reach to change that situation and
overcome it.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen,
outgoing Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), and his successor, Ambassador Ranko Vilović,
for their briefings and their strong personal commitment
to the Commission.

12

A number of recent crises, such as that in GuineaBissau last spring or that which began in December in
the Central African Republic, show the extent to which
the peacebuilding process is a hard road. The United
Nations and the PBC in particular face a number of
very complicated problems. The most recent report of
the PBC (S/2013/63) quite rightly underscores both the
potential and the limitations of the Commission — a
body which would be hard tasked to singlehandedly
address the underlying causes of instability. The
support that the Commission can provide must indeed
itself be accompanied by a strong commitment on the
part of national stakeholders — national ownership is
essential in that context — and lasting support from
international partners.
The PBC has, of late, achieved encouraging
results in a number of fields. First, in terms of
political assistance, the PBC has, for example, helped
in implementing a national reconciliation strategy in
Liberia and is supporting the Government as it resumes
its responsibilities, which are being transferred back
from the United Nations Mission in Liberia.
Secondly, with regard to partnership development
and resource mobilization, the poverty reduction
strategy in Burundi, for example, was able to make
progress, which was crucially the result of cooperation
between the PBC and the World Bank. That strategy
enjoyed the support of a donors conference held in
Geneva, which provided an opportunity for dialogue
between Burundi and its partners.
Thirdly, with regard to strengthening the coherence
of activities carried out in the field of peacebuilding, I
would refer to the example of the cooperation between
the Government of Guinea and the Peacebuilding
Fund, which allowed approximately 4,000 troops to be
retired, which has contributed to progress in security
sector reform in that country.
All of that progress is positive, but efforts must be
continued so as to ensure that the Commission be able
to play its full role. Among the principles in the field
of peacebuilding, set as priorities by the SecretaryGeneral in 2012, I would like to underscore two in
particular. First, a long-term approach is essential,
because peacebuilding is a difficult process that
requires solid foundations to be laid, starting with the
rule of law, a police force and a justice system. The
absence of those elements makes it impossible for a
lasting peace to be built.

13-31305

S/PV.6954

The PBC must also enable a country to emerge from
a cycle of violence. In the absence of credible police or
military forces, it is too often armed groups that take
control of a region or a State. The current crisis in the
Central African Republic shows us the extent to which
peacebuilding is a process that is both very fragile and
reversible. The work of the PBC must therefore have a
long-term perspective.

Lastly, we believe that relations between the
Commission in New York and in the field must be
improved. For instance, there should be a more flexible
exchange of information between the Commission here
and its field offices. For example, there are regular
contacts between the Chairs of the PBC country
configurations and the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General.

Secondly, in order to be viable, peacebuilding
processes must be inclusive, that is, they should
bring together all sectors of society. The increasing
recognition of the role of women in peacebuilding
is positive. We welcome in particular the decision of
Nepal, which, on the basis of resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008), has drawn up a national action plan
to make women an integral part of peacebuilding. The
efforts of the PBC and of its Organizational Committee
regularly to address that issue should continue.

Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
thank Ambassador Momen for his capable chairmanship
of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2012 and to congratulate Ambassador
Vilović on his assumption of the Chair for 2013. I thank
them both for their briefings today.

Beyond the general principles for implementing
peacebuilding, we believe that the PBC must also
improve its methods. In that regard, there are two
critical aspects.
First, the coordinating role of the PBC must be
strengthened in order to prevent the assistance provided
to countries on its agenda from being too fragmented
or inconsistent. Within the United Nations, exchanges
among the various bodies and relevant agencies should
continue. We welcome the Security Council’s holding
of an interactive dialogue with the PBC. We are
interested in the conclusion of the Commission’s report
that proposes considering areas in which the PBC could
more closely cooperate with the General Assembly. We
also underscore the fact that subregional organizations
play an increasing role in post-conflict periods. It
is therefore important that their views be taken into
account in the context of country configurations.
A more fluid dialogue with such organizations is
desirable.
Finally, the initiatives outside the United Nations,
such as, for example, the New Deal for Engagement
in Fragile States, also merit the Commission’s
attention. The partnership between the PBC and the
international financial institutions, the private sector
and philanthropic organizations is also important. We
believe that the work in that direction must be pursued
in order to mobilize resources, identify financing gaps
and duplication and define priorities in partnership
with the State concerned.

13-31305

The United States appreciates the contributions of
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), the Peacebuilding
Fund and the Peacebuilding Support Office and
recognizes the value of the PBC as a common platform
for international actors working in support of sustainable
peace and development. From mobilizing resources to
developing partnerships and building bridges among
the different United Nations entities in support of
peacebuilding objectives, the PBC continues to evolve
to reach its full potential. We share the SecretaryGeneral’s view that strong national ownership of the
peacebuilding process, a closer relationship between
Headquarters and United Nations actors in the field and
the prioritization of resources are essential to the PBC’s
success.
In that regard, I would like to focus on three areas
where the PBC has a great opportunity for added value:
political governance, economic governance and justice
and security sector reform.
Peace and security require a basic political
agreement on the structures of Government and the rules
of politics. Effective, resilient and inclusive governance
institutions are essential to ending recurring conflict
and to enabling long-term and broad-based economic
growth and development. As President Obama said in
2009, good governance is the ingredient that can unlock
Africa’s enormous potential.
Following the successful national elections in
Sierra Leone, for example, the PBC’s role in developing
coherent and short- and long-term peacebuilding
objectives and in identifying national capacity gaps,
particularly related to governance, is increasingly
important.

13

S/PV.6954

International support however cannot substitute for
the national Government or overcome the absence of
a durable political settlement. We note that the PBC’s
engagement in Guinea-Bissau has been suspended
following the April 2012 coup d’état and that the
Central African Republic has started down a similarly
troubling path. Before the Central African Republic can
stabilize and develop, the constitutional order must be
restored and the Libreville and N’Djamena Agreements
implemented. The Commission must be prepared to
step in and facilitate international support for effective
Government institutions once conditions allow.
Unlocking the vast and untapped potential of
women as political leaders and in building governance
institutions is essential. Every effort must be made to
ensure that women are included and supported, as the
PBC helps national actors to interface with the United
Nations system, to mobilize the appropriate resources
and to generate the momentum for further support and
positive action.
Economic governance is equally important to postconflict peacebuilding and recovery. Partnerships with
the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and
regional development banks are critical since those
organizations have the tools and the expertise to build
the capacity of public finance institutions. In Burundi,
the PBC’s engagement with the international financial
institutions led to the inclusion of the peacebuilding
priorities in its second-generation poverty reduction
strategy. Furthermore, thanks in no small part to
the efforts of Ambassador Seger and the country
configuration, more than $2.5 billion was pledged at
the October 2012 Burundi partners conference.
Indeed, the PBC’s ability to mobilize resources and
to ensure the inclusivity of women and underrepresented
groups is crucial to countries transitioning from
conflict to development phases. However, donors must
have confidence in the country’s capacity to absorb and
manage its contributions responsibly.
Beyond the need for capable political and economic
governance, ordinary citizens must feel safe and secure
in their daily lives for peacebuilding to succeed. They
need to be able to trust in the rule of law and the State
security forces. Yet, in the aftermath of conflict, there
is usually a need to build up the justice sector, while
the security sector is typically in need of reform and
downsizing. Women need to take part and to be included
in reforming the institutions of law and security so that
the needs of the entire society are met. The PBC can
14

and should help sustain the political momentum for
such efforts.
In Liberia, the PBC not only facilitated the
participation of key stakeholders in establishing justice
hubs to bring security and justice services to Liberians
outside the capital. It also helped to enable a structured
road map that kept the project on track and coordinated.
We understand that the first hub is already providing
essential services, including counselling to victims of
sexual and gender-based violence.
Too often our attention is focused acutely on ending
the fighting and stopping the bloodshed but, when the
guns fall silent, the wounds of war are far from healed
and the causes of conflict far from resolved. For that
reason, the PBC remains important and must continue
to improve its effectiveness in catalysing the political
momentum and in mobilizing the resources needed to
assist countries transitioning from conflict to peace.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting to discuss the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission on its sixth session (S/2013/63). We
also express our appreciation to the Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh, Mr. Abulkalam Abdul
Momen, for his excellent leadership of the Commission
last year. I would also like to welcome the Permanent
Representative of Croatia, Mr. Ranko Vilović, as the
new Chairperson of the Commission and wish him every
success in fulfilling that demanding responsibility.
The issuance of the present report in a new
format allows for an in-depth assessment of progress
and limitations in the implementation of the
recommendations of the 2010 review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture (S/2010/393,
annex). It is noteworthy that, by drawing examples from
the experiences of the country-specific configurations,
the report places particular emphasis on the results
achieved and the challenges and opportunities related to
the Commission’s work in the countries on its agenda.
The Peacebuilding Commission was established to
bring coordination, coherence and integrity to the United
Nations peacebuilding efforts with a view to addressing
the special needs of countries emerging from conflict.
Because peacebuilding processes depend heavily on
existing circumstances on the ground and changing
global realities, such as the current international
financial situation, the Commission cannot meet all
expectations or fully secure a central role in rebuilding

13-31305

S/PV.6954

war-torn societies. The Commission’s added value will
be most apparent if it takes more practical approaches,
such as marshalling potential donors and mobilizing
resources for the countries on its agenda in line with
their priorities.
The sense of national ownership is at the core of
peacebuilding. The Governments of countries on the
Commission’s agenda bear primary responsibility
for post-conflict reconstruction policies, including
identification of their own needs and priorities. Positive
developments, such as the launch of Liberia’s national
reconciliation strategy, the successful conduct of
elections in Sierra Leone and resource mobilization
in support of a new poverty reduction strategy
in Burundi underscore the critical importance of
national ownership in and continued commitment to
peacebuilding. Serious setbacks in the Commission’s
activities caused by the crises in Guinea-Bissau and
the Central African Republic highlight the urgent need
for cardinal solutions to the root causes of recurring
instability in those countries.
Peacebuilding efforts will yield true results if
they strive to build and develop the institutional
capacities of post-conflict countries. The establishment
of viable State institutions with solid capacities is
a key prerequisite that underpins the effectiveness
of peacebuilding and fosters national ownership.
International assistance for the countries on the agenda
should be aimed at developing national systems that
are able to attract sustainable financial and technical
support.
The Commission’s efforts to strengthen partnership
with international financial institutions, such as the
World Bank and the African Development Bank, on the
basis of complementarity between their respective roles
in support of national peacebuilding strategies, should
be further continued. It is also important to establish
proper mechanisms and procedures that will ensure
greater coordination and coherence among key actors
in the field and the alignment of their activities with the
recipient Governments’ agendas.
We also underline the necessity of improved
interaction and coordination between the Commission
and senior representatives of the United Nations in the
countries concerned. That interaction will increase
the shared understanding of respective comparative
advantages, roles and responsibilities and help identify
areas where relations could be mutually reinforcing.

13-31305

I would like to conclude by commending the
dedicated work of the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations. The relevance of the Commission and
the effectiveness of its overall work are judged by the
impact of its configurations on the ground. We are
looking forward to tomorrow’s informal interactive
dialogue, where we will reflect on various aspects of
the Commission’s and configurations’ activities, assess
achievements and analyse existing challenges in a
candid and detailed manner.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I thank the
Rwandan presidency for having organized today’s
meeting. We thank the Permanent Representative of
Bangladesh, Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen,
and appreciate his dynamic and successful stewardship
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in 2012. We
also thank the Permanent Representative of Croatia,
Ambassador Ranko Vilović, for his briefing and wish
him success in his role as Chairman of the PBC for
2013.
Peacebuilding has become an integral part of
the United Nations architecture for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Embedding
peacebuilding tasks in early phases of United Nations
interventions and missions fosters stability and prevents
relapses. Last year, the Security Council’s thematic
meetings and the PBC’s own work led to coherent,
efficient and predictable responses by the United
Nations to peacebuilding in the countries emerging
from conflict.
The efforts of the Council and the PBC are focused
on the following three concepts: first, prioritizing
targeted areas of post-conflict peacebuilding to focus
on security sector reform, the rule of law, local capacitybuilding and economic revitalization; secondly, forging
a coherent and seamless response to conflicts by refining
the nexus between peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
while drawing on comparative advantage of the various
United Nations entities, with a view to ensuring stable
transition, consolidation and sustainable peace; and
thirdly, sharpening the emphasis on development
aspects to move post-conflict peacebuilding towards
recovery and socioeconomic development.
By virtue of its unique composition, the PBC is
well placed to advise the Security Council on policy
developments, institutional consolidation and countryspecific engagements with respect to post-conflict
peacebuilding. For the Security Council, the advisory

15

S/PV.6954

role of the PBC is pertinent in the context of both
specific situations and thematic issues.

should remain sensitive to the distinction between
peacebuilding and development needs.

There is a need to harness the PBC’s role in the
work of the Security Council, particularly while
conceiving peacebuilding mandates. In January, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2086 (2013), which
underscored the centrality of the PBC as an advisory
and resource mobilization body for peacebuilding. The
resolution identifies priority areas of peacebuilding in
a multidimensional peacekeeping mandate. It clarifies
and reinforces the relationships between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. The resolution helps build stronger
partnerships for a collective response to challenges to
peacekeeping, peacemaking and peacebuilding. While
steering resolution 2086 (2013) in the Council, we were
guided by our experience as a founding member of the
PBC and a leading troop contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping.

The engagement of IFIs with peacebuilding does
not diminish the importance of the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF). The catalytic role of the PBF in attracting other
sources of funding makes it an essential component of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture.

Since the creation of the PBC in 2006, we have
learned the value of aligning the strategic framework
of peacebuilding with respective national priorities
and policies. All peacebuilding endeavours should
be under complete national ownership and tailored
to local requirements. The gender perspective is very
important in peacebuilding. Lasting peace will remain
elusive without improving the conditions of women and
other vulnerable segments of society. For a long-term
economic recovery and social cohesion, women’s access
to health, education and entrepreneurship is essential.
We value the work of the country-specific
configurations of the PBC. Those configurations are
taking important initiatives in resource mobilization
through international financial institutions (IFIs) and
non-United Nations sources of funding. The success
of a country-specific configuration is ensured by its
ability to fine-tune its contributions as dynamics of
a post-conflict situation evolve. We support regular
interaction among the respective configurations, the
PBC Organizational Committee and the Security
Council so that lessons learned may be shared and
coherence promoted.
Post-conflict peacebuilding should instil confidence
and provide tangible benefits to the countries on the
agenda. Peacebuilding assistance must be distinct from
classical models of development assistance, both in
terms of target sectors and conditions attached to the
funding. As funding for peacebuilding increasingly
taps into international financial institutions, we

16

Pakistan has been contributing to the PBF. We
agree with the apt characterization of contributions to
the PBF as an “investment in peace”. Member States
and the Secretariat need to provide the PBF with the
resources and operational flexibility to make it more
efficient. Besides finances, peacebuilding initiatives
require adequate human resources. The SecretaryGeneral’s initiative on civilian capacities is important
in identifying expertise to be tailored to specific needs
in the context of for post-conflict peacebuilding.
The civilian capabilities process should stand up
to intergovernmental scrutiny and avoid duplication
of roles, and it must be compliant with United
Nations rules and procedures. As a member of the
Organizational Committee of the PBC, we reiterate our
strong commitment to and support for United Nations
peacebuilding endeavours. We share the hope that our
collective peacebuilding efforts will benefit conflictaffected peoples in different parts of the world.
Ms. King (Australia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this briefing. Allow me to
take this opportunity to thank Ambassador Momen and
Ambassador Vilović for their briefings and for their
respective leadership of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC).
This discussion and the interactive dialogue that we
will have tomorrow are very timely as we head towards
the 2015 review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture.
We all are familiar with the statistics on the relapse
of post-conflict States into violence. The situations
preoccupying the Council provide clear illustrations:
the relapse into violence in the Central African
Republic; last year’s coup in Guinea-Bissau, its fourth
since independence; and the recent violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The PBC, together with the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF) and the Peacebuilding Support Office, were
established to fill gaps in the United Nations capacity
to assist post-conflict States to avoid relapses. At

13-31305

S/PV.6954

that time, there was little in the way of peacebuilding
architecture in other forums. The field is now relatively
crowded. While it has been rightly acknowledged
that the PBC has yet to realize its full potential, there
are useful lessons we can draw on to provide it with
guidance on fulfilling its core mandate.
I will focus my remarks on three areas.
First, the PBC’s value-add and impact in the
field. The core challenge is how a New York-based
organization can make an impact on the lives of people
on the ground. The PBC works well when it uses its
comparative advantage as a Member States-based
entity to play a strong political accompaniment role.
The organization can deliver coordinated and targeted
messages at key times. We saw this in the lead-up to
Sierra Leone’s successful elections last November.
However, further efforts will be needed to
strengthen practical impact in the field. Countryspecific configurations must focus on supporting
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General,
Executive Representatives of the Secretary-General
and Resident Coordinators. They can add weight to
advocacy, mobilize Member State engagement and
draw attention in New York to threats and challenges.
Their effectiveness depends on their relationships with
host Governments and with Special Representatives and
Executive Representatives of the Secretary-General,
and the depth of their understanding of the situation on
the ground.
The second issue is partnerships. As noted in
the annual report (S/2013/63) before us today and
as mentioned by Ambassador Momen, the PBC has
made serious efforts over the past year to strengthen
partnerships and build valuable synergies with financial
institutions, especially the World Bank and the African
Development Bank. We are pleased to see those strands
coming together. Greater coherence between the PBF,
the World Bank’s State and Peacebuilding Fund and
the African Development Bank’s Fragile States Facility
helps minimize duplication and ensures that we can
leverage economies of scale. The PBC can play a strong
political role to complement the work of the financial
institutions.
Often the PBC is criticized for failure to mobilize
resources, but this is a constant challenge at the moment
in times of fiscal austerity. The PBC must therefore look
to non-traditional donors, including the private sector.

13-31305

Country configurations can help coordinate donor
efforts to minimize duplication and identify gaps.
We welcome the pilot mapping exercise of Guinea’s
peacebuilding priorities, and the Working Group on
Lessons Learned is also doing important thinking on
the organization of donor conferences, building on the
successful conference on Burundi last year.
We welcome the efforts of the PBC to support new
models of partnership between conflict-affected States
and development partners. It absolutely makes sense
for the PBC to align its country-specific commitments
with national peacebuilding priorities. For example,
the Sierra Leone and Liberia configurations have
supported the two pilot countries in implementing the
New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States by aligning
their mutual commitments with those countries’
development strategies, which is logical.
The third issue is the role of women. Engaging
women in peacebuilding settlement and post-conflict
decision-making processes is vital to ensuring
sustainable recovery and long-term peace. More effort is
needed to take forward the Secretary-General’s sevenpoint action plan on gender-responsive peacebuilding.
As an example of efforts in that area, we are
working closely with Pacific Islands chiefs of police to
support female police officers to undertake the relevant
training, and we are developing police deployment
gender strategies to promote the participation and
protection of women in conflict and post-conflict
settings.
We encourage the Peacebuilding Fund to maintain
its commitment to the Secretary-General’s target of
allocating 15 per cent of United Nations-managed
funds to projects addressing women’s needs and
empowerment.
Finally, let me say a few words on the interaction
between the Council and the PBC. The key issue is how
both bodies can work in pursuit of the same objectives.
The Council should draw on the PBC’s expertise more
readily, and the PBC should draw to the Council’s
attention emerging threats in the countries on its
agenda.
We fully agree with Ambassador Vilović’s comment
that the PBC can and should have a role during the
Council’s consideration of mandate renewals and in
transitions in United Nations missions. Sierra Leone is
a good example.

17

S/PV.6954

Similarly, in Liberia, as the United Nations Mission
in Liberia continues its transition process, the PBC
configuration is well placed to highlight to the Council
any risks to the timeline and provide guidance to it.
In concluding, let me assure the Council of our
commitment to ensuring that the PBC continues to
develop its role and strengthen its partnerships so that
it can make a real difference to the people who suffer
the most from relapses into conflict.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this briefing. We would also like to congratulate the
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh and former
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
on the outstanding work that he did during his mandate.
We would like also to congratulate Ambassador Vilović
on his assumption of the chairmanship of the PBC,
and we wish him every success in the discharge of his
mandate.
Since its creation, the PBC has played a pivotal
role. Its composition, with its members representing
various United Nations bodies, must continue to be used
effectively so as to increase its value added. The new
format of the report (S/2013/63), which we welcome,
makes it possible to highlight both the progress made
and existing gaps where the Commission should focus
its efforts. The progress made in 2012, which is based
mostly on the 2010 recommendations, is undeniable.
With regard to the mobilization of resources,
the success of the Burundi donors conference and
the work done by the Guinea configuration with the
help of the Working Group should serve as a basis
for a best-practices model that could be duplicated
elsewhere, adapting it, of course, to the specific needs
of each configuration. In addition, the strengthening of
partnerships with international and regional financial
institutions, including the World Bank and the African
Development Bank, is encouraging and should be
further developed.
As part of that strengthening, we welcome
the upcoming participation of the Peacebuilding
Support Office in the annual meeting of the African
Development Bank, to be held next May in Marrakesh.
Among the successes achieved, I would cite the
achievements made with respect to hubs for access to
regional security and justice in Liberia, in supporting
the electoral process in Sierra Leone, and in providing

18

support to the planning process for the new povertyreduction strategy in Burundi.
All of those examples are an illustration of the
political support provided by the PBC to the countries
on its agenda. Of course, gaps remain in terms of the
political accompaniment of the Commission, as was
shown by the institutional crises affecting GuineaBissau and, more recently, the Central African
Republic. The situation in those countries reminds us
of the need to attack the root causes of instability and
should encourage us to start an in-depth reflection on
the measures to take in similar situations. Of course, we
must keep in mind that it is when political instability
prevails that those countries most need the attention
and support of the international community the most.
On another topic, we note that national ownership,
a principle that is widely accepted and supported by
all, is closely linked to the strengthening of civilian
capacity. In September 2012, Morocco hosted a regional
consultation on the strengthening of civilian capacities
in the Arab world in Rabat, and we attach particular
importance to this issue for a number of reasons.
The strengthening of South-South and triangular
cooperation is a diplomatic priority for Morocco, and
over the past few years my country has developed,
in this respect, a proactive policy on the sharing of
expertise in a number of areas. However, we are aware
that there is a need to clarify how the initiatives on this
issue are to be implemented. In that respect, we support
the idea of a new paradigm under which South-South
and triangular cooperation would be able, under the
Peacebuilding Commission, to respond to the priorities
identified by the countries concerned and strengthen
national ownership.
Another crucial issue is the relationship between
the Peacebuilding Commission and the other United
Nations organs, in particular the Security Council.
Significant progress has been made in that regard.
Indeed, resolution 2097 (2013), which provides for the
progressive drawdown of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone, spells out in a
detailed manner the role of the Commission in that
sensitive process. The Commission will also be called
upon to contribute to the upcoming adaptation of the
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic.
During Morocco’s presidency of the Council in
December 2012, we convened a debate on post-conflict

13-31305

S/PV.6954

peacebuilding (S/PV.6897) that culminated in the
adoption of a presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/29).
That statement noted in particular the important role
played by the Commission in prioritizing an integrated
and coherent to peacebuilding and the relationship
between the two bodies. In the same vein, with respect
to the discussion on the situation in countries on the
Commission’s agenda, we welcome the participation
by the Chairs of the country-specific configurations
of those countries. It is clear that those configurations
provide undeniable added value and a specific
perspective that helps the Council in its consideration
of and decision-making concerning issues that are also
under consideration by the Commission.
With respect to the Peacebuilding Fund, we have
taken note of the report of the Secretary-General
(A/67/711), and we welcome the significant increase
in contributions to the Fund. As a result, we call on
the Fund to increase its support to the countries on the
agenda of the Commission and to countries that are still
fragile that request it.
Finally, we have taken particular note of the
programme of work for the future, and we reiterate
Morocco’s willingness to participate actively in the
ongoing reflection aimed at refining the work and
approach of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
Rwanda for having organized this briefing on the annual
report of the Peacebuilding Commission (S/2013/63).
Allow me to congratulate Ambassador Momen on
his dynamic chairmanship of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in
2012 and to thank him for his briefing. I also welcome
the statement of Ambassador Ranko Vilović, which
quite rightly focused on the strengthening of the
relationship between the Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission.
As our exchanges on the subject have shown, there
is consensus on how important the work of the PBC is.
Its mandate, which is based on resolutions 1645 (2005)
and 1646 (2005)and has been refined through the work
of the Organizational Committee and the countryspecific configurations, is to ensure that the countries
on its agenda do not relapse into conflict and violence.
It seeks to achieve that noble goal by providing political
support and advocacy, support to coordination among
international partners, and support for resource
mobilization. Thanks to the help of all its members and
the concerned parties in the countries on its agenda,
13-31305

and with the support of the Peacebuilding Support
Office (PBSO), the Commission achieved encouraging
success in 2012, as documented in the report before us.
Despite the progress achieved by the PBC in 2012,
the report notes that much remains to be done. I would
therefore like to focus on what we, as members of the
Security Council, can do to support the Commission in
its mandate in service to our common objective. From
the experience I have gained as Chair of the GuineaBissau country-specific configuration since February
2011 and as a member of the Council for several months
now, I would like to address three conditions that we
believe are important for the success of the PBC.
The first condition is to be found within the
countries supported by the PBC. They must find the
political will to rise above the deeply rooted causes
of the conflicts of the past: poverty; socioeconomic
exclusion; political, ethnic and identity-based rivalries;
corruption; bad governance; and external impacts and
interference. We all recognize that those primarily
responsible for peacebuilding are the State entities of
the country in question, foremost among which is the
Government. It is in that respect that the Commission
can and must establish trusting partnerships in
which it identifies and supports the reformers within
Governments who are prepared to fully invest in the
future of their country and work for the good of its
citizens.
The six countries supported by the PBC have
highlighted their willingness to emerge from their
fragile situation by joining the Group of Seven Plus
and contributing to the creation of the New Deal for
Engagement in Fragile States. That solemn commitment
is primarily centred on cooperation between a
national Government desirous to fulfil its duties and
its international partners desirous to cooperate in
a responsible and sustainable manner. It also sets
the milestones for an irreversible exit from a fragile
situation by putting forward a unique national vision
and transition plan. In that respect, we believe that
additional efforts must be made to align peacebuilding
commitments with a given country’s vision for the
success of its transition.
On a more technical level, we believe that the
civilian capacities initiative is a good chance to simplify
and accelerate the strengthening of the institutional
capacities in the countries on the PBC agenda. At the
same time, we must remain aware of the fact that the
countries supported by the PBC should be viewed in
19

S/PV.6954

their regional context. The common and cross-border
challenges and obstacles involved in peacebuilding
must necessarily be part of our analysis so that we can
find appropriate solutions to them. To that end, the
country-specific configurations of the countries that are
members of the Mano River Union — Guinea-Bissau,
Liberia and Sierra Leone — are planning a meeting on
the challenges that face the region as a whole, with the
help and under the guidance of the Secretary General
of the Union.
In 2012, during the debate held on this issue
(S/PV.6897), almost every Council member highlighted
the importance of the improved coordination of
peacebuilding activities, and most wanted to see it
done by the country-specific configurations of the
Commission. Such coordination requires close ties
among all the international stakeholders that support
peacebuilding and the strengthening of the State in the
countries in question. That will be carried out primarily
within the countries themselves, through the United
Nations high representatives on the ground, as well as
in New York.
The second condition that is necessary for
the success of the Peacebuilding Commission is a
Peacebuilding Support Office that is strong and capable
of playing the support and coordination role within the
United Nations system that is expected of it. Under the
firm hand of Assistant Secretary-General Judy ChengHopkins, the personnel of the Peacebuilding Support
Office has done commendable work.
Like other Council members, we believe that
the Peacebuilding Commission is most useful in its
country-specific configurations. Therefore, the Office
must devote more significant resources to support for
those configurations. The PBSO must also take on a
central role as coordinator of peacebuilding work
within the United Nations system, both to ensure a
better exchange of information and analysis between
the various departments and entities of the system and
the country-specific configurations, and to contribute
to including, in a crosscutting manner, the idea of
peacebuilding in the work of the United Nations.
In that context, maintaining triangular, close and
constructive relationships of trust between country
configurations, high United Nations officials on the
ground, the Special Representatives and executives of
the Secretary-General, the resident coordinators and the
Peacebuilding Support Office is particularly important.

20

The third condition for success is that we must
overcome the uncertainties that seem to persist
in relations between the Security Council and the
Commission. The success or failure of a peacebuilding
process affects the Council as well as the Commission.
The work and responsibilities of the Council and the
Commission are inextricably entwined — a fact that
is also reflected in their overlapping makeups. Thus
the five permanent members of the Council also
have permanent seats on the PBC’s Organizational
Committee. Guatemala and Morocco will participate
in its work in 2013. As one of the principal troopcontributing countries, Pakistan is active in the
Commission.
Finally, Luxembourg, a non-permanent member
of the Council in 2013 and 2014, has chaired the
Guinea country configuration since February 2011.
I would therefore like to reiterate in particular the
recommendation that the Chairs of the country
configurations be allowed to participate in the Council’s
private consultations. Luxembourg is convinced that
it can bring added value in terms of analysis and
perspective. It can help shed light on the root causes
of conflicts, especially socioeconomic factors and the
effects of exclusion, through which countries run the risk
of relapsing into conflict. The country configurations
may be able to support States more closely than the
Council can; their input, based on a relationship of trust
established with the country’s authorities, can only
be of benefit to the Council’s consultations. I would
also like to encourage my colleagues on the Council
who will be assuming the presidency in the next few
months to consider inviting the Chairs of the country
configurations to private consultations, particularly
when discussing mandate renewals.
I welcome the possibility of engaging in deeper
discussions at the interactive dialogue that will be
held tomorrow between the country representatives,
along with the Commission, the Chairs of the country
configurations and the members of the Security
Council.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
will try to be brief, since my positions coincide with
a number of the suggestions made by my colleagues. I
would like to thank Rwanda for having organized this
meeting on the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), and the Chair of the PBC and Mr. Abulkalam
Abdul Momen of Bangladesh for their statements.

13-31305

S/PV.6954

As noted in the 2010 review of the peacebuilding
architecture (S/2010/393, annex), an effective response
on the part of the Organization is required to produce
a broad and coordinated strategy based on local
authorities’ identification of priorities so as to establish
goals and specific deadlines. The review also stated
that this task requires countries to undertake activities
promoting humanitarian assistance and the restoration
of the rule of law, develop plans for security and justice
policies, and promote sustainable development and a
vigorous and democratic policy aimed at protecting and
promoting human rights. Those challenges are still very
much with us, and we feel it is important to support
a peacebuilding strategy in post-conflict situations
based on three elements that various speakers have
highlighted. The first of these is the issue of national
responsibility, the second is coordination with the
United Nations, and the third is the complementarity of
regional organizations.
The first of these areas, the principle of national
responsibility in peacebuilding activities, is a priority.
At the same time, it must be founded on the protection and
promotion of human rights, ensuring the involvement
of society as a whole, without any discrimination,
and encouraging the conditions and opportunities
that allow all to participate on an equal footing. Such
involvement and broad-based participation, without
discrimination or exclusion, should be reflected
throughout the entire reconstruction process and based
on the priorities established by the local authorities
and demanded by society as a whole. We realize that
this is complex and difficult, but what is important is
consensus and agreement; that is the best way to deal
with such situations effectively and legitimately and to
address the challenges of the realities that emerge after
a conflict.
We are pleased to see that in its 2012 programme
the PBC reaffirmed the centrality of a strong national
role in peacebuilding, as exemplified by the its support
during the transition of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia, and for the holding of free, fair and peaceful
elections in Sierra Leone — long sought by the
international community — as well as the mobilization
of resources in support of a new poverty-reduction
strategy in Burundi. All of these unquestionably
demonstrate the real and potential importance of the
work of the PBC, shown on the practical level in its
ability to mobilize, promote and launch constructive
dialogue with the relevant national actors.

13-31305

Regrettably, the collapse of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau interrupted the electoral process there
during the period covered by the report (S/2013/63).
And, most recently, the failure of constitutional order
in the Central African Republic was preceded and
followed by renewed hostile activities, revealing the
limits of the PBC’s ability to help countries if the
countries themselves do not possess a credible, firm and
stable national commitment, and if they cannot take the
necessary steps themselves to address the fundamental
causes that can lead to instability or situations where
conflict will overwhelm peace. It is clear that the
degree of legitimacy that the PBC’s political support
can bestow on countries on its agenda must be sustained
and combined, as has been said, with the effective, clear
commitment of the countries themselves.
For the second aspect, the coordination of the
peacebuilding efforts of the United Nations, the
Commission is in a privileged position when it comes
to mobilizing and making assistance with resources
for peacebuilding activities — financial, technical
and political — more effective, as well as in its ability
to establish agreements and provide strategic links
with regional and international actors in order to help
ensure that every effort contributes to strengthening
institutions and is in line with the country’s priorities.
On that point and because I promised to be concise,
the representatives of China and other countries
underscored an intangible but decisive factor that arises
when financial, economic or technical cooperation is
being established with countries that request and need
it. If we consider the lessons learned in the cases of our
countries in Latin America, there is a very high social,
economic, cultural and institutional cost involved.
Based on lessons learned, we support the idea that
such cooperation cannot be used as the sole model or
as an imposed solution, particularly when attempts are
made to continue imposing such models or solutions
even after economic growth and social inclusion have
clearly failed. That is not only the case in countries
in my region; it is also clear that such one-size-fitsall solutions being imposed on countries are today
actually impeding and undermining the possibilities
for well-being, social cohesion and the rule of law in
the countries concerned.
Therefore, we should not impose solutions, but
rather should favour them; we should not preach, but
rather discuss and respect the will and the priorities of
the countries concerned. The bottom line should be full

21

S/PV.6954

respect for the rule of law and human rights. At the
same time, as noted by the Ambassador of Guatemala,
it is not enough to have a more fluid, ongoing, frank
and strategic relationship between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Security Council. We must also
look at the capacity and functions of all of the parts of
the Organization and ensure that there is an efficient,
comprehensive and clear link among them.
When we talk about cooperation with post-conflict
countries and societies, I think it would also be very
interesting to consider what is happening with regard to
financial cooperation. What is the situation with regard
to the conditions for access to credit, for example,
that are imposed on post-conflict countries? What is
happening with economic and financial cooperation and
the need to guarantee gradual, progressive, continuous
and effective access for post-conflict societies to
universal economic, social and cultural rights, not to
mention political and civilian rights, particularly with
regard to women’s equality, education, culture, jobs for
young people and the human rights of children. I think
that all of those aspects must be considered as well
because we are discussing the conditionalities tied to
financing and cooperation mechanisms in other forums
and bodies outside of the Organization.
The practice of inviting the Chairs of the country
configurations for Liberia and Sierra Leone to inform
the Council before renewing the mandates of the
peacekeeping missions undoubtedly ensures that the
Commission can fully carry out the advisory role
assigned to it by the United Nations and enables the
Security Council to draw further on the experience of
the Peacebuilding Commission. We believe that this
practice should be applied to the other countries on the
Commission’s agenda where there is a United Nations
presence on the ground, as we saw recently with the
Central African Republic, and where developments
are incompatible with the peacebuilding agenda in
the country. The interactive dialogue scheduled for
tomorrow with the Chairs of the country configurations
of the Peacebuilding Commission, which recently has
followed Security Council meetings on the subject,
certainly affords us a great opportunity to think across
the board about the core problems and challenges, not
only for the Peacebuilding Commission, but also for the
Council.
The issue of the associations and the promotion
of cohesion leads me to affirm, as my last point, that
the role of regional organizations and subregional

22

organizations, as established under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, entails the need
to strengthen the capacities of the regional systems
to support countries recovering and rebuilding
after a conflict. In that regard, I think it would also
be interesting to include the model of South-South
cooperation, which is governed by the principles of
complementarity and solidarity. The progress that we
have made in focusing on South-South cooperation could
also help us to understand and guide us in how we think
about the role of regional and subregional cooperation
with the understanding that it is only the principles
of complementarity and solidarity that should really
guide us. That is because once again we are seeing that
the lack of security in and destablization of a country
affect security and stability in neighbouring countries.
If a region is unstable, we cannot expect every country
there to develop and prosper.
Therefore, that relationship and link between postconflict countries with regional organizations has key
strategic power. It does not exclude the mission and
functions of the United Nations as an international
system, but gives it predictability that further strengths
the complex and challenging stage of ensuring lasting
peace, which, as we know, goes hand in hand with
political stability and social justice.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Rwanda.
I would like to thank the former Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative
of
Bangladesh,
Ambassador
Abulkalam Abdul Momen, and the current Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and Permanent
Representative of Croatia, Ambassador Ranko Vilović,
for their statements.
Let me start by saying that Rwanda considers
peacebuilding processes to be of vital importance
and constitutes a fundamental stage if countries are
to overcome the root causes of conflicts. Within the
United Nations system, the Peacebuilding Commission
has been given the role of proposing and advising on
strategies for post-conflict recovery and bringing
together all the relevant actors involved in political,
financial and technical resource mobilization. That
continues to be an important, yet very complex and
challenging role. I also believe that the Security Council
can and should contribute to the Commission’s effort to
play such a role.

13-31305

S/PV.6954

Therefore, my statement today will focus on two
main issues: first, the impact and effectiveness of
the Peacebuilding Commission, and secondly, the
relationship of the Peacebuilding Commission with the
Security Council.
With regard to the impact and effectiveness of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Rwanda believes that the
Commission can have an impact only if it is able to
leverage its unique membership structure by bringing
political support to its engagement in the field, as well
as within intergovernmental forums and with strong
advocacy. Furthermore, being on the PBC agenda must
entail certain responsibilities and expectations, such
as readiness to undertake specific financial, political
and technical tasks or to share expertise and experience
around country-specific priority areas.
Collective support for the countries on the PBC
agenda should focus on building national capacities.
We know from experience that there is no substitute
for strengthening national institutions as the only way
to achieve sustainable results. The generation of local
and national capacities and ownership of processes,
strategies and policies are indispensable to averting
a relapse into conflict. It is of the utmost importance
to create the conditions for countries to enjoy their
sovereign rights, generate development and promote
the welfare of their populations.
Within the PBC’s unique membership structure,
there is a wealth of expertise and experience, as well
as financial resources, which each member should
be prepared to share and contribute depending on
its capacities and comparative advantages. The
Commission could become a viable platform for
promoting South-South cooperation that is focused on
experience-sharing in strengthening core Government
functions and the development of core national
institutions.
There is also a need for coordination and coherence
within the United Nations. Rwanda calls upon the PBC
to maintain mutually reinforcing relations with the
senior United Nations leadership in the field. The PBC
can put the political weight of its membership behind
the United Nations leadership at the country level,
and the United Nations missions are expected in turn
to support and pursue the PBC areas of engagement
and overall objectives. We also believe that the PBC
should support the United Nations in delivering as one,
remain focused on nationally identified priorities in
the field, and ensure that United Nations guidance to
13-31305

field missions is aligned with national peacebuilding
priorities.
Coordination and coherence are relevant not only
between the PBC and United Nations entities, but also
among external actors. The PBC should continue to
explore practical ways to align such activities as the
assessment and planning of bilateral, regional and
multilateral actors behind national peacebuilding
priorities. Regional and subregional organizations play
an important role in that process. The World Bank and
the African Development Bank play an important role
in supporting intermediate and long-term recovery
and in rebuilding the social, economic and financial
structures of countries in transition from conflict.
Resource mobilization is also linked to coherence
and coordination, as well as to political progress. We call
for continued advocacy on behalf of the countries on the
agenda of the PBC in order to help underscore political
and socioeconomic progress to attract assistance and/
or investment, as well as to identify entry points to tap
into the potential of foundations, the private sector and
other non-traditional donors.
It is also important to pursue the mapping of
capacities, actors and resource flows with a view to
identifying gaps, channeling the necessary resources to
fill them, and supporting the creation of viable national
donor coordination mechanisms. We can therefore
certainly conclude that the effectiveness and strength of
the PBC lie in the capacity and readiness of its members
to use it as the linchpin of multilateral and coordinated
support to sustainable peace and development, and to
bridge the traditional gap between the global security
and development architectures.
On the relationship between the Security Council
and the PBC, let me first emphasize that the joint
membership should play a leading role in guiding the
nature and scope of the PBC advisory role. Among other
things, the PBC should be tasked with monitoring the
effectiveness of the peacebuilding mandates of United
Nations missions, and suggest course adjustments as
necessary. The PBC should be asked by the Council
to provide specific information on coherence among
key actors, the support of international partners, the
political commitment of national actors, and risks to
the peacebuilding process in the countries concerned.
In countries on its agenda, the PBC is in a good
position to support a successful and smooth transition
and drawdown of United Nations missions. The Security

23

S/PV.6954

Council needs to provide clarity on the division of roles
and responsibilities between the PBC and the senior
United Nations leadership in the field, and ensure
that United Nations missions report on support to the
peacebuilding priority areas and to PBC engagement
in these areas. In order to improve the modalities of
engagement and interaction, we agree with the PBC
Chairperson that there is a need for greater use of
informal interactive dialogues, with particular attention
to timing and purpose.
In that spirit, and building on the initiative of the
Colombian presidency of July 2012, Rwanda will hold

an interactive dialogue among the Security Council, the
leadership of the Commission and the countries on its
agenda in order to provide an opportunity to exchange
opinions on how we can further strengthen the nature
and scope of the Commission’s advisory role to the
Security Council.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

24

13-31305
