S/2000/1133

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 November 2000
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
A letter dated 24 October 2000, addressed to the President of the Security
Council, was handed to the President by Bernard Grandjean, President of the
Federation of International Civil Servants’ Associations, on 28 November 2000. It is
hereby circulated for the attention of the members of the Council (see annex).

00-77313 (E) 301100
`````````

S/2000/1133

Annex
Letter dated 24 October 2000 from the President of the
Coordinating Committee for International Staff Unions and
Associations of the United Nations System and the President of the
Federation of International Civil Servants’ Associations
On behalf of the global staff of the United Nations system represented by the
Coordinating Committee for International Staff Unions and Associations of the
United Nations System (CCISUA), and the Federation of International Civil
Servants’ Associations (FICSA), we have the honour to transmit to you a petition on
the safety and security of United Nations staff, signed by over 12,000 staff
members. Through their signatures, the staff express their desire for the Security
Council to convene a special meeting of the Council for the purpose of addressing
safety and security problems faced by United Nations staff and associated personnel,
especially when on mission assignments.
Since September 1999 alone, 84 civilian and military personnel have been
killed and on average two major incidents involving rape, physical assault, theft and
other violations of individual rights have been reported each day.
We all decried the most recent tragic incidents in West Timor and Guinea,
involving the killing of four colleagues from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), as unacceptable and the worldwide marches
in solidarity with our slain colleagues was testimony to our outrage. We were
gratified that the Security Council, by its resolution 1319 (2000) condemned this
outrageous and contemptible act against unarmed international staff who were in
West Timor to help the refugees and reiterated its condemnation of the murder of
two peacekeepers of the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
and attacks on the United Nations presence in East Timor. Barely a few days later, a
riot involving West Timor militia members almost led to further casualties involving
other UNHCR colleagues. We are convinced that comprehensive mission planning, a
more effective early warning system and preventive measures, as supported by the
Security Council declaration on the occasion of the Millennium Summit, would go a
long way to address and contain such dangers more effectively. This is why we are
concerned that an acute shortage of funds and resources hinders the implementation
of practical measures, which have widely been recognized as essential to bolster
staff security. The limited acceptance and adherence to international legal
instruments and conventions by many States, especially those where security
transgressions occur, add to the complexities in addressing this multidimensional
issue effectively.
In that context, the staff are fully aware of the concerns of the Security Council
as reflected in its various resolutions and express their appreciation to Council
members for their support for staff safety and security.

2

S/2000/1133

In the light of the foregoing, the staff of the common system of the United
Nations suggest that the Security Council convene a meeting that is especially
dedicated to this issue. In such a meeting, the Security Council may wish to draw
upon the various initiatives of the Secretary-General, which we fully support, and
invite the staff representatives to present their perspectives and suggestions for
further practical measures.
(Signed) Mehri Madarshahi
President, CCISUA
(Signed) Bernard Grandjean
President, FICSA

3

S/2000/1133

Appendix
Petition to the members of the Security Council
(Sponsored by the Coordinating Committee for International Staff Unions and
Associations of the United Nations System (CCISUA) and the Federation of
International Civil Servants’ Associations (FICSA))
Dear Mr. President,
We, the undersigned Staff of the United Nations system, unite globally to
strongly urge the members of the Security Council to hold a special session on staff
safety and security to address the prevailing problems faced by United Nations staff
and associated personnel while in the line of duty.
Over 200 civilian staff members have been killed and 228 taken hostage or
kidnapped in the past eight years. Moreover, in the same period, there have been
nearly 300 reported violent incidents against United Nations staff, including violent
robbery, physical assault and rape.
With the most recent incident in West Timor, where three staff members of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees were killed and
scores were injured, this unacceptable trend has continued at an alarming pace. It is
our conviction that this tragedy could have been avoided if a more effective early
warning system had been in place and preventive measures, including support from
the host Government, had been provided in a timely manner. The lack of sustainable
financial resources to deal effectively with this multidimensional issue is an
important element of this predicament. The commitment of our Member States to
the safety and security of the international civil service is essential. To that effect, a
whole series of practical measures are required to translate these commitments into
reality, if we are to continue to fulfil our mandate.
The staff of the United Nations system are deeply distressed that preventive
and preparatory measures for staff safety and security have not become an integral
part of the peacekeeping and peace-building efforts. This important issue should
form part of the special session of the Security Council, in which staff
representatives should be invited to participate.
[12,000 signatures follow]

4
