Calls upon every nation

C

11. To settle international disputes by peaceful
means and to co-operate in supporting United
Nations efforts to resolve outstanding problems;

The General Assembly,
Considering its recommendations regarding the
disposal of the former Italian colonies,
Calls upon the Interim Committee of the Genel;ll Assembly to study the procedure to be
adopted to delimit the boundaries of the former Italian colonies in so far as they are not
already fixed by international agreement, and
report with conclusions to the fifth regular session
of the General Assembly.

12. To co-operate to attain the effective international regulation of conventional armaments ;
and
13. To agree to the exercise of national sovereignty jointly with other nations to the extent
necessary to attain international control of atomic
energy which would make effective the prohibition of atomic weapons and assure the use of
atomic energy for peaceful purposes only.

250th plenary meeeting,
21 November 1949.

261st plenary meeting,
1 December 1949.

290 (IV). Essentials of peace
The General Assembly

291 (IV). Promotion of the stability of
international relations in the Far
East

1. Declares that the Charter of the United Nations, the most solemn pact of peace in history,
lay» down basic principles necessary for an enduring peace; that disregard of these principles is
primarily responsible for the continuance of international tension ; and that it is urgently necessary
for all Members to act in accordance with these
principles in the spirit of co-operation on which
the United Nations was founded;

Whereas the peoples of the United Nations
have expressed in the Charter of the United Nations their determination to practise tolerance,
and to live together in peace with one another as
good neighbours and to unite their strength to
maintain international peace and security, and to
that end the Members of the United Nations have
obligated themselves to carry out the purposes
and principles set forth in the Charter,

Calls upon every nation
2. To refrain from threatening or using force
contrary to the Charter ;
3. To refrain from any threats or act», direct
or indirect, aimed at impairing the freedom, independence or integrity of any State, or at fomenting civil strife and subverting the will of the
people in any State;

Whereas it is a purpose of the United Nations
to develop friendly relations among nations based
on respect for the principles of equal rights and
self-determination 0f peoples,
Whereas the organization of the United Nations is based on the principle of the sovereign
equality of all its Members and on respect for
international agreements,

4. To carry out in good faith its international
agreements;
5. To afford all United Nations bodies full
co-operation and free access in the performance of
the tasks assigned to them under the Charter ;

Whereas the Charter calls upon all Members
to refrain in their international relations from
the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any State,
or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations,

6. To promote, in recognition of the paramount
importance of preserving the dignity and worth
of the human person, full freedom for the peaceful
expression of political opposition, full opportunity
for the exercise of religious freedom and full
respect for all the other fundamental rights expressed in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights;

The General Assembly,
Desiring to promote the stability of international relations in the Far East,
Calls upon all States:

7. To promote nationally a,id through international co-operation, efforts to achieve and sustain
higher standards of living for all peoples ;

1. To respect the political independence of
China and to be guided by the principles of the
United Nations in their relations with China;

8. To remove the barriers which deny to peoples the free exchange of information and ideas
essential to international understanding and
peace;

2. To respect the right of the people of China,
now and in the future, to choose freely their
political institutions and to maintain a government independent of foreign control ;

Calls upon every Member

3. To
China;

9. To participate fully in all the work of the
United Nations;

respect existing treaties relating to

4. To refrain from (a) seeking to acquire
spheres of influence or to create foreign-controlled
regimes within the territory of China ; ( b) seeking to obtain special rights or privileges within
the territory of China.

Calls upon the five permanent members of the
Security Cou•cil
10. To broaden progressively their co-operatipn and to exercise restraint in the use of the
veto in order to make the Security Council a
more effective instrument for maintaining peace;

273rd plenary meeting,
8 December 1949.
13
