S/PV.7469

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7469th meeting

Tuesday, 23 June 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Adnin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Stehelin
Mr. Hmoud
Mr. Baublys
Mr. Taula
Mr. Adejola
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-18936 (E)
*1518936*

S/PV.7469

Non-proliferation

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006)
The President: At this meeting, the Security
Council will hear a briefing by Ambassador Román
Oyarzun Marchesi, Permanent Representative of
Spain, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour to present the report of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), in accordance with paragraph 18 of that
resolution. The present report covers the period from
24 March to 22 June, during which time the Committee
held an informal meeting on 1 June and carried out
additional activities, using the no-objection procedure
provided for in paragraph 15 of the guidelines for
conducting its work.
Taking into account the evolution of events relating
to the Joint Plan of Action, the Committee reiterates its
support to all parties in their efforts to hold negotiations
aimed at achieving a broad agreement.
I would like to reiterate that the measures imposed
by the Security Council under resolutions 1737 (2006),
1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010) remain
in full effect while negotiations between the P5+1
and the Islamic Republic of Iran continue, and that
Member States remain under the obligation to apply
them. The Committee continues to fully support the
implementation of all relevant resolutions and stands
ready to provide guidance to those Member States that
request assistance.
During the reporting period, the Committee was
informed of no new incidents. With respect to prior
events investigated by the Panel of Experts, I would like
to recall that the Committee has been in touch with the
Islamic Republic of Iran on a number of occasions in

2/10

23/06/2015

order to convey its observations. The Islamic Republic
of Iran has not yet responded, and the Committee
continues to urge it to do so.
The Committee continues to provide States
and international organizations with assistance in
implementing the relevant Security Council measures.
That includes analysing whether or not the proposals
for technical assistance to the Islamic Republic of
Iran, which cover a broad array of fields, from energy
efficiency to the protection of the ozone layer, as
well as proposals for other kinds of cooperation, are
in violation of the sanctions regimes. The Committee
welcomes such collaboration on matters relating to
implementation and compliance, and encourages the
parties to continue to request the Committee’s guidance
with respect to the implementation of the Council’s
measures.
In accordance with paragraph 5 of resolution 1737
(2006), the Committee was notified by one Member
State about the expected delivery of equipment to be
used in a light-water reactor at the Bushehr nuclear
plant. Regarding actions taken by Member States
to implement the relevant measures of the Security
Council, the Committee encourages those Member
States that have not yet submitted reports to do so as
soon as possible, in recognition of the importance of
national implementation reports for promoting the
implementation of sanctions measures.
With regard to the Panel of Experts, the Committee
heard a briefing on the final report on the mandate of
the Panel of Experts (S/2015/401) in the framework of
its informal consultations, which were held on 1 June,
and had the opportunity to review that report with the
Panel, as required in paragraph 2 of resolution 2159
(2014). On 1 June the Council received the report, the
text of which may be viewed in all the official languages
of the United Nations. The report contains observations
that can serve as a useful guide for Member States
when it comes time to implement the measures set forth
in resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008)
and 1929 (2010). The Committee notes that the Panel
has not issued any new recommendations in addition
to those contained in its previous final reports. The
Committee will continue to study the report and to
consider whether additional follow-up measures will be
needed in the light of its conclusions.
Furthermore, I would like to state that, following
the 9 June decision adopted by the Council in resolution

15-18936

23/06/2015

Non-proliferation

2224 (2015) to extend the mandate of the Panel of
Experts until 9 July 2016, the Bureau has undertaken
the required administrative procedures concerning
nominations to the Panel. With respect to the activities
conducted by the Panel over the past three months, I wish
to point out that it participated in a series of activities
that are enumerated in the annex to the current report.
Finally, while the Committee reiterates that the
primary responsibility for applying the provisions of
resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and
1929 (2010) resides with Member States, the Committee
is prepared to facilitate the implementation of those
measures.
The President: I thank Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) and its Chair, as well as the Panel of Experts, for
their continued work in supporting implementation of
the Council’s resolutions on Iran.
This briefing comes at a crucial moment for
Iran. Negotiations between Iran and the E3+3 on a
comprehensive agreement on Iran’s nuclear programme
will reach their conclusion in the coming days. We
hope that a deal can be reached by the deadline on
next Tuesday. The E3+3 and Iran agreed on the key
parameters for a comprehensive agreement in Lausanne
on 2 April. That was a major milestone and formed the
basis for what could be a very good deal — one that is
durable and verifiable and will, if fully implemented,
address our proliferation concerns.
There is, however, much to be done in very little
time. Important political and technical issues still
need to be resolved before we have a final agreement.
Diplomats and technical experts from the E3+3 and
Iran are currently meeting in an effort to finalize
a comprehensive agreement by 30 June. In parallel
to those negotiations, the E3+3 and Iran have been
implementing their commitments under the Joint Plan
of Action. I thank my fellow E3+3 members for their
support in that effort.
But as this report reminds us, while negotiations
continue, the bulk of sanctions remain in place and
must continue to be enforced in full. That includes all
United Nations sanctions and all obligations on Member

S/PV.7469

States arising from Council resolutions on the issue.
The lifting of sanctions should act as an incentive for
Iran to conclude the negotiations on a comprehensive
agreement.
Turning to the work of the Committee, I am
grateful for the crucial role that it plays in supporting
the enforcement of the relevant Council sanctions
measures on Iran. We also welcome the ongoing work
of the Panel of Experts and the Council’s decision to
extend the Panel’s mandate until 9 July 2016.
We support the Committee’s continued guidance
and assistance to Member States and international
organizations. But we are disappointed at Iran’s
continued failure to respond to past requests from
the Committee for information on various incidents
of concern. Once again, we urge Iran to engage
constructively with the Committee on those requests.
The United Kingdom remains committed to
finding a peaceful and lasting negotiated solution to the
Iran nuclear issue. A negotiated settlement with Iran
that is durable and verifiable and that addresses our
proliferation concerns is the best way to stop Iran from
developing a nuclear weapons capability.
A comprehensive deal with Iran is in all our
interests. For the international community it would
provide reassurance that Iran’s nuclear programme is
exclusively for peaceful purposes at a time of great
instability in the region. For Iran, it would mean,
ultimately, the lifting of all sanctions imposed as a
result of Iran’s nuclear programme. This would have
a huge impact on Iran’s economy and would improve
the day-to-day lives of ordinary Iranians over time.
Furthermore, it would present a real opportunity to
reset relationships with the international community.
Should it fail to seize this opportunity, Iran faces
further years in isolation, to the detriment of its people,
its economy and its standing in the region. We hope that
will not be the case.
In order to help secure a better future for Iran,
we will continue to make every effort to find a
comprehensive agreement. We look to Iran to do the
same.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Oyarzun for his briefing.
We may be entering a critical moment in the
Security Council’s consideration of the Iranian nuclear

15-189363/10

S/PV.7469

Non-proliferation

issue. For almost nine years, the Security Council has
acted in response to concerns about the nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme. By applying progressively stronger
sanctions, the Council has supported international
nuclear diplomacy and has helped bring us closer to
resolving this difficult issue through negotiations.
As we meet today, negotiators from Iran and the
P5+1 countries are meeting in Vienna to finalize a
comprehensive nuclear deal. That work is hard, and
success is not guaranteed. This past spring, we made
great progress in Lausanne, Switzerland, by agreeing
to the parameters of a nuclear deal, but there is still
much work to be done. We still need to flesh out
important details and resolve some challenging issues
where there is still disagreement. Until there is a deal,
the Security Council must continue to stand behind its
previous resolutions on the Iranian nuclear issue. The
sanctions that the Council has imposed remain in force.
Member States must continue to implement them fully,
as required by Council resolutions.
Additionally, the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006), with the support of the Panel
of Experts, should continue efforts to improve sanctions
enforcement and provide useful advice to Member
States on questions involving sanctions implementation.
If Member States are able to share with the Committee
or the Panel evidence of sanctions violations, then we
encourage them to do so at any time, even during this
period of negotiations.
We were troubled to read in the Panel’s recent
report of continuing violations of the United Nations
sanctions, such as those related to conventional arms
and illicit nuclear procurement. Iran’s trafficking in
weapons, including shipments to some of the most
extreme and irresponsible actors in its region, remains
a serious threat to peace. In addition to violating
Security Council resolutions, smuggling of that kind
supports terrorism, fuels Al-Assad’s violence in Syria
and further destabilizes Yemen. The United States,
working closely with partners, will continue to help
detect, disrupt and seize such shipments.
As we announced in Lausanne, if a deal is reached,
then the Security Council would be asked to adopt a
new resolution to endorse it. That resolution would
also terminate the provisions of previous sanctions
resolutions upon verification that Iran has taken
certain nuclear steps. It would also establish ongoing
restrictions. If such a resolution were to be adopted,

4/10

23/06/2015

the United Nations would continue to help ensure that
Member States understand their precise obligations in
the period ahead. If there is not a deal, however, then,
needless to say, the work of the Committee and Panel
will become even more critical.
For now, however, we look with hope to Vienna. I
think I speak for all Council colleagues when I wish our
negotiators the best of luck in their endeavour.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi of Spain for his briefing
and appreciate the efforts made by the Ambassador and
his team to promote the work of the Committee.
China has always attached importance to and taken
an active part in the Committee’s work and hopes that
the Committee will continue to carry out its mandate
in a balanced and practical manner. China is of the
view that all parties have the obligation to implement
the Security Council’s resolutions on sanctions against
Iran in an earnest, accurate and comprehensive manner.
However, the sanctions themselves are not the purpose
of the Security Council resolutions. The activities of the
Committee and the Security Council should all serve
the efforts aimed at reaching a negotiated solution to
Iran’s nuclear issue.
China has taken note of the final report submitted
by the Panel of Experts and hopes that the Panel will
continue to carry out its activities in accordance with
to the mandate of the resolution and in an objective and
just manner. The Committee should properly address
each case on the basis of clear facts, verified evidence
and broad consultations.
At the meeting of foreign ministers in Lausanne
in April, the six parties and Iran agreed on the core
elements of a comprehensive agreement on the Iran
nuclear issue. That marked a major breakthrough
in the negotiations and constitutes a solid basis for
a comprehensive agreement. In the next stage, as
the deadline is fast approaching, all parties have
demonstrated strong political will to reach an early
comprehensive agreement through rigorous negotiations
on the text of the agreement. China hopes that all parties
will respect the results of the negotiations in Lausanne,
pay attention to and resolve in a reasonable way all
the legitimate concerns of all parties, avoid various
actions aimed at interfering with each other and be
decisive in making a timely political decision, so that
a comprehensive agreement can be reached according
to schedule.

15-18936

23/06/2015

Non-proliferation

An early comprehensive agreement on the Iran
nuclear issue will contribute to the international
non-proliferation regime and will also contribute to
peace and stability in the Middle East. As a major
party to the negotiations, China has always played a
constructive role in moving the negotiations forward
by taking a just and objective position. China will
continue to take an active part in the negotiations and
work tirelessly for a comprehensive long-term and
proper solution to the Iran nuclear issue.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi, Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006), for his presentation of
the quarterly report of the Committee covering the
period 24 March to 24 June 2015, and I would like to
congratulate him for his leadership. When it comes
to the Iranian nuclear dossier, Chad welcomes the
continued negotiations between Iran and the P5+1 in the
framework of the Joint Plan of Action. In that regard,
the Framework Agreement on the Joint Plan of Action
on Iran’s nuclear programme, signed in Lausanne,
Switzerland last 2 April, represents a major step
forward, as the framework makes it possible to envision
an optimistic future for all stakeholders. We hope that
the ongoing negotiations taking place in Vienna will
make it possible to settle the technical details in order
to reach a final agreement by the deadline of 30 June
of this year.
In this critical phase in the peaceful settlement of the
Iranian nuclear issue, we encourage all parties to act as
constructively as possible in order to reach a successful
conclusion to the negotiations. Furthermore, we express
our concern over reports of the use of a computer virus
to spy on the hotels where the negotiations are taking
place, and we call on the competent authorities of the
countries involved to do their utmost to shed light on
those ill-intentioned activities and ensure appropriate
conditions for continued negotiations.
We reiterate that the Islamic Republic of Iran has a
right to develop a full civilian nuclear-energy industry,
and that, in the event of a final agreement, all United
Nations sanctions against Iran should be lifted.
With regard to the report of the 1737 Committee, we
welcome the fact that no incidents have been reported
during the past three months. We encourage members
of the Committee to continue their discussions of
the report, and we call on the Committee to continue

S/PV.7469

facilitating the implementation of the provisions
contained in Security Council resolutions 1737 (2006),
1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010).
To conclude, we hope that the ongoing negotiations
will lead to a peaceful negotiated settlement of the
Iranian nuclear issue and the immediate and complete
lifting of all sanctions. We are pleased by the positive
developments in those negotiations. They amply
demonstrate that diplomacy can succeed better than
confrontation and threats.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We are grateful to the Permanent
Representative of Spain for the report about the
recent work of the Committee that he chairs. The
Russian Federation thanks the Spanish delegation for
its skilful leadership of that subsidiary body of the
Security Council at this very delicate stage. We hope
for a continuation of a business-like and constructive
cooperation in the framework of the Committee in the
interest of rapidly resolving the situation regarding
the Iranian nuclear programme through political and
diplomatic means.
We are continuing the search for compromise
approaches on the remaining outstanding issues in
the framework of negotiations of the group of six
international mediators with the Iranian representatives.
In that connection, we would like to note that it is
very important for all parties to ensure progress in
moving towards a final agreement. The key to the
successful completion of negotiations on developing
a final agreement on a comprehensive settlement of
the situation regarding the Iranian nuclear programme
is a precise and rigorous implementation of the basic
agreements that were reached at the meeting of foreign
ministers of the group of six and Iran at the beginning
of April in Lausanne.
There is no doubt that achieving an agreement
and implementing the expected arrangements will
go hand in hand with an in-depth revision of the
current sanctions regime. The discussion of concrete
parameters is currently under way in the framework of
the group of six plus Iran in Vienna. We will continue
to do everything expected of us to resolve the questions
relating to the Iranian nuclear programme once and for
all, and the lifting of the sanctions against Teheran,
which were introduced in accordance with a Security
Council resolution.

15-189365/10

S/PV.7469

Non-proliferation

Mr. Stehelin (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank the Ambassador of Spain for his
briefing on the quarterly activities of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), which established sanctions with regard to
the Iranian nuclear programme.
Almost 20 months have passed since the adoption
of the Joint Action Plan in November 2013. We have
been involved with our partners in the E3+3 in intensive
discussions with Iran.
The interim agreement in April this year in Lausanne
marked an important step towards reestablishing
the confidence of the international community in
the exclusively peaceful purposes of Iran’s nuclear
programme. But now those negotiations are entering
a crucial phase, since in principle an agreement is
supposed to be reached before the end of the month,
and it is undeniable that a lot remains to be done.
From the beginning, France has had a constant
and consistent position: Iran has every right to develop
nuclear energy for civilian purposes, but by no means
should it be able to obtain a nuclear weapon. All our
demands during the negotiations have been derived
from that stance. The aim of the negotiations is to reach
a robust agreement. That involves a long-term limitation
on Iran’s ability to carry out research and development,
and a rigorous verification regime, which includes,
when necessary, military sites, as has already been
indicated by the Director-General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). That also involves the
possibility of an automatic return to sanctions in the
event of a violation of Iran’s commitments.
That is the position of France: a simple one that
is consistent with our rejection of nuclear proliferation
and our wish to preserve the security of the region. We
are therefore determined with our partners in the group
of six to reach a good agreement before the end of the
month, one that is robust and verifiable and that would
make it possible to ensure the exclusively peaceful
purposes of the Iranian nuclear programme. But Iran
must take courageous steps forward.
Such an agreement also includes renewed
cooperation with the IAEA, especially on the possible
military dimensions of Iran’s nuclear programme. In
that regard, we regret the lack of substantial progress on
that front since 2014. The latest report of the DirectorGeneral of the IAEA on the implementation of Iran’s
guarantees notes that no new practical measures have

6/10

23/06/2015

been proposed by Iran. The resolution of all issues
on the potential military dimensions of Iran’s nuclear
programme is a key element for the re-establishment of
confidence and, therefore, for the long-term agreement
that we all want.
I wish to recall here that the Council’s resolutions
on Iran remain fully in force, pending a comprehensive
solution to the proliferation crisis, as explicitly stated in
the Joint Plan of Action.
We were therefore concerned to read in the final
report of the Panel of Experts (S/2015/401, annex)
that several attempts were made by Iran to bypass
the sanctions, particularly the arms embargo that is
burdening the country. Such attempts are contrary to
the Council’s resolutions and represent a destabilizing
factor in the Middle East. This makes clear that vigilance
remains necessary and that it would be irresponsible to
lower our guard in terms of Iran’s actions.
We thank the Panel of Experts for its tireless work
and welcome the report, which is a valuable source of
information in assisting Member States to strengthen
implementation of the resolutions.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to thank the Permanent Representative of
Spain for the information provided and his leadership
in chairing the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). I also
thank the Panel of Experts for the preparation of the
report (S/2015/401, annex) that is before the Council.
The changes taking place in the Middle East region
are striking. Member States are waiting to see the final
details of the agreement regarding the situation.
Jordan hopes that the agreement will contribute
to strengthening trust and allaying fears regarding
the Iranian nuclear programme, establish the basis for
peace and stability in the Middle East and strengthen
the nuclear non-proliferation regime in the Middle East
and worldwide.
It is of utmost importance that the agreement be fully
aligned with all international standards, particularly in
terms of the physical security of nuclear installations,
through full oversight by the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). Impacts on environmental
issues must also be considered.
It would be important for the agreement to include
a number of mechanisms to address possible future

15-18936

23/06/2015

Non-proliferation

S/PV.7469

violations. Furthermore, we believe that we must begin
by examining more seriously issues related to the arms
embargo against Iran, in particular in the light of the
information on violations contained in the Panel of
Experts’ report. It is a major challenge that must be
considered extremely carefully.

While we welcome the prospect of an agreement,
until such time as one is reached the Committee must
continue to monitor and improve the enforcement of
existing sanctions, just as the Panel of Experts must
continue to investigate violations and clarify obligations
to Member States.

Once again, we stress that the 1737 Committee
should continue its work in the most effective manner
possible and carry out the necessary inquiries regarding
violations, in addition to continuing to cooperate
positively with the Iranian Government in order to clear
up issues regarding past violations. We also encourage
those countries that have not yet submitted reports
on the measures they have adopted to implement the
Council’s relevant resolutions, to do so with utmost
haste. They must also cooperate positively with the
Panel of Experts, as the success of the Committee’s
work is highly dependent on the reports submitted by
Member States.

Finally, we encourage all parties involved in
the negotiations to sustain the commitment and the
political will required for a positive, peaceful and
lasting solution.

Finally, we value highly the role of the 1737
Committee, which assists countries and international
organizations in the implementation of the Council’s
relevant resolutions through the consideration of
countries’ requests for the provision of technical
assistance to Iran in various areas. We encourage such
action, as it will facilitate States’ and organizations’
effective implementation of Council resolutions.
Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We thank the Permanent
Representative of Spain, as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), for his briefing. New Zealand commends
the Chairman’s work and that of the Committee and
its Panel of Experts in maintaining oversight of this
complex sanctions regime.
Today’s briefing is somewhat overshadowed by an
air of expectation around the P5+1 negotiations with
Iran in pursuit of a comprehensive agreement on Iran’s
nuclear programme. New Zealand acknowledges the
efforts of the parties to the negotiations. We reiterate
our support for the process and hope that negotiations
will be concluded in keeping with the original intent.
We appreciate that the negotiations are sensitive for
the key parties involved, but trust that these sensitivities
will not stand in the way of a comprehensive outcome.
Be that as it may, today sanctions remain in place. They
place obligations on States Members of the United
Nations and, as such, the work of this Committee
remains extant.

Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi for
introducing the quarterly report on the work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006). We also thank the Panel of
Experts and its Coordinator for the presentation to the
Committee on 1 June of its final report (S/2015/401,
annex).
As we have noted previously, Chile has always
attached great importance to the work of the
non-proliferation Committee, whose sanctions regime
remains fully in force.
Like other speakers, we continue to follow the
negotiations currently under way between the E3+3
and Iran. In both the Security Council and the 1737
Committee, Chile has promoted a positive atmosphere
conducive to the negotiations.
At this historic juncture, we call on the parties
to demonstrate flexibility and responsibility at the
international level. An eventual agreement would benefit
the non-proliferation regime and provide assurance
to the international community as to the exclusively
peaceful role of the Iranian nuclear programme.
We urge Iran to continue cooperation with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Chile
takes note of the latest report on the implementation of
the safeguards agreement in connection with the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
relevant provisions of Security Council resolutions
on Iran. We appreciate the support of the IAEA in the
monitoring and verification of the voluntary measures
referred to in the Joint Action Plan.
In conclusion, Chile considers that the current
negotiations send an encouraging message about
the value of diplomacy in resolving conflicts. We
hope that the E3+3 and Iran will promptly achieve a
comprehensive and verifiable agreement.

15-189367/10

S/PV.7469

Non-proliferation

Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I thank the presidency
for convening this informative meeting on the work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006), whose report (see S/2015/401,
annex) was presented by Ambassador Mr. Román
Oyarzun Marchesi, as Chair of the Committee. We
congratulate him for his outstanding leadership of that
subsidiary body.
Venezuela welcomes the significant progress made
regarding the Joint Plan of Action, the negotiations
undertaken between the P5+1 and Iran, and the
commitment of all parties to continue the round of
negotiations so as to achieve a broad agreement.
The possibility of achieving this important
agreement aimed at reaching a comprehensive
settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue in the long term
is a tangible option today. It once again demonstrates
than when a political commitment to reach negotiated
solutions, engage in dialogue and achieve peace exists,
this is the optimal path for overcoming violence and
militaristic discourse, especially in a region deeply
affected by conflicts and extremists.
The most important task in the next phase is
to take advantage of this positive momentum and
focus on resolving the differences through dialogue,
negotiations and mutual trust. That will open a new
phase in diplomatic relations with Iran, leading finally
to the definitive lifting of the sanctions regime against
that country, which has had negative economic and
social effects on the Iranian people.
We are pleased that dialogue and cooperation
between Iran and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) have continued, as highlighted in the
Agency’s May 2015 report. We recognize the importance
of the constructive role played by the IAEA in resolving
the issues relating to Iran’s nuclear programme. We hope
that that cooperation will continue to be strengthened,
and that the ongoing issues will be resolved, as will
the measures relating to the implementation of the Joint
Plan of Action. In that respect, we call on all parties
involved to fulfil their respective commitments in good
faith.
Venezuela reaffirms the sovereign right of the
Islamic Republic of Iran to the peaceful use of nuclear
energy. We therefore reiterate that article IV of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
which stipulates the inalienable right of all parties to

8/10

23/06/2015

the Treaty to continue with the research, production
and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes,
without any discrimination whatsoever, should be fully
respected. Venezuela attaches great importance to the
efforts made by the international community to promote
disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. We express our full commitment to
the strengthening of the international regime applicable
to those issues through compliance with the obligations
derived from the relevant binding legal instruments.
Venezuela believes that holding the conference on a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, in line
with the agreements achieved at the 1995 NPT Review
Conference, is an extremely positive measure that
would further strengthen peace and stability.
As the NPT Review Conference held in May 2015
was unable to adopt an outcome document, owing to the
failure to implement the agreement reached 20 years
ago, we believe that the international community should
not abandon its efforts to promote the denuclearization
of the Middle East on the basis of agreements freely
entered into between States, in accordance with the
guidelines defined by the Disarmament Commission in
its 1999 report (A/54/42). To that end, we call on all
Member States to focus their diplomatic and political
efforts on reaching such an agreement without further
delay.
For my country, weapons of mass destruction
constitute a threat to international peace and security,
and their elimination is therefore a priority for all of
humankind.
Finally, we call on the Committee, in this crucial
phase, to focus its attention on the new challenges and
objectives that are arising under this new dynamic,
in line with the principles of objectivity, impartiality
and balance. In the area within its competence, the
Committee must facilitate the ongoing negotiations.
We hope that the diplomatic initiatives under way in
other forums on the implementation of Iranian nuclear
safeguards will have a positive effect on the work of
the Council and lead to the permanent suspension of
sanctions against that brotherly country.
Mr. Adejola (Nigeria): I thank the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) for his presentation of the latest
90-day report of the Committee.
Nigeria takes due cognizance of the fact that there
were no new incidents reported to the Committee in the

15-18936

23/06/2015

Non-proliferation

period covered by the report. My delegation commends
the Committee for its continued engagement, in
particular in the area of assistance to States and
international organizations in the implementation of the
relevant Security Council measures relating to sanctions
under resolution 1737 (2006). Indeed, that aspect of the
Committee’s work is in line with the efforts to protect
the integrity of the decisions taken by the Council and
to ensure that States do not unknowingly flout the
sanctions regime under resolution 1737 (2006). We
reiterate the useful purposes served when States seek
appropriate guidance from the Committee on proposals
for technical cooperation with Iran in matters under the
purview of Committee’s work and the merits of such an
approach.
Regarding past requests made by the Committee
on two incidents investigated by the Panel of Experts,
we continue to urge Iran to respond to those requests
as a demonstration of respect for the decisions of the
Committee. We commend the efforts of the Panel
of Experts, which have contributed significantly to
the work of the Committee. That is indeed reflected
positively in its final report (S/2015/401).
Finally, we continue to monitor and encourage
the negotiations between the United States and Iran
and between the P5+1 and Iran aimed at working out a
comprehensive solution of the Iranian nuclear issues. We
believe that it is in the interest of all to remain focused,
constructive and committed to the negotiations.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We thank Ambassador
Román Oyarzun Marchesi for the presentation of
the report and for his excellent work as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006).
We are pleased that no new incidents have been
reported during the past three months, and we sincerely
hope that there will be a positive outcome to the
ongoing negotiations with the Islamic Republic of Iran
regarding its nuclear programme. We understand the
sensitive nature of some of the issues being discussed
by both sides in the negotiating process, and we hope
that the negotiators will be able to find ways that
address the concerns that Iran has expressed and those
expressed by the E3+3 regarding ways to improve the
inspections regime and to ensure that Iran addresses
questions about its past nuclear activities.
According to recent reports in the media, Iranian
and Western officials have clashed over key details of a

S/PV.7469

final deal in recent days, and critical differences have
emerged in the negotiating room. Since we do not have
any information regarding those differences and the
points of contention, all we can do is hope that those
differences can be overcome and a final accord reached
by the deadline of 20 June, so that the international
sanctions, which have severely affected the Iranian
people, can begin to be lifted.
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I would like to thank
Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi of Spain for
his support to the Council as the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006).
Lithuania closely monitors the intensive efforts by
the E3+3 and Iran to reach a final agreement on a Joint
Plan of Action. We remain convinced that the vigorous
system of sanctions and the strong commitment
by Member States to uphold the implementation of
sanctions continue to have a decisive impact in support
of a negotiated solution. Now that negotiations are
in the final stretch, Iran must show flexibility and
willingness to provide the international community
with verifiable guarantees of the exclusively peaceful
nature of its nuclear programme.
Iran’s cooperation with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) is another key element in
rebuilding the international community’s trust. We
welcome the conclusion by the IAEA that Iran has
been implementing measures agreed in the Joint Plan
of Action, but we call on Iran to increase cooperation
in providing access to all relevant information, sites,
material and personnel.
We thank the Panel of Experts for the final report
(S/2015/401) and welcome its official public release
on 1 June. The report provides a useful overview of
Iran’s compliance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and an analysis of reported violations.
We remain concerned that while complying with the
Joint Plan of Action, Iran continues to disregard other
provisions of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
in particular those related to transfers of conventional
weapons and related material. As the negotiations on
the final agreement continue in Vienna, all Security
Council sanctions imposed on Iran remain in full
effect and all Member States must implement them,
including by reporting cases of non-compliance to the
Committee. Furthermore, Iran itself must cooperate
with the Committee, inter alia by providing the

15-189369/10

S/PV.7469

Non-proliferation

information requested by the Panel during the course
of its investigations.
Finally, let me underscore our hope that the
current talks between the E3+3 and Iran will translate
into a comprehensive and verifiable solution, which
would strengthen long-term international confidence
in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Malaysia.
I join others in thanking the Permanent
Representative of Spain for his briefing on the work
carried out by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) during the reporting period.
My delegation commends the Chair for steering the
Committee through a particularly significant period,
against the backdrop of the P5+1 and Iran’s negotiations
on Iran’s nuclear programme. The Chair’s previous
briefing to the Council in March (see S/PV.7412) came
at a time when the P5+1 and Iran were close to reaching
an understanding on a favourable agreement on Iran’s
nuclear programme. Today, we meet again at a similar,
if not a more important juncture. In a matter of days, the
parties are expected to finalize the technical annexes
and conclude a comprehensive solution to the issue.
Malaysia is of the view that the P5+1 and Iran
negotiations on the framework agreement constitute
an important development in efforts to promote
regional and international peace, security and
stability. The commitment and flexibility shown by
all parties in reaching an initial agreement constitute
positive steps towards non-proliferation and nuclear

10/10

23/06/2015

security — particularly in view of the lengthy and
difficult negotiations that have taken place for nearly 10
years. In that regard, Malaysia welcomes the political
understanding on the parameters reached by the parties
in Lausanne in April 2015. We hope that the talks will
continue to pave the way for all parties to conclude a
long-term comprehensive solution.
Malaysia remains optimistic for a positive outcome
from the talks, and we also underline the Committee’s
support to all parties in the negotiations. However,
the present measures, established under the relevant
Council resolutions, remain valid, and the Committee
remains committed to carrying out its responsibilities.
Accordingly, at the present stage, the Committee
should maintain its function of providing guidance
and assistance to Member States and international
organizations on the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolution, upon request. My
delegation believes that the Committee will continue
to deliberate its decisions in a cautious and thorough
manner, in accordance with its mandate.
Finally, on the Panel of Experts established pursuant
to resolution 1929 (2010), Malaysia congratulates the
members of the Panel on the renewal of its mandate
earlier this month. My delegation thanks the Panel for
its final report, which is currently under consideration
by the Committee. We hope the Panel will soon have a
full complement of members, given the important tasks
that lie ahead of it.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The meeting rose at 3.55 p.m.

15-18936
