S/2007/220

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 April 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 19 April 2007 from the President of the
Security Council to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
decided to send a mission on the Kosovo issue from 24 to 29 April 2007. The
mission will be led by Johan C. Verbeke, Permanent Representative of Belgium. The
members of the Council have agreed on the terms of reference of the mission, which
are annexed hereto.
The members of the Council have agreed that the composition of the mission
is as follows:
Johan C. Verbeke, Head of mission (Belgium)
Li Junhua (China)
Basile Ikouebe (Congo)
Jean-Marc de la Sablière (France)
Leslie Christian (Ghana)
Hasan Kleib (Indonesia)
Marcello Spatafora (Italy)
Ricardo Alberto Arias (Panama)
Luis Enrique Chávez (Peru)
Mutlaq Majed Al-Qahtani (Qatar)
Vitaly Churkin (Russian Federation)
Peter Burian (Slovakia)
Dumisani Kumalo (South Africa)
Karen Pierce (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland)
Zlmay Khalilzad (United States of America)
I should he grateful if you could have the present letter and its annex
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Emyr Jones Parry
President of the Security Council

07-31489 (E) 200407

*0731489*

S/2007/220

Annex
Security Council mission on the Kosovo issue
The year 2007 emerges as a significant one for Kosovo. In the light of the
recent submission of the United Nations Special Envoy’s set of proposals to the
Security Council, the Council has decided to give its members the opportunity to
inform themselves of the situation on the ground, by sending a Security Council
mission to Belgrade and Kosovo, from 25 to 28 April 2007. The mission will also
visit Brussels and Vienna. A balanced programme and comprehensive schedule of
meetings will provide the Security Council members with a first-hand understanding
of progress made since the Security Council adopted resolution 1244 (1999). It will
allow the Security Council to have an informed understanding of the political, social
and economic situation in Kosovo. Earlier Council missions took place in April
2000, June 2001 and December 2002.
The mission has the following objectives:
(a) To obtain first-hand information on progress made in Kosovo since the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), including on the
implementation of the agreed standards;
(b) To receive information directly from the leadership of Serbia and the
Provisional Institutions for Self-Government of Kosovo and from representatives of
Kosovo’s ethnic minority communities on the current political, social and economic
situation in Kosovo, as well as on the regional situation;
(c) To receive information directly from representatives of the international
community, in Brussels and on the ground, on the current political, social and
economic situation in Kosovo, as well as on the regional situation.
The mission will report its conclusions to the Security Council.

2

07-31489
