S/2019/171*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 March 2019
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
In paragraph 2 of resolution 2407 (2018), the Security Council requested the
Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution 1874 (2009) to provide a final
report to the Council with its findings and recommendations.
Accordingly, the President hereby circulates the report received from the Panel
of Experts (see annex).

* Reissued for technical reasons on 12 March 2019.

19-01704* (E)

250919

*1901704*

S/2019/171

Annex
Letter dated 21 February 2019 from the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1874 (2009) addressed
to the President of the Security Council
The Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution 1874 (2009) has the
honour to transmit herewith, in accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 2407
(2018), the final report on its work.*
The attached report was provided to the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) on 1 February 2019 and was considered by the
Committee on 21 February 2019.
The Panel would appreciate it if the present letter and its enclosure were brought
to the attention of the members of the Security Council and issued as a document of
the Council.
(Signed) Hugh Griffiths
Coordinator
Panel of Experts established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1874 (2009)
(Signed) Olaf Andrieu
Expert
(Signed) Dmitry Kiku
Expert
(Signed) Stephanie Kleine-Ahlbrandt
Expert
(Signed) Maiko Takeuchi
Expert
(Signed) Jong Kwon Youn
Expert
(Signed) Jiahu Zong
Expert

* Ms. Yvonne Yew, the eighth member of the Panel of Experts, was appointed by the Secretary General on 18 January 2019 and took up her official functions in New York on 28 January
2019.
2/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Enclosure
Letter dated 1 February 2019 from the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1874 (2009) addressed to the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006)
The Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution 1874 (2009) has the
honour to transmit herewith, in accordance with paragraph 2 of Security Council
resolution 2407 (2018), the final report on its work.*
The Panel would appreciate it if this letter and its annex were brought to the
attention of the members of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006).
(Signed) Hugh Griffiths
Coordinator
Panel of Experts established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1874 (2009)
(Signed) Olaf Andrieu
Expert
(Signed) Dmitry Kiku
Expert
(Signed) Stephanie Kleine-Ahlbrandt
Expert
(Signed) Maiko Takeuchi
Expert
(Signed) Jong Kwon Youn
Expert
(Signed) Jiahu Zong
Expert

* Ms. Yvonne Yew, the eighth member of the Panel of Experts, was appointed by the Secretary General on 18 January 2019 and took up her official functions in New York on 28 January
2019.
19-01704

3/379

S/2019/171

Report of the Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution
1874 (2009)
Summary
The nuclear and ballistic missile programmes of the Democratic People ’s
Republic of Korea remain intact and the country continues to defy Security Council
resolutions through a massive increase in illegal ship -to-ship transfers of petroleum
products and coal. These violations render the latest United Nations sanctions
ineffective by flouting the caps on the import of petroleum products and crude oil
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea as well as the coal ban, imposed in
2017 by the Security Council in response to the country’s unprecedented nuclear
and ballistic missile testing. In addition to information provided to the Panel by
several Member States on ship-to-ship transfers, one Member State indicated, while
queried by another, that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea had already
procured over 500,000 barrels of refined petroleum products in 2018. Global banks
and insurance companies continue to unwittingly facilitate payments and provide
coverage for vessels involved in ever-larger, multi-million-dollar, illegal ship-toship transfers of petroleum products, as well as an increasing number of ship-to-ship
coal transfers and attempted transshipments.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues to violate the arms
embargo and has attempted to supply small arms and light weapons and other
military equipment to Houthi rebels in Yemen, as well as to Libya and the Sudan,
via foreign intermediaries, including Syrian arms trafficker Hussein al -Ali in the
case of the Houthi rebels. The Panel continued investigations into designated entities
and individuals in Asia who clandestinely procured centrifuges for the nuclear
programme of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and attempted to sell a
wide range of military equipment to armed groups and Governments in the Middle
East and Africa. The Panel investigated the involvement of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in gold mining in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
construction of a military camp in Sierra Leone and the sale of fishing rights in the
waters surrounding the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as well as activities
of designated entities and other prohibited activities around the world. The Panel
also investigated the acquisition by the Democratic People ’s Republic of Korea of
leading luxury brand goods, such as Rolls-Royce, Mercedes-Benz and Lexus
vehicles. The world’s largest container shipping line continued to unwittingly
transport prohibited items later seized by Member States.
Financial sanctions remain some of the most poorly implemented and actively
evaded measures of the sanctions regime. Individuals empowered to act as
extensions of financial institutions of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
operate in at least five countries with seeming impunity. The Reconnaissance
General Bureau continues its international financial operations by transferring funds
from accounts closed in the European Union to those held at financial institutions in
Asia. The global operations of Glocom and the Malaysia-Korea Partners Group of
Companies (MKP) continue despite the Panel’s past reporting on their illicit
activities and show the ongoing use of overseas companies and individuals to
obfuscate income-generating activities for the regime of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The Panel also investigated companies acting as possible
cooperative entities or joint ventures, some of which are officially regist ered as joint
ventures and others that more actively conceal the nature of their collaboration with
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. A number of these entities have also
violated other provisions of the resolutions, including by maintaining links to
designated entities. The Panel also investigated the sophisticated cyberatt acks
4/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

carried out by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea against multiple Member
States to evade financial sanctions.
Ship-to-ship transfers involve increasingly advanced evasion techniques. The
disguising of vessels through ship identity theft and false Automatic Identification
System (AIS) transmissions is not being taken into account by most global and
regional commodity trading companies, banks and insurers, whose due diligence
efforts fall extremely short. The manipulation of vessel AIS transmis sions remains
an overarching feature of illegal transfers, contrary to International Maritime
Organization (IMO) regulations governing safety of life at sea, which require that
AIS be in operation at all times. This highlights weak monitoring by flag State s. In
addition, insurers do not monitor the AIS of the vessels for which they provide
coverage and services. Other methods of evasion include physical disguise of
tankers of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the use of small, unregistered
vessels, illegal name-changing and other forms of identity fraud, night transfers and
the use of additional vessels for transshipment. In addition to evading sanctions, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and its maritime fleet are systematically
violating the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, routinely engaging
in double-flagging and providing safe harbour for hijacked ships. The Panel
inspected seized vessels engaged in prohibited coal trades, documenting ship
identity laundering, whereby the owners had deceived IMO into providing new
vessel identity numbers to avoid repeat detection. The Panel found that ports and
airports in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea were being used for rampant
violations of the resolutions, ranging from illegal oil imports and coal exports to the
smuggling of bulk cash by nationals of the Democratic People ’s Republic of Korea.
Furthermore, the Panel found that the country was using civilian facilities, including
airports, for ballistic missile assembly and testing with the goal of effectively
preventing “decapitation” strikes.
Diplomats of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continue to play a
key role in sanctions evasion. While some Member States have limited the number
of bank accounts of the country’s embassies and diplomats as required by the
resolutions, the latter are evading this provision by controlling accounts in multiple
countries, including those to which they are not accredited. Diplomats and
representatives of designated entities of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
also circumvent the assets freeze and the limit on the number of diplomatic bank
accounts by holding accounts in the name of family members and front companies
and by establishing accounts in multiple jurisdictions. Diplomats of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea continue to travel under false accreditation in their
passports and have also facilitated the country’s efforts to illegally export large
quantities of coal through transshipment to disguise the origin.
Member States, United Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations have
expressed concern that despite the exemption provisions in the resolutions and the
Committee’s efforts, United Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations
continue to experience difficulties in meeting critical life-saving needs of vulnerable
populations in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The present report offers a series of recommendations for designation and other
practical measures to assist Member States and the Security Council in addressing
implementation challenges and shortcomings.

19-01704

5/379

S/2019/171

Contents
Page

I.

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

II.

Sectoral and maritime sanctions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

III.

Embargoes, designated entities and individuals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

30

IV.

Finance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

48

V.

Recent activities related to nuclear and ballistic missile programmes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

65

VI.

Unintended impact of sanctions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

66

VII.

National implementation reports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

67
68

Annexes*

* The annexes are being circulated in the language of submission only and without formal
editing.
6/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

I. Introduction
1.
In paragraph 2 of resolution 2407 (2018), the Security Council requested the
Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution 1874 (2009) to provide to the
Committee a final report with findings and recommendations. The present report
covers the period from 2 February 2018 to 1 February 2019. 1

II. Sectoral and maritime sanctions
2.
Ship-to-ship transfers of petroleum products by foreign-flagged vessels using
flags of convenience are a primary method of sanctions evasion by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. These transfers have increased in scope, s cale and
sophistication, with more than 50 vessels and 160 assoc iated companies under
investigation. Reports to the Panel by Japan, the Republic of Korea, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America and
the Panel’s own investigations show that illegal ship-to-ship transfers of petroleum
products greatly accelerated in 2018. On 30 March, the Committee designated 27
vessels and 21 entities, mainly for ship-to-ship transfers of petroleum. On 16 October,
the Committee designated an additional three vessels.
3.
On 6 July 2018, the United States informed the Panel that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea had breached the petroleum cap stipulated in resolution
2397 (2017), stating that between 1 January and 30 May 2018, tankers of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea had called at ports of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea at least 89 times, likely to deliver refined petroleum
products illegally procured via ship-to-ship transfers 2 and that “these sales must be
halted given that, in our estimation, the UNSCR 2397 quota has been breached ”. On
30 July 2018, the Panel received a note verbale from the Russian Federation in which
it sought clarification on the projection provided by the United States. The Russian
Federation also informed the Panel that the cap had not been officially reached
according to the numbers reported to the Committee and therefore there were no
grounds for suspension of refined petroleum products to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. On 17 September 2018, the United States informed the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) that “at least an
additional 59 tanker deliveries to the DPRK have occurred from June 1 through to
August 18 bringing the 2018 total to at least 148 deliveries, all of which involved
deliveries to North Korean ports to unload refined petroleum products procured
through UN-prohibited STS transfers”. The United States provided some imagery
(see figure IX) and three scenarios to the Committee that “make clear that the DPRK
has obtained far more than the 500,000 barrels it is authorized to procure in 2018”
(see annex 2). 3 In a communication to the Committee dated 21 September, the R ussian
Federation stated that “the fragmentary information provided by the US regarding the
cases of alleged illegal ship-to-ship transfers of refined petroleum products to DPRK
vessels as well as the result of the US computer modelling are insufficient fo r the
__________________

Cyberattacks against the Panel continued to hamper its ability to report on the implementation of
sanctions according to its mandate (see S/2018/171). In addition, the Panel notes that
unauthorized disclosures of Committee proceedings and Panel internal reports and activities are
damaging.
2
Annex 1 contains a table listing ports of delivery, together with a conservative estimate of the
volumes delivered.
3
With regard to the differences between data submitted by the United States of America in July
and September in the column “Delivery Volume if 33% Laden”, this appears to have been caused
by a different formula being applied (÷3 for the July submission and x0.33 for the September
submission) and by limiting the figures to two digits after the decimal point.
1

19-01704

7/379

S/2019/171

Committee’s decision to completely cease refined petroleum export to the DPRK
before the end of the year … a full investigation and corresponding conclusions of
the Panel of Experts of the Committee of 1718 are required” (see annex 3).
4.
While the Panel lacks the definitive evidence to conclude that the cap has been
breached, since September 2018, it has nevertheless obtained evidence of the
increasing frequency of ship-to-ship transfers and of one unprecedented prohibited
petroleum product transfer comprising 57,623.491 barrels alone, worth $5,730,886.
The Panel’s investigation of this transfer reveals the most sophisticated case of
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea-related vessel identity fraud to date,
highlighting new sanction evasion techniques that defeated the due diligence efforts
of the region’s leading commodity trader, as well as the United States and
Singaporean banks that facilitated the fuel payments and a leading United Kingdom
insurer that provided protection and indemnity cover to one of the vessels involved.
The case also underlines, once again, the extremely poor reporting, oversight,
monitoring and control over the vessels exercised by the flag -of-convenience States
under whose jurisdiction they apparently sail. These failures further demonstrate how
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the transnational criminal networks
with which they partner may operate freely within global logistics supply chains 4 and
were able to hide in plain sight in international waters for more than eight months
after the owner of one of the vessels was designated for an assets freeze and travel
ban.
Panama imposter
5.
On 11 November 2018, a Member State reported a suspected illegal ship-to-ship
transfer on 28 October 2018 involving the Yuk Tung (IMO No. 9030591), 5 designated
for a global port entry ban and deflagging on 30 March 2018, 6 and the Ocean Explorer
(IMO No. 9388792) (see figure I).

__________________

In its 2018 final report, the Panel stated that the Democratic People ’s Republic of Korea “is
already flouting the most recent resolutions by exploiting globa l oil supply chains, complicit
foreign nationals, offshore company registries and the international banking system ”. In this
regard, the Panel noted that “the profit margins involved, coupled with the offshore nature of
much of the affected oil, maritime and finance sectors, necessitate far greater private sector due
diligence, information-sharing and self-policing”. (S/2018/171, summary).
5
The name “Maika” had been painted on the Yuk Tung together with a false IMO number.
6
The vessel’s owner, Yuk Tung Energy Pte, was also designated for an assets freeze and travel
ban. “Security Council 1718 Sanctions Committee adds 22 Entries to its Sanctions List,
Designates 27 vessels”, SC/13272, 30 March 2018. See https://www.un.org/press/
en/2018/sc13272.doc.htm.
4

8/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Figure I
Yuk Tung and Ocean Explorer on 28 October 2018

Source: Member State.

6.
The Panel’s investigation found that beginning on at least 22 May 2018 in the
East China Sea, the Yuk Tung engaged in vessel “spoofing”, falsely transmitting its
identity via its AIS as a supposedly Panama-flagged vessel named Maika using IMO
number 9033969, as well as altering its course and destination. 7 At the same time, the
vessel legally authorized and registered with IMO number 9033969, the Comoros flagged Hika, 8 remained anchored off Lome, in the Gulf of Guinea, more than 7,000
miles away (see figure II).

__________________

Flag registries issue Maritime Mobile Service Identities (MMSI) numbers. These are not unique
and may be duplicated. When a vessel changes flag, their MMSI nu mber may be allocated to
another ship. This results in “spoofing” with one or more vessels being shown in two locations at
the same time. See Maritime Intelligence, “Understanding AIS (Automatic Identification
System)”, 10 March 2017. Available at https://maritimeintelligence.informa.com/
resources/product-content/understanding-the-automatic-identification-system.
8
On its final voyage, the Hika’s name was altered to the Mahika on AIS transmissions. This name
change meant that only one letter “h” would need to be changed by the crew of the Yuk Tung to
imply that the Mahika had become the “Maika”. The Panel is investigating possible collusion
between the owners of the Hika and the Yuk Tung, which were engaged in similar trading patterns
in East Africa and Asia prior to the Yuk Tung’s designation.
7

19-01704

9/379

S/2019/171

Figure II
Yuk Tung, a.k.a. Maika, begins spoofing Hika, a.k.a. Mahika

Source: Windward.

7.
Commercial maritime intelligence platforms, ship radar, specialized maritime
databases and vessel-scrapping information show that the deception continued
throughout the months of June to November 2018. While the Yuk Tung was operating
under a falsely broadcast IMO number before and during the October ship-to-ship
transfer, the vessel that it was impersonating, the Hika, made its final voyage from
the Gulf of Guinea to the Chittagong scrapping yards in Bangladesh, 9 where it was
beached for scrap on 9 October 2018 (see figure III).

__________________
9

10/379

See annex 8 for vessel scrapping information.
19-01704

S/2019/171

Figure III
False AIS broadcasting by the Yuk Tung from August to October; on 28 and
29 October 2018; final voyage of the Hika from 24 July to 9 October 2018 to
Chittagong (left to right clockwise)

Sources: Sea Searcher, the Panel, Windward.

8.
The above images show how the Yuk Tung transmitted an AIS signal, the
disablement of which has been documented in previous Panel reports as a risk
indicator of illegal ship-to-ship transfers and maritime-related activity of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. 10 This more sophisticated subterfuge
succeeded, as the Yuk Tung’s false broadcasting of the IMO number of the Hika
triggered no alerts on the part of flag States, commercial maritime intelligence
platforms or other maritime service providers.
Physical disguise and false documentation
9.
The final element of the deception operation was physical disguise and false
documentation. This activity appears to have been carefully pre-planned as the Yuk
Tung and the Hika were unique in appearance: identical twin sister ships built in the
same year by the same manufacturer according to the same design specifications with
the exact same profile, tonnage and equipment. Imagery analysi s provided by another
Member State shows that after its designation in March 2018, the Yuk Tung was
physically disguised with the abbreviation “YT” removed from the painted circle on
the vessel’s stack and the name and IMO number of the vessel’s stern changed to that
of the Maika (see figure IV). The Yuk Tung also obtained a false or fake Equatorial

__________________
10

19-01704

Uninterrupted AIS transmission by contracted vessels has become a requirement for a minority of
global trading commodity companies with their regional offices clustered mainly in Singapore.
These companies occupy the key position in global oil and petroleu m product supply chains for
East Asian ship-to-ship transfer markets, primarily through free-on-board contracts.
11/379

S/2019/171

Guinean certificate of registry (figure V). 11 The false registration papers 12 and fake
AIS transmissions, coupled with the physical deceptions employed by the vessel,
provided the cover necessary to deceive any of the current, few due diligence and
active compliance measures deployed by most global and regional commodity
traders. These deceptive measures triggered no alerts on the part of the global and
regional banks that unwittingly facilitated the multiple financial transactions
associated with this transfer or of the insurers and reinsurers that provided protection
and indemnity and hull insurance.
Figure IV
Yuk Tung imagery analysis

Source: Member State.

__________________

Equatorial Guinea’s flag of convenience has a poor record of reporting ship registrations or annual
tonnage to the International Maritime Organization (IMO) and has not replied to the Panel’s
inquiries as to whether the document is a forgery or was issued under false pretenses.
12
According to the false Equatorial Guinea registration for the “Maika”, a.k.a. Yuk Tung, the
shipowner was Virtue Base Development Ltd of the Seychelles. Virtue Base Development has a
“care of” address with Vanguard Shipping Safety Management in Kaohsiung City. On 3 December,
the Panel wrote to Vanguard, requesting that it account for its role in the establishment of Virtue
Base Development as well as four other foreign-flagged vessels suspected of involvement in
sometimes multiple illegal ship-to-ship transfers dating back to 2017. Vanguard replied that it had
established Virtue Base at the request of “Mr. Lai”, with whom it was no longer in contact.
Regarding the other foreign-flagged vessels engaged in ship-to-ship transfers, Vanguard stated that
in two cases, it was only the ship manager, not responsible for the cargo, that in others the
documentation had been faked, that other cases were subject to legal dispute and that one vessel in
a ship-to-ship transfer was in fact Chinese and not flagged to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea (see annex 6).
11

12/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Figure V
False certificate of registry for the Maika, a.k.a. Yuk Tung

Source: The Panel.

Yuk Tung commodity and brokering chains
10. The commodity trading and brokering chains involved in the $ 5,700,000
transfer to the Yuk Tung are similar to the multi-million-dollar deals documented in
previous Panel reports. 13 The region’s leading oil and petroleum trader, Hin Leong,
agreed to supply petroleum products to another known customer, Yuantai Fuel
Trading, also registered in Singapore. Yuantai had been approached by individuals
claiming to act on behalf of Golden Luxury Corporation, a Belize-registered entity
that was apparently located in Taiwan Province of China. 14 Golden Luxury later
provided Yuantai documentation suggesting that its client for the transfer was a
United Arab Emirates-based entity, Zeeshan Building Materials Trading LLC. These
papers have not been verified and no supporting banking records or other credible or
independent documentation have been provided to verify actual end-use delivery of
the cargo. The Panel wrote to Golden Luxury Corporation but received no resp onse
(see annex 5). Hin Leong and Yuantai have since cooperated with the Panel by
providing full transparency. On 10 December 2018, Hin Leong stated that they “have
ceased STS operations and withdrawn our vessels from the East China Sea ” as well
as another affected area. 15

__________________

S/2018/171, paras. 71–73.
The address supplied by Golden Luxury Corporation in its documentation appears to be in the
CSBC Corporation shipyard in Keelung City (see annex 4). Yuantai supplied independently
verifiable financial documentation to substantiate its role and statements regarding Gold en
Luxury Corporation.
15
Correspondence held on file.
13
14

19-01704

13/379

S/2019/171

Sanctions implications for “free-on-board” contracts
11. Such incidents are likely to continue to occur for two reasons. The deception
measures deployed by the Yuk Tung defeated all of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea-related sanctions compliance mechanisms adopted by commodity traders as
well as their associated banks, insurers and vessels. Secondly, the essence of the legal
definition of “free-on-board” contracts in East Asian markets is that liability for the
cargo transfers from the seller to the buyer when the product is pumped via pipe from
the guardrails of one vessel to the other during the ship-to-ship transfer. However, the
designations by the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006) of vessels for global port bans and deregistration, coupled with the
designation of some of those vessel owners, mean that liability for illegal transfers
does not end with their product crossing the guardrail, if the Committee or Member
States determine that such transfers violated sanctions. Such free-on-board contracts
specific to the East Asian market may lose their legality and the concept behind “free
on board” no longer holds if the party transferring the cargo is judged to have violated
the measures contained within the resolutions. For example, both the Yuk Tung and
its owners were designated in March 2018 following a January transfer to the Rye
Song Gang 1. While Hin Leong has demonstrated that it was an unwitting party
through its full and transparent disclosure, the Panel notes that Hin Leong did not
implement the Panel’s suggested end-user delivery verification clause “best
practices” outlined in a letter to the company on 10 May 2018 (see annex 7). The
investigation continues.
Recommendations
12. Member States and relevant international organizations should ensure that
the global and regional commodity trading companies and tanker fleets
operating under their jurisdictions and in those at-risk segments of the free-onboard market and/or engaging in ship-to-ship transfer in the affected
international waters adopt contractual language that includes effective end -use
delivery verification.
13. Member States and relevant international organizations should ensure that
the global and regional commodity trading companies and tanker fleets
operating under their jurisdictions and those segments of the affected free-onboard markets assess the AIS history of all the vessels that they intend to suppl y
with products banned under the resolutions.
Frequency of illegal ship-to-ship transfers: a 66-day period snapshot
14. On 30 November 2018, a Member State provided imagery to the Panel showing
that Democratic People’s Republic of Korea-flagged and foreign-flagged tankers
engaged in ship-to-ship transfers within a 66-day period between 2 June and 9 August
2018, including images of some vessels conducting illegal activities on consecutive
days. Identified vessels included the Ji Song 6, the Myong Ryu 1, the An San 1, the Yu
Phyong 5, the Sam Jong 2 and the Nam San 8. In a number of cases, the transfers
involved smaller, unknown vessels in the East China Sea (see figure VI).

14/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Figure VI
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea-flagged tankers engaged in ship-to-ship
transfers with unknown vessels, June to August 2018

Source: Member State.

15. Three documented transfers took place involving larger, foreign-flagged
vessels, the Shang Yuan Bao (IMO No. 8126070), the New Regent (IMO
No. 8312497) and the Xing Ming Yang 888 (IMO No. 8410847) (see figure VII).
Figure VII
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea-flagged tankers engaged in ship-to-ship transfers
with foreign-flagged vessels

Source: Member State.

Flag-of-convenience registries
16. The Shang Yuan Bao had already been subject to Panel inquiries regarding a
previous ship-to-ship transfer involving vessel identity fraud with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea-flagged tanker Paek Ma on 18 May 2018 (see annex 13,
para. 4). In August 2018, the Panel wrote to Panama, as the flag-of-convenience State
for the Shang Yuan Bao during the transfers on 18 May and 2 June 2018 and for the
New Regent on 7 June 2018. In its reply of 2 November 2018, Panama stated that the
19-01704

15/379

S/2019/171

Shang Yuan Bao was “removed from the Panamanian merchant registry on
6 September” and that for the New Regent, “the process of removal” began “on
4 September” (see annex 9). On 16 August 2018, the Panel wrote to Sierra Leone, the
flag-of-convenience State for the Xing Ming Yang 888. Sierra Leone has not replied
to multiple inquiries from the Panel.
Owners, operators and managers
17. The Panel investigated the owners, operators and managers of the vessels.
Regarding the ship-to-ship transfer on 18 May 2018 involving the Shang Yuan Bao,
Jui Zong Shipping Management of Taiwan Province of China replied, stating that the
first transfer was “a big misunderstanding” and that its vessel was providing drinking
water through hoses used to transfer petroleum products (see annex 10). In its
response of 15 October 2018 regarding the second ship-to-ship transfer of 2 June
2018, Jui Zong did not provide any requested documentation, simply stating that “the
Ministry of Justice Investigation Bureau is investigating this case, we believe they
shall give back our innocence” (see annex 11). With regard to the New Regent, neither
the vessel’s operator, registered owner nor manager have replied to the Panel’s
inquiries. 16 Regarding the Xing Ming Yang 888, Hongkong Qi Hang International
Shipping Management Co. Ltd replied on behalf of the Hong Kong-named owner and
operator, providing the same rationale as that used by the Jui Zong Shipping
Management Co. for the Shang Yuan Bao (see annex 12). The Panel reminded them
of the prohibition on all ship-to-ship transfers with Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea-flagged vessels under resolution 2375 (2017).
Vessel profiles
18. The Shang Yuan Bao, Xing Ming Yang 888 and New Regent share a profile
similar to most foreign-flagged vessels involved in illegal ship-to-ship transfers or
ships from which fuel has ultimately been transferred to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. This vessel profile consists of coastal, product and generalpurpose tankers operating out of ports within 600 nautical miles of previously
identified zones in the East China Sea. 17 These vessels typically sail under the
jurisdiction of flag-of-convenience States with non-existent or poor sanctions
compliance standards that were frequently used by Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea-controlled vessels during the period from 2011 to 2017. They are typically
older ships that score poorly in port State control safety inspections or have otherwise
been fined for pollution by port or coastal States. They have been insured or reinsured
by protection and indemnity companies registered in Europe, North America and East
Asia. Maritime industry practices that have traditionally shielded beneficial owners
from potential environmental and taxation liabilities 18 contribute to obscuring the
identity of the foreign nationals who may have ultimately profited from prohibited
transfers of fuel to Democratic People’s Republic of Korea-flagged vessels.

__________________

The ship operator and manager is Ocean Grow International Shipmanagement Consultant
Corporation of Taiwan Province of China. Panama stated that the registered owner, Mega Glory
Holding Ltd, is registered in the British Virgin Islands (see annex 9). The company was also
registered in Hong Kong, China, as the owner of the New Regent and three other vessels.
17
These vessels are relatively small with deadweight of between 5,000 and 20,000 tons.
18
These frequently involve allocating “registered owner” status for a single vessel to an offshore
shell company established in such territories as Belize, the British Virgin Islands, Hong Kong,
China, the Marshall Islands or Seychelles.
16

16/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea-flagged tankers, brokering networks of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and foreign-flagged vessels
19. In November 2018, a Member State informed the Panel that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea was using approximately 23 of its tanker vessels for
prohibited ship-to-ship transfers of petroleum products. The Member State named the
following six vessels as among the most active, accounting for 50 per cent of all
transfers: 19 the An San 1, the Chon Ma San, the Sam Jong 2, the Yu Son (Yuson), the
Kum Un San and the Saebyol (Chong Rim 2). In a separate submission to the
Committee dated 4 October 2018, the Member State provided imagery of two
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea-flagged tankers, the Sam Jong 2 and the Ji
Song 6, engaging in illegal ship-to-ship transfers with unknown vessels on
12 September and 24 May 2018, respectively (see figure VIII).
Figure VIII
Ji Song 6 (above) and Sam Jong 2 (below) engaged in illegal ship-to-ship
transfers on 12 September and 24 May 2018

Source: Member State.

20. Other Democratic People’s Republic of Korea-flagged tankers documented in
ship-to-ship transfers include the Myong Ryu 1, the Yu Phyong 5, the Nam San 8 (see
paras. 14–17 and figures VI-VII), the Yu Jong 2, the Rye Song Gang 1 and the Paek
Ma (see annex 13). In addition to acts of non-compliance, these vessels routinely
engage in identity fraud and other activities contrary to both the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea and IMO regulations.
Brokering networks of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
21. In November 2018, a Member State informed the Panel that the overseas bank
representative offices of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea arrange ship-toship transfer deals with help from third-country brokers. According to the Member
State, one known individual is Ko Il Hwan 20 (고일환), a representative of the
designated Korea Daesong Bank based in Shenyang, China. The Panel previously
__________________
19
20

19-01704

This figure is according to number, not volume.
Date of birth 28 August 1967, passport number PS927220424.
17/379

S/2019/171

investigated the Korea Daesong Bank’s representative office in Shenyang 21, and Ko
Il Hwan in particular, for processing payments on behalf of Daedong Credit Bank.
Korea Daesong Bank has used at least two false names to disguise its identity in its
shipping-related activities: 조선녹색산업무역 (朝 鲜 绿 色 产 业 贸 易) and
조선신용투자회사 (朝鲜信用投资公司 or 朝鲜信用投资会社). 22
22. The Member State named a number of companies that are known and use d by
such brokers. One of these is Gudzon Shipping Company LLC, a company based in
the Russian Federation. On 22 June and 18 November 2018, the Panel wrote to
Gudzon and its affiliated company, Primorye Maritime Logistics Co. Ltd, relating to
a ship-to-ship transfer of petroleum products from their vessel, the Patriot, to the Wan
Heng 11 (see annexes 13–14) as well as two 22 August 2018 reported ship-to-ship
transfers to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea-flagged tankers Chong Rim
2 and Chon Ma San. 23 In its letters, the Panel requested information on the brokers
involved in these shipments (see annex 14). It has yet to receive a reply.
Communications methods for ship-to-ship transfers
23. The Panel’s investigations showed that WeChat, a messaging, social media and
mobile payment application, is the primary means of communication for ship -to-ship
transfers in the East China Sea and the Yellow Sea and that various techniques are
used on that platform to obscure activities. In at least one case invest igated by the
Panel, the geographic coordinates were communicated in lieu of the identity of a
vessel. Furthermore, the receiver vessel transferred to a supply ship a ph otograph via
WeChat showing the last four digits of a renminbi banknote to authenticate the
receiver vessel prior to fuel transfer. A foreign oil supplier and vessel owner involved
in an attempted Democratic People’s Republic of Korea-related ship-to-ship transfer
in 2018 informed the Panel that brokers on WeChat had requested him to switch off
his vessel’s AIS on at least two occasions in 2017. The brokers were acting on behalf
of fishing fleet tanker vessels seeking to avoid possible detection of illegal fishing in
Chinese fishery protection zones. These attempts at secrecy are not limited to the
WeChat platform, but they complicate efforts to investigate and trace broke rs acting
on behalf of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Ports in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea: hubs for illegal activities
24. A Member State provided imagery of certain ports in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, in particular Nampo, as hubs for suspected illegal activity. In
addition to imagery highlighting the consistent use of Nampo port for loading
prohibited exports of coal from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (see
paras. 31–34 and annex 15), a Member State provided imagery demonstrating the
widespread use of the Marine Import Terminal at Nampo by tankers documented as
engaged in illegal ship-to-ship transfers. The imagery shows how underwater
pipelines attached to offloading buoys are used to transfer fuel from vessels to the
terminals in the Nampo port complex (see figure IX).
__________________

S/2017/150, paras. 225, 227 and 230.
See annex 43. For more complete information on Korea Daesong Bank, including other aliases it
uses, see also annex 42.
23
The Panel was not provided with imagery evidence for these reported transfers. A Member State
reported that the transfers occurred in mid-January 2018. According to a 28 September
communication from the Russian Federation, “the ownership and use of the Patriot was
transferred on 5 July 2017 to PML Co. Ltd under a standard bareboat charter agreement. Since
that time the Gudzon Company LLC has had no involvement in the commercial operation of the
vessel and consequently could not issue instructions in January 2018 for the loading of petroleum
products and their subsequent transfer to vessels of the DPRK ”.
21
22

18/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Figure IX
Marine Import Terminal at Nampo port: a hub for illegal ship-to-ship
transfer offloading

Source: Member State; Map: The Panel.

Study visit to Singapore by port officials of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
25. Blatant violations such as these can occur only with the full knowledge and
cooperation of Nampo port officials. On 12 October 2018, a Member State informed
the Panel that “there may have been a sanction violation in Singapore ” relating to a
scientific or technical training project between the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and Singapore that included a study visit to Singapore’s port by Nampo port
officials. In its letter to Singapore, the Panel noted the systemic violations of the
resolutions taking place at Nampo and also noted that according to a number of the
Panel’s previous reports, the port was also the site for the export or import of a variety
of shipping containers seized by Member States and found to be containing items
from or destined for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that violated the
provisions of the resolutions, including the measures aimed at stemming nuclear,
ballistic missile and other arms-related materials.
26. Singapore replied to the Panel on 4 December 2018, confirming that Kang Jong
Gwan, the Minister of Land and Maritime Transport of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, who oversees the country’s port, shipping and vessel operations,
headed a delegation to Singapore. Previous Panel reports have noted that designated
entities such as Ocean Maritime Management Company, Ltd are under the control of

19-01704

19/379

S/2019/171

the Ministry of Land and Maritime Transport. 24 In its reply, Singapore stated that it
“had verified that the delegation members were not individuals designated by the
UN”. The investigations into the activities at ports in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and their senior managers continue.
27. In addition to commanding vessels engaged in prohibited activities, at least one
vessel captain from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has been reported as
having been arrested following disembarkation fro m a vessel of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea for carrying undeclared bulk cash in October 2018 (see
figure X). 25 In response to the Panel’s letter, the Russian Federation replied that on
2 October 2018, a citizen of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Kim Kwang
Il, was detained at the Pervomaisky customs post and “a large amount of cash was
seized from him”. The Russian Federation noted that “a criminal case has been filed
against this individual under the Criminal Code of the Russian Feder ation article
200.1, section 2 (a) for non-declaration of cash in the amount of 179,900 USD”. In
its reply, the Russian Federation stated that the investigation was continuing and that
“the involvement of North Korean individuals whose names are included i n the
consolidated United Nations Security Council List has not been established ”. 26
Figure X
Bulk cash seized from a vessel captain of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea

Source: http://dvtu.customs.ru.
__________________

S/2016/157, para. 136, notes: “OMM continues to operate and adapt since its designation on
28 July 2014. The Panel has confirmed that OMM works under and has been controlled by the
Ministry of Land and Marine Transport of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, both
before and after its designation. The Ministry has played an indispensable role in enabling OMM
to evade sanctions measures.”
25
See http://dvtu.customs.ru/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=24856:180--------&catid=49:press-cat&Itemid=100; Oliver Hotham, “North Korean detained by Vladivostok
customs for “large scale” cash smuggling”, NK News, 3 October 2018.
26
According to media reports, a second national of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was
detained at Vladivostok International Airport for carrying $192,300 and 1,000 euros. (Sources:
http://dvtu.customs.ru/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=25205: -200------&catid=49:press-cat&Itemid=100; “North Korean detained at Vladivostok airport for large-scale
cash smuggling”, NK News, 26 November 2018). The Panel wrote to the Russian Federation on
10 December 2018 and the investigation continues.
24

20/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Blockchain platform for vessel transactions: Marine Chain
28. In October 2018, a Member State informed the Panel that “a start-up company
in the process of establishing itself as a Hong Kong-registered blockchain platform
named Marine Chain has at least one DPRK individual behind it”. 27 The Member
State expressed concern that “the platform could be used to generate money for the
regime and as a potential means of evading sanctions on shipping by creating a new
method of obscuring the ownership of a vessel”.
29. The Panel investigated Marine Chain’s Chief Executive Officer, Singaporean
national “Captain” Jonathan Foong, on suspicion of violating paragraph 18 of
resolution 2375 (2017). The Panel requested information on a suspected national of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea who had been presenting himself as a
Marine Chain adviser.
30. In his replies to the Panel, Foong provided contradictory information and
documentation that did not meet the Panel’s evidentiary standards. He claimed that
Marine Chain had been shut down, stating that “the biz was closed because the
owner/investor is not paying his bill”. 28 On the whereabouts of and his
communications with the “owner/investor”, he stated that “although I have informed
the owner to foot all outstanding bills (Owning (sic) close to 500K US$) he remained
silent and we lost communication shortly thereafter ”. For information on the use by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of cyberactivity in evasion of sanctions,
see paragraphs 109 to 115.
Ship-to-ship coal transfers
31. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has switched most of its maritimerelated coal trade to illegal ship-to-ship transfers as the primary means of
circumventing paragraph 8 of resolution 2371 (2017). Such illegal deliveries became
regularized and systemic in 2018 (see annex 15), with some of the largest vessels in
the fleet of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea documented as continuing to
load coal at ports in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on a monthly basis
before engaging in illegal ship-to-ship transfers, predominately in the Gulf of Tonkin
(see figure XI).
Figure XI
Ship-to-ship transfers of coal in the Gulf of Tonkin

Source: Member State; Map: The Panel.

__________________

The Member State also noted that Marine Chain “claimed to be an Etherium-based block chain
platform with its own crypto-currency token that will facilitate the buying and sel ling of marine
vessels worldwide through digital tokenization”.
28
Marine Chain Platform Limited was registered in Hong Kong on 12 April 2018 and closed on
17 September 2018.
27

19-01704

21/379

S/2019/171

32. In other cases, satellite imagery shows that previously foreign-flagged vessels,
such as the Hua Fu (IMO No. 9020003) designated for a global port entry ban and
deflagging on 30 March 2018, continued to engage in multiple illegal ship-to-ship
transfers in August and September 2018 (see figure XII).
Figure XII
Hua Fu engaging in illegal coal transfers in August and September 2018

Source: Member State; Map: The Panel.

33. Other unknown foreign-flagged or now stateless vessels such as the former
Panama-flagged Forever Lucky (IMO No. 9003653), the former Togo-flagged Lucky
Star ((IMO No. 7942843) and the former Comoros-flagged Oriental Treasure (IMO
No. 9115028) (see figure XIII), have also been documented as aiding and abetting the
illegal coal export operations of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. No flag
State, including the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, has reported these new
vessel flags to IMO.
Figure XIII
Forever Lucky, Lucky Star and Oriental Treasure engaging in illegal
coal operations

Source: Member State; Map: The Panel.

False-flagging of coal vessels of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea: the
Wise Honest
34. Vessels of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea have transported large
quantities of coal and other prohibited goods through deceptive practices such as
“double-flagging” that have violated both the resolutions and provisions of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, essentially rendering such vessels stateless
22/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

and vulnerable to the right of visit. One example of this trend is the vessel Wise Honest
(IMO No. 8905490), which was transporting 25,500 tons of coal when it was detained
by Indonesia around 1 April 2018. The Panel wrote to Indonesia on 14 June and again
on 27 August 2018 following information and imagery supplied by a Member State
(see figure XIV). Indonesia reported on 12 September 2018 that the ship had been
inspected and found to be registered under two jurisdictions, one set of registration
and crew documents under the flag of Sierra Leone and the other under the flag of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. 29 Common to all Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea-flagged vessels engaged in prohibited trade and contrary to IMO
regulations, the vessel was reported as sailing with the AIS “turned off during the
ship’s journey into Indonesian territorial waters” and that “no report was made to the
destined port authority for proper ship clearance”. 30 Indonesia informed the Panel on
29 November 2018 that the captain of the Wise Honest was subject to prosecution for
“knowingly hoisting a false flag”.
Figure XIV
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea vessel Wise Honest at Nampo loading coal on
11 March (left) and at Balikpapan Port Facility on 9 April 2018 (right)

Source: Member State.

__________________
29
30

19-01704

See annex 16.
Indonesia also stated that that “no report was made to the destined port authority for proper ship
clearance”.
23/379

S/2019/171

Figure XV
Likely route of the Wise Honest

Source: Member State.

Coal originating in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea: brokering
and export chains
35. The Panel’s investigations into coal brokering and export chains highlight the
significant amounts of revenue for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea as well
as profit for commodity traders seeking commissions or arbitrage from such deals.
The Wise Honest shipment was worth $2,990,000, according to its contract (see
annex 17). Regarding the shipment’s export documentation and brokering chain,
Indonesia stated that it had recovered “cargo documents and clearance received from
a Russian cargo ship intending to conduct an STS transfer around Balikpapan waters
in East Kalimantan”. The Panel requested further clarification and/or documentation,
which has not been received to date. Indonesia also named a company of the Republic
of Korea, Enermax, as the “final destination/recipient of the coal upon the STS
transfer of the coal in Balikpapan” (see annex 16). On 3 December 2018, Enermax
informed the Panel that it had been investigated by its national authorities and that
there was no import of coal. 31 The contract for the shipment named the sellers as Hong
Kong Nova International Trade Company, an entity selling cigarette-manufacturing
machinery. The company informed the Panel that it “had no idea where the contract
came from nor why it has our company’s seal” (see annex 18).
36. The Panel identified a key figure in the coal shipment as Hamid Ali, an
Indonesian commodity trader and broker who had regular meetings with diplomats at

__________________
31

24/379

Enermax stated that “we simply received an offer of Indonesia-origin coal from someone who
seemed to be a local broker in Indonesia”.
19-01704

S/2019/171

the Embassy of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in Jakarta. 32 These
diplomats introduced Ali to Jong Song Ho, the president of the Jinmyong Trading
Group and Jinmyong Joint Bank of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in
December 2017 (see annex 19) as part of “the establishment of a Korean Cultural
Centre in West Java”. 33 Ali met Jong again a month later and discussed the
transshipment of coal; 34 the cost of the service was $760,000, which Jong arranged
through a transfer to Ali’s account via a company named Huitong Minerals (see ibid.).
According to Ali, another broker, Eko Setyatmoko, then became involved in the
transshipment. Setyatmoko, who received at least some of the Huitong Minerals
payment and has liaised with the Wise Honest and its crew since its interdiction in
April, has not responded to the Panel’s inquiries. The Panel informed Indonesia, Ali
and Setyatmoko that the 25,500 tons of coal should be seized, according to the
resolutions, and that the broker may not sell the coal. The Panel has yet to receive any
confirmation that the coal has been offloaded from the vessel. The investigation
continues.
37. The Panel continued its investigation of prohibited coal exports by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in 2017 via transshipment 35 through Russian
Far Eastern ports, including Kholmsk. 36 On 10 December 2018, the Republic of Korea
indicted four of its nationals and five commodity trading companies for illegally
importing coal and pig iron (see table 1). The motive reportedly cited by the Public
Prosecutors’ Office was “profit from arbitrage, using the fact that the prices of North
Korean coal and other materials are low due to their difficulty to be traded
internationally”. 37
Table 1
Prohibited commodity shipments subject to prosecution: type, volume
and value
Commodity

Volume (tons)

Value (United States dollars)

Coal

29 843

4 610 000

Coal briquettes

8 275

(coal and coal briquettes)

Pig iron

2 010

971 000

Total value of prohibited imports
a

5 581 000 a

In a reply to the Panel dated 7 January 2019, the Republic of Korea reported that according
to the Public Prosecutor’s Office, 29,843 tons of coal, 8,275 tons of coal briquettes and 2,010
tons of pig iron from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea were “illegally transported
to the ROK – these are provisional figures, pending final judgement by the judiciary”.

__________________

Through the embassy of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Mr. Ali had been
introduced to a number of businessmen from the De mocratic People’s Republic of Korea who
travelled through China, Indonesia and Viet Nam (see annex 19).
33
Jong Song Ho’s local representative in Indonesia is Kwak Chol Su, phone + 62 813 803 00501
(see annex 19).
34
Jong “discussed of the possibility to distribute DPRK products, he asked whether is possible to
charter Vessel for Transhipment of Cargo which Coal from Russian Origin not using Korean
Vessel (sic)”. (see annex 19).
35
S/2018/171, para. 59.
36
The shipments reportedly “never went through customs in Russia, and were shipped to South
Korea after documentation about their origins had been falsified. ” See Baek Kyung-Seo and
Shim Kyu-Seok, “Four indicted for buying North coal”, Korea Joongang Daily, 11 December
2018. Available at http://koreajoongangdaily.joins.com/news/article/article.aspx?ai d=3056743.
37
Joyce Lee, “South Korean prosecutors indict four for importing North Korean coal ”, Reuters,
10 December 2018 Available at https://www.reuters.com/article/us-northkorea-southkoreacoal/south-korean-prosecutors-indict-four-for-importing-north-korean-coal-idUSKBN1O90TP.
32

19-01704

25/379

S/2019/171

38. A Member State informed the Panel in September 2018 that the prohibited
shipments listed above comprise only one element of much larger trades of
commodities from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that involve unwitting
international banks providing letters of credit to a wider, transnational trading
network that operates through offshore jurisdictions such as the British Virgin Islan ds
and in Hong Kong, China, as well as other locations. Vessel owners engaged in such
trades have attempted to launder the identity of their ships, deceiving IMO into
providing new IMO numbers for vessels later seized pursuant to paragraph 9 of
resolution 2397 (2017) (see annex 28). These investigations continue.
Vessel hijacking and use of the flag of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
39. The Panel continued its investigation of the Wan Heng 11 (IMO No. 8791667),
a former Belize-flagged vessel, which was first detected engaging in an illegal ship to-ship transfer with the tanker of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Rye
Song Gang 1 (IMO No. 7389704) on13 February 2018. Although deregistered by
Belize on 19 February 2018, the vessel continued to occasionally transmit as a Belizeregistered vessel, including around the time of a ship-to-ship transfer on 10 April with
the Patriot, a Russian Federation-registered vessel, and until 21 June 2018, when it
switched identity to that of a Democratic People’s Republic of Korea-flagged vessel,
the Kum Jin Gang.
40. Notably, this reregistration occurred without official notification to IMO 38 and
without the consent of the rightful owners of the ship, Zhej iang Wanheng Shipping
Company. This company cooperated with the Panel, providing evidence that on
29 November 2017, the company signed a bareboat charter agreement with Hong
Kong Cosnewvi International Shipping represented by Chen Chun-han, a national of
Taiwan Province of China, who also holds a Travel Permit for Resident of Taiwan to
Chinese Mainland. 39 The bareboat charter agreement contained an “illegal trading
clause”, which was activated on 19 February 2018 when the owners learned from the
Belize authorities of the sanctions violation through their vessel’s deregistration
notification. Subject to multiple investigations by the Chinese authorities, the rightful
owner attempted to locate and reclaim their vessel, without success. 40 According to
the business registry, Hong Kong Cosnewvi International Shipping was dissolved on
24 August 2018. Chen Chun-han did not respond to the Panel.
41. The case highlights a newly identified risk for larger shipowners in the region
engaging in the frequent practice of bareboat chartering. The case sh ows that
charterers that violate sanctions-related clauses do not return vessels following
contract cancellations as a result of documented violations. Importantly, the effective
12-month hijack of the Wan Heng 11 illustrates how the flag registry and ports of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea now provide safe harbour for such ships, both
in terms of resupply of fuel and provisions as well as ensuring that United Nationsdesignated deregistration does not render such vessels stateless and thus more
vulnerable to inspection for illegal activities under the rules governing the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. 41 In addition, the global port ban imposed
__________________

United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, article 91 (2), requires that flag States not only
register ships but issue registered vessels with documentation to prove registration and nationality.
39
Both documents held on file by the Panel.
40
According to the bareboat charter arrangement, the owners had provided neither officers or crew
to the Wan Heng 11 which had switched off its AIS following the incident. The company
provided evidence of their attempts to contact Chen Chun-han at his Taichung business address
to demand information on the location of their vessel and its immediate return, but registered
delivery letters were returned.
41
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, article 110.
38

26/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

on the Wan Heng 11 and other such vessels means that these ships cannot enter ports
subject to commercial courts and other tribunal jurisdictions, which would provide
the rightful owner with legal recourse.
Due diligence and AIS monitoring by flag States, commodity traders, insurers
and classification societies
42. With regard to the above-mentioned evasion tactics and, in particular, the
consistent switching off of AIS, the Panel conducted a survey in 2018, writing to all
the flag-of-convenience States and protection and indemnity insurers that had
registered or provided services to foreign-flagged vessels identified as involved in
violations of paragraphs 11 and 14 of resolution 2375 (2017). As part of the survey,
the Panel also wrote to the leading global commodity trading companie s and oil
refiners operating in the relevant region, including those whose pr oduct had already
been illegally channelled to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, requesting
information about any due diligence and risk mitigation measures taken to ensure that
the relevant vessels and cargoes under their services or contracts were not diverted to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The Panel suggested a best practice “AIS
switch-off clause” in the letters as well as contractual clauses to ensure end-use
delivery verification of petroleum products for global commodity traders, oil refiners
and producers, which it further promoted during consultations with industry and
Member States between February and June 2018.
43. None of the flag-of-convenience States that replied to the Panel’s letters on AIS
surveillance currently monitor the AIS of the vessels that sail under their jurisdiction
and are therefore unable to ensure that these vessels comply with the AIS regulations
contained within the relevant international treaties, such as the International
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea. The lack of AIS monitoring of at-risk vessels
in international waters in North-East Asia means that these flag-of-convenience States
are unable to detect future illegal ship-to-ship transfers signalled through an AIS
switch-off or manipulation. Similarly, none of the responding Protection and
Indemnity Club insurance and reinsurance companies indicated that they monitored
the AIS of vessels whose cargo they insured.
44. Several entities indicated that they had adopted some form of an AIS switch-off
clause, including three of the largest global commodity trading companies and a
smaller number of Asia-based oil traders and refiners. While only one major global
commodity trading company has previously indicated to the Panel that it instituted a
full end-use delivery verification supporting documentation requirement for contracts
applied to specific Asian deliveries, two other major traders included a destination
restriction clause in their contracts. A major global commodity trading company’s
institution of both an AIS switch-off clause and the end-use delivery verification
requirement demonstrates the ability of the private sector to enhance due diligence at
a relatively low cost.
45. If the above measures were adopted more widely, they might significantly
reduce the number of charter vessels willing to switch off or otherwise manipulate
their AIS to engage in illegal ship-to-ship transfer. If the relevant flag States adopted
similar measures, ship captains might understand that AIS switch-off or manipulation
for illegal ship-to-ship transfer could lead to vessel deregistration, the loss of
insurance and the loss of earnings through the termination of chartering and
transportation contracts.
46. The Panel conducted another survey with all companies providing classification
services to vessels involved in prohibited ship-to-ship transfers of petroleum as well
as exports and transshipments of coal banned under the resolutions. In most cases, the
Panel found that such contracts had been withdrawn and the vessels had been
19-01704

27/379

S/2019/171

“declassed”. While classification societies may inform the flag States and vessel
owners of declassification, the reason (violation of the resolutions) is gene rally not
given, making it possible that other such societies unwittingly provide services to the
vessel or its owners. To ensure better information, coordination classification
societies should inform the Committee, as well as flag States, vessel owners, relevant
international and regional organizations and trade associations, when they declassify
vessels based on violations of the resolutions.
Prohibited fishing activities
47. The Panel found that the prohibited transfer by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea of its fishing rights, as clarified in resolution 2397 (2017),
continued throughout 2018, acting as a potential source of income for the country.
The Panel analysed two Member State reports, noting that during the period from
January to November 2018, they had inspected more than 15 Chinese fishing vessels
that were found to be carrying fishing licences of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. 42 Inspections and reports detailed multiple areas of operation, including
fishing grounds in the seas between Japan and China, the Korean Peninsula and t he
Russian Federation. One fisherman stated, during an interview with a Member State,
that there were around 200 Chinese fishing boats operating in the “water of North
Korea”. Another interviewee stated that the monthly cost of an individual fishing
licence was 50,000 yuan (approximately $7,250 43 ). Observable evidence included
fishing permit number plates attached to the boats’ bridge (see figure XVI) while in
another image, the vessel flew the flag of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(figure XVII).
Figure XVI
Fishing vessels displaying fishing permit number plates and
the flag of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Source: Member State.

48. The Panel noted two obfuscation techniques: fishing permits issued by
authorities of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea used by foreign fishing
__________________

Among those crewmen interviewed by a Member State, individuals were found to be serving
aboard the following vessels: 福远渔 679, 福远渔 680, 合兴 88, 闽霞渔 1067, Urongyu61006(鲁
荣渔 61006).
43
11 December 2018 conversion rate.
42

28/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

boats and false-flagging. For example, a fishing permit issued by authorities of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was found aboard a boat captained by a
Chinese national (see figure XVII). In a separate case, the Panel is investigating media
reports based on video footage of the Russian Federation Coastguard that highlights
at least one Chinese fishing boat flying a flag of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, obfuscating its nationality (see figure XVII).
Figure XVII
Fishing licence (left) and flag of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on
the bow of the Chinese boat (right)

Source: Member State (left); YouTube (right).

49. The Panel wrote to China and the Russian Federation to request information on
its investigations. China informed the Panel that “China has always seriously
implemented the Security Council resolutions related to the DPRK. After the adoption
of the Security Council Resolution 2397 (2017), the Chinese competent authorities
immediately published an announcement to prohibit procuring fishing rights from the
DPRK, and the Chinese entities have stopped procuring fishing rights from the DPRK
in accordance with the announcement. If any Chinese national or vessel is confirmed
to illegally procure fishing rights from the DPRK or illegally go fishing in the DPRK
sea areas without permission, China will deal with relevant issues in accordance with
laws and regulations.” The Panel has not yet received a reply from the Russian
Federation.
Recommendations
Recommendations to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006)
50. Designate the following vessels for illicit transfers of petroleum products in
violation of paragraph 5 of resolution 2397 (2017):
Myong Ryu 1, IMO number: 8532413, flag of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea
Song Won, IMO number: 8613360, flag of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
Jin Yang 36 (金洋 36), flag unknown
Xing Ming Yang 888, IMO number: 8410847, Sierra Leone
51. Include the provision in paragraph 11 of resolution 2375 (2017) in the vessel
designation criteria and incorporate it into the existing lists of designated vessels
as appropriate.
19-01704

29/379

S/2019/171

52. Amend the delisting procedure to allow Member States to request delisting
on behalf of a vessel owner (for the Panel’s proposal for an amended delisting
procedure for vessels, see annex 20).
Recommendations to Member States
53. Flag States should inform the Committee and the Panel of vessels that they
deregister.
54. Flag States should monitor the AIS of their vessels to better ensure
implementation of the resolutions.
55. Members States should consider introducing a regulatory requirement for
protection and indemnity insurance and reinsurance companies to include AIS
screening and an “AIS switch-off” clause in their contracts for at-risk vessels
operating in the relevant regions.
56. Member States should consider introducing a regulatory requirement for
petroleum product trading, refining and producing companies to include enduse delivery verification measures and AIS screening as well as an “AIS switchoff” clause in their contracts.
57. IMO member States IMO should consider measures to improve
information-sharing and maritime regulation enforcement by flag States and
other interested parties.
58. Member States should consider introducing legislation to ensure that global
and regional banks operating in their jurisdiction introduce AIS screening and
vessel due diligence risk assessment clauses into letters of credit, loans and other
financial instruments for global and regional commodity traders and brokers
trading in oil and petroleum products in higher-risk free-on-board markets in
the affected areas.
59. In order to allow more effective due diligence by flag States, other Member
States and the maritime-related industries, the Committee should consider
consolidating the designated vessels in one document. Information provided on
the vessels should include the measures obligated under the relevant resolutions,
such as asset freeze, denial of port entry and cancellation of registration or vessel
services. Incidents of deregistration reported to the Committee should also be
reflected to prevent inadvertent reregistration.
Imports and exports of commodities to and from the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea according to trade data
60. For detailed information on imports and exports of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea during the reporting period, see annex 21.

III. Embargoes, designated entities and individuals
Algeria
61. In response to the Panel’s letter of 10 August 2017 on Mansudae Overseas
Project Group of Companies, Algeria replied during 2018 that “there are no North
Korean companies or entities on Security Council sanctions lists in Algeria ”.
However, Algeria also noted that one national of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, a company manager named Choe Song Il, “claimed to represent Mansudae
Overseas Project Group of Companies”. He was officially the manager of “MOP
Group Algeria LLC”, which was registered on 20 August 2015. The company

30/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

specialized “in major public works, construction design, mining and the manu facture
of furnishings”. Furthermore, Choe’s replacement, Kim Chol Jin, arrived in Algeria
on 3 February 2017, the same day that Choe departed. The Panel notes that according
to Algeria, the company was officially dissolved on 8 January 2018. Kim Chol Jin
departed Algeria on 18 March 2018.
Angola
62. The Panel continued its investigation of a military advisory mission of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of approximately 80 individuals, which,
according to a Member State, departed Angola for an unknown destination in January
2017. On 27 August 2018, Angola replied to the Panel, stating that “we are not aware
of any movement or travel by military advisers from Angola to Mozambique in 2017”.
Angola informed the Panel that Jon Chol Yong, a diplomat of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea accredited to Angola and working on behalf of Green Pine
Associated Corporation, 44 departed Angolan territory on 20 April 2017. Angola also
noted that embassy staff of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea had been
“drastically reduced from 12 diplomats in 2016–2017 to 6 diplomats currently” and
provided the Panel with lists of accredited diplomats of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea (see annex 22).
Botswana
63. Regarding the activity of Mansudae Overseas Project Group of Companies in
Botswana, Botswana cooperated by replying in its letter dated 6 February 2018 that
the Government had contracted Mansudae Overseas Project Group of Companies
based in Windhoek in 2004. General manager Kang Hyo Song 45 represented the
company, which designed and built “three Dikgozi Monument”, and two workers of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ri Ung Si 46 and Sin Yong, 47 had visited
Botswana in the last stages of the project. Botswana further informed the Panel that
in 2007, Kang Hyo Song had acquired a residence permit in Botswana and registered
“Korean Art and Monument (Proprietary) Limited” in Gaborone, about which the
Panel is now addressing its inquiries. In its implementation report submitted on
27 October 2017, 48 Botswana noted that the three Dikgozi monument contract was
the last engagement on record with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Cambodia
64. Cambodia replied to a Panel inquiry by stating that Mansudae New Tech
Corporation Ltd had been incorporated as an investment company by Mansudae
Overseas Project Group of Companies as a subsidiary at the Council for the
Development of Cambodia and the Ministry of Commerce and that it had “signed an
agreement with the Royal Government of Cambodia to establish the Grand Angkor
Panorama Museum in Siem Reap Province”. Cambodia provided the biodata of 12
nationals of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (2 managers 49 and 10 staff)
who had worked for the company but has yet to reply to the Panel’s most recent letter.

__________________

S/2017/150, para. 103 and S/2018/171, para. 85.
Date of birth (DOB): 13 October 1971, passport number 827220297 (issued on 3 May 2007,
expired on 3 May 2012).
46
Structural engineer, DOB: 28 February 1942, passport number 211130196.
47
Architect, DOB 4 January 1964, passport number 463130133.
48
S/AC.49/2017/95.
49
Kim Sang Gyu, DOB: 25 March1966, passport number 563320017; Ri Kyong Il, DOB: 3 March
1981, passport number PS836220044.
44
45

19-01704

31/379

S/2019/171

China
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea-designated entities engaged in clandestine
nuclear procurement
65. The Panel continued its investigation into the designated entities Namchongang
Trading Corporation, Namhung Trading Corporation and associated front companies
and their representatives, including Kang Mun Kil, designated for nuclear
procurement activities by resolution 2270 (2016). According to a Member State, Kang
Mun Kil procured items used for nuclear programmes, including pressure transducers,
prohibited under paragraph 8 (a) of resolution 1718 (2006). 50 According to the
documents obtained by the Member State, he had procured pressure transducers from
a Chinese company, Shanghai Zhen Tai Instrument Corporation Limited (上海振太
仪表有限公司, hereafter Shanghai Zhen Tai), at least twice in 2013 and 2016. 51
Shanghai Zhen Tai has also been advertised as an exporter of vacuum equipment to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on a commercial website. According to
the Member State and supporting documentation, Kang Mun Kil used a Hong Kong
company, “Y Y Shun Limited” (億億順有限公司), 52 for procurement activities. By
September 2014, Kang Mun Kil had officially renamed Y Y Shun Limited as “Shunyi
Limited”, and this company provided a Chinese bank account for transfers from the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The Member State informed the Panel that
Kang Mun Kil’s successor in China was Chong Won Ryol, a national of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea who is the official trade representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in Dalian in addition to working on behalf of
Namchongang Trading Corporation. The Panel requested information from China on
Shanghai Zhen Tai’s sales of vacuum equipment and end users, correspondence
between YY Shun Limited 53 and Shanghai Zhen Tai and catalogues of the company’s
pressure transducers, relevant customs documents, immigration and visa record
entries and exit information, and financial information. China replied to the Panel,
stating that the “relevant authorities have made a comprehensive and serious
investigation into this case” and that “Shanghai Zhen Tai Instrument Corporation
Limited does not have the export qualification in accordance with Chinese laws and
regulations. Zhen Tai has neither directly carried out any export trade nor entrust ed
trade agent companies to do export on behalf of it since establishment ” and that
“regarding the Hong Kong company Y Y Shun Company Ltd and Shunyi Limited,
after an in-depth investigation by China there is no evidence proving that they are
operating in China on behalf of Namchongang Trading Corporation”. China also
informed the Panel that “the bank account opened by the above Hong Kong
companies in a Chinese bank has been closed” and that “Kang Mun Kil left China in
2016 and is not in China now”.
66. As a follow-up to this investigation, the Panel is currently surveying the world ’s
manufacturers of nuclear procurement “choke point” items such as pressure
transducers to identify, determine and ultimatel y share good corporate internal
screening systems and other examples of proactive end-use delivery verification.

__________________

See S/2006/814, annex (2006); and INFCIRC/254/Rev. 8/Part 2 (2010), annex 3.A.7, for
specifications of restricted pressure transducers.
51
Address: Building 1, No. 1358, Tongpu Road, Shanghai, China, Tel: 021-52707750,
Fax: 021-52701844.
52
Address: Unit 04, 7/F, Bright Way Tower No. 33 Mong kok road, Kowloon, Hong Kong,
Tel: 85-2-27935511, Fax: +85-2-35902333. He also used the fax number 04-1183-6555. The
company was renamed as Hongkong Shunyi Limited in 2014 and dissolved in 2017. The director
on the deregistration document was Jian Ping (蒋萍) (China ID number: 21060419730627002X).
53
YY Shun Limited renamed to Shunyi Limited in 2014.
50

32/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Democratic Republic of the Congo
67. The Panel is investigating the involvement of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea in gold mining in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Panel viewed
letters from Medrara, a Kinshasa-registered gold mining company directed by a
Lebanese citizen, Fouad Dakhlallah, A letter from Medrara dated 9 September 2017
was addressed to Kim Chol Su, a representative of the United Nations-designated
entity Saeng P’il, a.k.a. Green Pine Associated Corporation. The letter outlined a
proposed investment in a Medrara gold mine, noting that “the size of the territory is
16,000 hectares” and named Syrian arms trafficker Hussein al-Ali as the appointed
intermediary, stating that “after your approval Mr. Hussein Al-Ali in Damascus will
make all the arrangements for meeting in Beirut”. The letter, sent by Dakhlallah,
provides Hussein al-Ali’s contact details. An earlier letter dated 15 October 2016 was
addressed to “Chong Ryong”, assessed by the Member State as likely to be the
Chongryong Technology Corporation previously identified as active on behalf of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in the Sudan, together with Hussein al-Ali.
The letter, inviting a geologist team from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to visit, requested the names and passport numbers of the geologists. The Panel wrote
to Dakhlallah, who also controls a forestry company, Compagnie d’exploitation de
bois d’Afrique, to request information concerning both the involvement of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in his businesses and that of their documented
intermediary in Africa, Hussein al-Ali, but has received no reply.
68. The Panel continued its investigation into military training by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea of the Presidential Guard of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as well as its provision of 9-mm firearms to the Presidential Guard and
special units of the police, some of which were deployed to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic. 54
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has yet to respond to the Panel ’s inquiries.
Egypt
69. The Panel continued its investigation of Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
diplomat An Jong Hyok, 55 who was certified as the general representative of the
Ministry of Military Equipment of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in the
Middle East and Africa 56 and authorized to act on behalf of Saeng Pi’l Trading
Corporation, an alias of Green Pine Associated Corporation. 57 According to a Member
State, An had travelled to Egypt in August 2016 in an attempt to negotiate the release
of the vessel Jie Shun and its cargo of 30,000 rocket-propelled grenades seized by the
Egyptian authorities and then inspected by the Panel in November 2016. 58 Egypt
cooperated with the Panel in April 2018, confirming that An Jong Hyok was still
stationed at the Embassy of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in Cairo as
the Third Secretary. Egypt also informed the Panel on 13 July 2018 that An Jong Hyok
was “no longer accredited North Korean Embassy in Egypt and has left Egypt
permanently”. Egypt also replied to the Panel’s request for information on the
activities of its Defence Office in Pyongyang, the existence of which was
communicated to the Panel by a Member State by stating that “it has made it
absolutely clear that there is no military cooperation with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea”.

__________________

S/2017/742, para. 24.
DOB 14 March 1970, passport number 563410155.
56
S/2017/150, annex 14–25.
57
Ibid., para. 182.
58
S/2018/171, para. 90; S/2017/150, paras. 61–71.
54
55

19-01704

33/379

S/2019/171

Eritrea
70. The Panel continued its investigation into Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea national Kim Kwang Rim; it has previously reported on this individual as the
Green Pine Associated Corporation representative in Eritrea. 59 Eritrea has yet to reply
to the Panel’s inquiries for his full biodata, activities and whereabouts. The Panel also
continued its investigation into prohibited military cooperation between the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and Eritech (E-tech), which operates under
the authority or at the direction of the Eritrean Defence Forces, and its relationship
with Glocom, a Democratic People’s Republic of Korea provider of encrypted
military communications equipment. 60
Germany
71. The Panel investigated a diplomat of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Ri Yun Thaek (a.k.a. Ri Yun Taek) who attempted to procure a multi-gas
monitor, which, according to Germany, is a prohibited dual-use item that may be used
in the production of chemical weapons, while based at the Embassy of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in Berlin in 2012 and 2013. Germany informed the Panel
that it had prevented the procurement attempt but had been unable to take any legal
action against Ri owing to his diplomatic status. Germany subsequently expelled Ri
and informed other European Union member States about his activities. As a result,
he was refused accreditation at the Permanent Mission of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to the United Nations in Vienna and at the Embassy of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in Sofia. According to a Member State, Ri
was then assigned to the Embassy of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in
Moscow. The Panel has requested information from the Russian Federation on his
status.
Islamic Republic of Iran
72. A Member State informed the Panel that the Islamic Republic of Iran was one
of the two most lucrative markets for Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
military-related cooperation 61 and that both Korea Mining Development Trading
Corporation (KOMID) and Green Pine Associated Corporation, a.k.a. Saeng Pi’l,
offices in the Islamic Republic of Iran “are active”. The Member State also informed
the Panel that one recently observed pattern was nationals of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea based in the Islamic Republic of Iran flying between Tehran and
Dubai and boarding a return flight to Tehran within a few hours of their arrival in the
United Arab Emirates. The Member State noted that this was indicative of cash
couriers. 62 The Panel wrote to the Islamic Republic of Iran requesting all information
relating to activities of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in the country. In
the letter (see annex 23), the Panel noted previous correspondence with the Islamic
Republic of Iran in 2015 and 2016 documenting more than 282 flights between Tehran
and Dubai by Democratic People’s Republic of Korea diplomats Kim Yong Chol and
Jang Jong Son, who were designated in March 2016 as KOMID representatives in the
Islamic Republic of Iran. 63 The Panel also recalled airline information showing visits
to Tehran by KOMID President Kang Myong Chol in 2013 and Green Pine Associated
Corporation President Ri Hak Chol in 2014 and provided evidence of at least two
__________________

S/2016/157, para. 95.
For previous Panel reporting on Glocom’s violations of the resolutions, see S/2018/171,
paras. 173–177; S/2017/150, paras. 72–87 and 232–241; and S/2017/742, para. 52. See also
paras. 108–110 of the present report.
61
Two Panel members noted a lack of statistical information provided to the Panel.
62
Two Panel members noted a lack of evidence to support the assessment.
63
S/2017/150, tables 8 and 9.
59
60

34/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

passports for each of the designated individuals as well as additional aliases. The
Panel recalled Member State information indicating that previously identified
designated individuals and the representatives of designated entities were now
travelling under false names or with different passports and renewed its 2017 request
to the Islamic Republic of Iran for the names and passport numbers of all diplomats
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea accredited in the country. The Panel
also requested copies of passports and visa information on all nationals of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea registered with the Iranian authorities. The
Islamic Republic of Iran replied to the Panel on 19 December 2018, stating that “there
are no DPRK nationals residing in the Islamic Republic of Iran other than its
diplomats”. It also stated that “DPRK diplomats accredited to the Islamic Republic
of Iran have so far not been in contradiction with the provisions of relevant
conventions or resolutions of the Security Council on DPRK ” (see annex 24).
Libya
73. The Panel continued its investigations into multiple attempts at milita ry
cooperation between the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and various Libyan
authorities, as well as designated entities and foreign nationals working on the ir
behalf in Libya. According to a Member State, O Chol Su, the Deputy Minister of the
Ministry of Military Equipment of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, sent
a letter on 23 March 2015 to Khalifa al-Ghwail, the then Chief of the Supreme Council
of Defence and deputy to the Prime Minister, which noted that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea was “currently in the process of preparing the
sales/purchase agreement for the required defence systems and ammunition needed
to maintain stability of Libya” and further noted that “Green Pine Association, a
commercial establishment belonging to our ministry” would provide the draft
agreement and additional documentation. The letter also mentioned the role of
Consulting Bureau for Marketing, a company belonging to a Hussein al-Ali, a Syrian
national described as an arms trafficker for the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in Libya, the Sudan and Yemen. 64 In a reply dated 5 April 2015, Khalifa alGhwail thanked O Chol Su and referred to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s invitation to Libyan technical teams to visit the country. A subsequent
document of the Libyan Ministry of Defence dated 20 May 2015 authorized power of
attorney for Syrian national Hussein al-Ali “to negotiate, correspond, exchange
information, receive documents and technical and financial proposals on our behalf
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea”. The Panel suspects a connection
between the 2015 planned activities and meetings held later by the Ambassador of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to Libya with the Libyan Ministry of Defence
to engage in military cooperation in March 2017. 65 Neither Libya nor Khalifa alGhwail have replied to the Panel’s inquiries.

__________________
64
65

19-01704

See annex 26 for the reply from the Sudan and annex 30 for the passport.
Information obtained by the Panel through media sources shows that the Office of Information
for the Libyan Ministry of Defence uploaded on its Facebook page a report on a meeting between
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and Libyan Government officials in Tripoli on
8 February 2017. According to the Facebook page, Libyan Minister of Defence, Al-Mahdi
al-Barghathi, and the new Ambassador of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to Libya,
Ju Jin Hyok, discussed ways to develop the bilateral relations between the two countries,
“particularly in the fields of military cooperation” and “agreed to develop a joint action plan to
promote bilateral cooperation between Tripoli and Pyongyang in various fields, particul arly in
the fields of technical cooperation, information technologies and communication in military
fields”.
35/379

S/2019/171

Madagascar
74. The Panel is investigating the activities of Mansudae Overseas Project Group of
Companies in Madagascar. Madagascar replied to the Panel in its letter dated
20 November 2017 66 that no company named “Mansudae Overseas Project (MOP)
Group of Companies” is conducting business in Madagascar and no “North Korean
national” is registered in immigration databases.
Malaysia
75. On 22 February 2018, the United States announced that it had determined that
“the Government of North Korea used the chemical warfare agent VX to assassinate
Kim Jong Nam in Kuala Lumpur airport”. 67 On 14 March, during the 87th meeting of
the Executive Council of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
the Government of Malaysia stated that it was “the use of VX nerve agent” that had
“caused the death of one North Korean national, Mr. Kim Jong Nam”. Malaysia also
noted that its law enforcement authorities were “still pursuing an investigation on the
four North Korean suspects who fled Malaysia on the day of the killing”. 68 During
the court proceedings, a Malaysian police investigator identified Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea nationals Ri Jae Nam with Hanamori, the suspect Hong Song Hac
with Chang and Ri Ji Hyon as Y 69 and stated that Ri Jae Nam was the mastermind
behind the assassination. 70 The Panel requested further information from Malaysia
concerning a media report that equipment that could be used to make nerve agents
had been found in the apartment of Ri Jong Chol, 71 a national of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea first detained by Malaysia in the initial stages of the
police investigation and subsequently expelled on 3 March 2017.
Mozambique
76. The Panel continued its investigation into six nationals of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea working on behalf of designated entities and travelling to
Mozambique. According to a letter of December 2017 from Mozambique, the six
individuals (Kim Kwang Hyok, Kim Hyok Chan, Kim Song Chol, Ri Won Ho, Kim
Sok Chol and Kim Jung Jong) travelled to Mozambique during the period from 2012
to 2017. Airline records show that while in Mozambique, these individuals travelled
to remote civil-military airfields with nearby military bases. Mozambique has yet t o
respond to the Panel’s inquiries on the individuals’ activities. It also has not replied
to a request for information on the status and travel movements of Ri Chang Su, a
diplomat of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea based in South Africa but
stationed in Mozambique, who was identified as the representative of Haegeumgang
__________________

The original letter was in French.
Heather Nauert, Spokesperson, Department of State, United States of America, “Imposition of
Chemical and Biological Weapons Control and Warfare Elimination Act sanctions North Korea ”,
press statement, 6 March 2018. Available at www.state.gov/r/pa/prs/ps/2018/03/279079.htm.
68
For more information on Malaysia’s statement to the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) on the VX nerve agent attack, see OPCW, document EC -87/NAT.14, available
at https://www.opcw.org/fileadmin/OPCW/EC/87/en/ec87nat14_e_.pdf.
69
Radio Free Asia, “Video shows Kim murder suspect playing prank in Hanoi, Defense says ”,
20 March 2018. Available at www.rfa.org/english/news/korea/kimjongnam-trial03202018171630.html. International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) Red Notices
were issued against the three suspects as well as O Jong Gil in March 2017.
70
Radio Free Asia, “Malaysia: male suspects in Kim Jong Nam murder changed clothes,
appearance”, 26 October 2017. Available at www.rfa.org/english/news/korea/kimjongnam-trial10262017170212.html.
71
Alastair Gale and Tom Wright, “North Korea’s secret army: how operatives abroad aid the
regime”, Wall Street Journal, 18 May 2018. Available at www.wsj.com/articles/north-koreassecret-army-how-operatives-abroad-aid-the-regime-1526652387.
66
67

36/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Trading Corporation, which has been engaged in prohibited military activities in
Mozambique.
77. Regarding the prohibited fishing activities of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea in Mozambique, 72 on 15 January 2018, Mozambique provided evidence that
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea-Mozambique joint fishing venture
EMKIP had been dissolved. On 11 April, Mozambique informed the Panel that “on
25th March 2018, 22 members of the DPRK’s crew of the vessels operating under the
flag of that country departed definitively from Mozambique to their country of origin”
and provided the relevant tickets and passport information. Mozambique informed
the Panel that “4 crew members plus a manager, all of them from DPRK [sic], still
remain in Mozambique taking care of the vessels and should return to their country
as soon as the necessary arrangements are concluded”. On 24 April 2018,
Mozambique informed the Panel that the two Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea-crewed fishing vessels associated with EMKIP’s operations had been
deregistered and reflagged to other Member States under the ownership of other
companies.
Myanmar
78. The Panel continued its investigation into Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea-prohibited activities in Myanmar. 73 Myanmar informed the Panel in March that
there “had been no military cooperation between Myanmar and the DPRK since
October 2016” and that “no Myanmar technicians are stationed in the DPRK at
present”. 74 The Panel has not yet received a reply to its request of January 2018 for
documentation of contracts relating to military cooperation, including ballistic
missile cooperation since October 2006. The Panel also requested evidence of the
return of all Myanmar technicians from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
as well as the departure of all technicians of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea from Myanmar.
Namibia
79. Regarding the assets of the Mansudae Overseas Project Group in Namibia, 75 the
Government informed the Panel on 12 February 2018 that Mansudae Overseas Project
had held a private auction on 26 June 2017 and sold off all the vehicles and equipment.
Namibia provided a statement from an individual who had purchased one vehicle as
evidence. The Panel notes that the payment and transfer of at least one bus was made
a month following the designation of Mansudae. Namibia also stated in the abovementioned letter that Mansudae’s four tipper trucks were on site at the Suiderhof
Military Base, about which the Panel requested further information, in addition to the
23 Mansudae-owned vehicles and other heavy construction equipment.
Netherlands
80. In 2016, the Netherlands interdicted a shipment of four generator units ( see
figure XVIII) that were en route to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea via
China. The investigation highlighted the role of a diplomatic representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in a European Union member State, Kim
Chol Yong 76 (see para. 120), who had procured the items by informing the European
__________________

S/2018/171, paras. 97 and 98.
S/2018/171, paras. 101–103.
74
In its letter of 15 March 2018 to the Panel, Myanmar also stated: “The Ministry of Defence also reaffirmed
that no Myanmar technicians are stationed in the DPRK at present.”
75
S/2018/171, para. 108.
76
DOB: 1 June 1964.
72
73

19-01704

37/379

S/2019/171

Union exporter that he was a Chinese national and that the cargo was destined for
China. The intercepted shipment was the third consignment of its kind arranged by
Kim. Documents obtained by the Netherlands customs authorities showed that for all
shipments, Kim had relied on unwitting Chinese logistics service providers, including
a trading company located in Dalian, to send the items to a trading company of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that has been associated with a designated
entity, Office 39. The investigation also found that the payments for the three
shipments had been made by four different entities mainly within the European Union
that had played no apparent role in the actual export. This case highlights the role of
diplomats of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in procuring items on behalf
of entities working at the direction of designated entities and evasion techniques using
a third country to ship these items to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Figure XVIII
Interdicted generators

Source: Member State.

New Zealand
81. Regarding the Panel’s investigation of the aircraft flown at Wonsan in 2016, 77
on 29 May 2018, a New Zealand district court fined the aircraft manufacturer, Pacific
Aerospace Ltd, 74,805 New Zealand dollars for indirectly exporting aircraft spare
parts to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and 1,000 New Zealand dollars
for making an “erroneous export entry”. The judgement stated that Pacific Aerospace
had entered into a joint venture with Beijing General Aviation Company, to which it
sold the corresponding aircraft in September 2015. That same month, Beijing General
Aviation informed Pacific Aerospace that the aircraft had been onsold to Freesky
Aviation Company Limited, which informed Pacific Aerospace that it intended to base
the aircraft in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to be used for tourism,
which Freesky did without changing its ownership. 78 In an email of January 2016,
Beijing General Aviation followed up with Pacific Aerospace regarding a spare part
for the aircraft that had not yet been delivered, making clear that the aircraft was
located in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which shows that Pacific
Aerospace was aware of the final destination of the parts. 79 As a result of this case,
Pacific Aerospace has adopted new export control practices. The Panel has reported
multiple times on the evasion pattern of onselling items through multiple entities as
a way to obscure their final destination.
__________________

S/2018/171, para. 145; S/2017/150, paras. 126–128.
New Zealand Customs Service v. Pacific Aerospace Ltd [2018] NZDC 5034.
79
S/2017/150, annex 12–10.
77
78

38/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Sierra Leone
82. The Panel investigated reported involvement of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in a September 2018 military camp construction project in
Freetown, an activity prohibited under paragraph 9 of resolution 2270 (2016).
According to information provided by a European Member State, the topographic
map and pilot study were led by workers from the Nam Nam Cooperative General
Company, a.k.a. Namnamhupchochong Korea South-South Corporation (a.k.a.
조선남남협조총회사, Korea South-South Cooperation Corporation, Nam Nam
General Corporation), designated by the United States Department of the Treasury.
According to the information, this project involves Guicopres, a Guinean company.
Guicopres replied to the Panel, stating that “while we commissioned the pilot study
from the Koreans, the topographic mapping was carried out by Guinean and French
engineers”. Guicopres further stated that “at no time, therefore, has there been any
form of collaboration or partnership with Nam Nam on this project”. However, it
admitted “that company [Nam Nam] was paid for a one-off service”. The company
further stated that “we have taken steps to notify the cessation of all collaboration
with that company” (see annex 25). The Panel wrote to Guicopres again on
12 December 2018 requesting detailed information and documentation regarding the
company’s relations with Nam Nam and nationals of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. On 20 December 2018, Guicopres replied, stating that “we only
contacted the Korean workers during the preparation of the consultation file for the
construction of the Freetown camp. We can confirm that they [the North Korean Nam
Nam company] only worked with us for a few days in the context of the pre -feasibility
studies, and then our surveyors and topographers took over.” (see ibid.).
South Africa
83. The Panel continued its investigation into the accreditation and movements of
Ri Chang Su 80 and Choe Kwang Su, 81 nationals of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea reported as engaged in prohibited military cooperation in Mozambique and
accredited in their diplomatic passport at the Embassy of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in Pretoria. Choe Kwang Su, whose passport indicates that he is
Third Secretary at the Embassy in Pretoria, has returned to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The passport of his successor in Mozambique, Ri Chang Su, also
identifies him as the Third Economic and Commercial Secretary at the Embassy of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in Pretoria. 82 The Panel has reported on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s previous use of diplomats based at its
Embassy in Pretoria 83 for prohibited activities in neighbouring countries during the
period from 2012 to 2014. 84 In response to the Panel’s request for entry and exit
records and financial information on these individuals, South Africa replied that “the
Department of International Relations and Cooperation has gone through the archival
record of the DPRK diplomatic staff establishment in South Africa and must
emphasise that there is no mechanism for DPRK diplomats accredited in neighbouring
countries to be also accredited to South Africa. Doing so is a misrepresentation by the
DPRK as is the case of Mr. Chung Su Ri.” South Africa also stated that “as regards
any bank accounts held in South Africa allegedly Mr. Kil Jong Hun, Mr. Kwang Yon,
Mr. Ri Chang Su and Mr. Choe Kwang Su, this information will be verified with the
Financial Intelligence Centre (FIC)”. The investigation continues.
__________________

S/2018/171, para. 94.
S/2017/150, para. 102.
82
S/2018/171, annex 28, p. 138.
83
S/2016/157, para. 173.
84
Ibid., para. 173.
80
81

19-01704

39/379

S/2019/171

Sudan
84. The Panel continued its investigations into military cooperation projects
between the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the Sudan. During the
reporting period, the Panel was provided with information on additional military
cooperation activities between the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
Sudan, including a letter dated 28 September 2016 between Syrian arms trafficker
Hussein al-Ali and Chonryong Technology Trading Corporation 85 citing future
technology transfers for Fagot anti-tank and man-portable air defence systems for
“military manufacturing in Sudan”. 86 A Member State also informed the Panel that
Sudan Master Technology Engineering Company, which is associated with the
Sudan’s Military Industry Corporation, 87 had contacts in 2009 with Choi Chan Han,
a.k.a. Solomon Choi, an Australian businessman working on behalf of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea who was arrested in Australia on 16 December 2017 for
brokering missile components and coal. On 26 November 2018, the Sudan informed
the Committee that “the Military Industry Cooperation (sic) MIC (Sudan) has never
dealt with a company named “KOMID” and it has been dealing with a company
named “Future Electronic Company” (FEC)”. The Sudan also informed the
Committee that the “Military Industry Cooperation (sic) (MIC) Sudan has never
received any shipment from North Korea. All shipments were from other countries .”
In response to the Panel’s reporting on KOMID representatives in the Sudan, Kim
Song Chol and Son Jong Hyok, the Sudan stated that “Mr. Kim Song Chol entered
Sudan in 2013 and 2016, using different names and left in May 2017. He has not
entered Sudan since that time due to the travel ban placed on him by the competent
authorities.” On the activities of Hussein al-Ali, the Sudan informed the Committee
that “Mr. Hussein al-Ali had offered his services in 2008 to the MIC (Sudan) but MIC
did not meet him or develop any cooperation with him.” The Panel requested the
names and passport details of all nationals of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and others employed by Future Electronic Company in the Sudan whom the
Sudan states it has expelled. 88 The Panel also requested copies of contracts between
Future Electronic Company and the Sudan’s Military Industry Corporation and Sudan
Master Technology Engineering Corporation, as well as evidence of the cancellations
of the projects. The Panel also requested all documentation associated with United
Nations-designated entities of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea or other
entities that may have operated on their behalf in the Sudan, including KOMID,
Tanchon Commercial Bank, Future Electronic Company, Chongryong Technology
Trading Corporation and Chosun Keumcheong Technology General Trade
Corporation, that were the subject of Panel requests to the Sudan from December
2015 until November 2018 (see annex 26).
85. On 2 January 2019, the Sudan cooperated with the Panel and provided contracts
and other requested evidence, stating that “a single framework agreement was signed
between the companies SMT and FEC. Two executive contracts were then signed to
provide parts for the project to develop 122mm [weapons] and aerial bombs.” 89
__________________

Chonryong Technology Corporation has been reported as suspected of engaging in arms transfers
to the Syrian Arab Republic in 2016; see S/2018/171, para. 133.
86
Information provided by a Member State.
87
Sudan Master Technology Engineering Company was previously reported as involved in Korea
Mining Development Trading Corporation (KOMID) rocket and missile military coop eration
projects, see S/2017/150, para. 106.
88
In paragraph 4 of the national implementation report dated 14 August 2018 ( S/AC.49/2018/98)
sent by the Sudan to the Committee, the Sudan stated that “the Sudanese Government expelled
the staff of the aforementioned company and prohibited them from entering Sudan. The last of
the staff members left on 12 August 2017.”
89
S/2017/150, para. 106.
85

40/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Additionally, the contracts between Future Electronic Company and Sudan Master
Technology Engineering Company were for various other programmes and items “in
the field of rehabilitation of eastern radars, air defense systems, tactical
communication, maintenance and spare parts and training” (see annex 27). The Sudan
also provided the Panel with cooperation regarding the KOMID front company Future
Electronic Company and KOMID representatives. Regarding KOMID representative
Kim Song Chol, the Sudan stated that “Mr. Kim Song Chol visited Sudan for the first
time in 2013 to follow up implementation of the contracts regarding the development
of 122mm [weapons].” He then visited for a second time to oversee some groups that
were working to install P-12 and P-15 radars. The Sudan noted that Kim Song Chol
then “visited the Sudan a third time in 2016 under a different name and a new passport
in order to request certain financial dues”. The Sudan provided the Panel with
documents prohibiting Kim Song Chol’s re-entry. Regarding the KOMID front
company, Future Electronic Company, the contracts stated that the company was
registered in a third country and that its representative was a Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea passport-holder named Hong Man Bak. 90
Syrian Arab Republic
86. The Panel continued its multiple investigations into prohibited activities
between the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the Syrian Arab Republic,
the continuing travel by technicians of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
and from the country and the presence of nationals of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea working on behalf of designated entities of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in the country, as well as Syrian arms brokers attempting
to sell military equipment of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in multiple
Middle Eastern and African Member States.
87. In 2018, a Member State informed the Panel of additional visits to the Syrian
Arab Republic in 2016 and 2017 by technicians from the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea tied to prohibited activities who were working for Syrian defence
factories (Maamal al-Difaa). These include three nationals of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea who departed the Syrian Arab Republic in the spring of 2017 91 (see
table 2).
Table 2
Information on technicians of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
visiting the Syrian Arab Republic
Name

Year of birth

Passport number

Year of issue

Yang Kyong Song

1961

83632010

2016

Kim Jong Gil

1971

927120306

2017

Kim Thae Hyon

1966

927120305

2017

88. According to the Member State, three other experts of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea (see table 3) arrived in the Syrian Arab Republic on 3 May 2017
and were greeted by Colonel Samer Haydar, member of the air defence department of
the Syrian armed forces.

__________________
90
91

19-01704

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea passport number 836298402.
The exact date of departure is held on file.
41/379

S/2019/171

Table 3
Information on experts of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea visiting
the Syrian Arab Republic
Name

Year of birth

Passport number

Year of issue

Kim Yong Chol

1970

836238472

2016

Ko Jong Myong

1974

56343410

2013

Ri Song

1960

927220125

2017

89. These three individuals were granted three-month visas issued by the Syrian
embassy in Pyongyang. 92 Their names and passport numbers differ from the groups
of technicians of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea engaged in ballistic
missile and other prohibited activities who previously travelled to and returned from
the Syrian Arab Republic in February 2011, August 2016, November 2016 and March
2017; this shows that the prohibited military cooperation between the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and the Syrian Arab Republic has continued unabated. 93
90. In addition, Syrian nationals have been reported to the Panel as being engaged
in arms brokering on behalf of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for
attempted sales to a range of Middle Eastern and African States, reportedly offering
conventional arms and, in some cases, ballistic missiles, to armed groups in Yemen
and Libya. One individual described as a Syrian arms trafficker, Hussein al-Ali, 94 has
been identified by a Member State as engaging in prohibited military cooperation on
behalf of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea by having attempted arms sales
in Libya (see para. 73), the Sudan (see para. 84) and Yemen (see para. 97). The Panel
has yet to receive a reply from the Syrian Arab Republic regarding the full extent of
the activities of Al-Ali and his Damascus-based company “Consulting Bureau for
Marketing” 95 in these and other Member States in Africa and the Middle East. Nor
has it received a reply to its request to Al-Ali for a full accounting of his past and
ongoing relationship with the Ministry of Military Equipment of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Saeng Pi’l and other designated entities of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and their nationals working on their behalf.
91. The Panel was informed by a Member State that Ryu Jin, designated as a
representative of KOMID in the Syrian Arab Republic, had left that country. The
Syrian Arab Republic has yet to provide confirmation and inform the Panel whether
the departure was an expulsion in accordance with paragraphs 13 or 14 of resolution
2270 (2016). The Panel was informed by a Member State that a number of designated
individuals and other nationals of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
working on behalf of designated entities, including Choe Jin Myong 96, continue to
reside in the Syrian Arab Republic.
__________________

Visa numbers on file with the Panel.
S/2018/171, paras. 125–127. The names and passports of a number of these individuals are held
on file by the Panel.
94
DOB: 1 January 1942, passport number 011095903; see annex 30 for passport.
95
Last known publicly advertised address for Consulting Bureau for Marketing is P.O. Box 33177,
Damascus, Syrian Arab Republic, Tel: 963-11-3325044, 3318888, Fax: 963-11-3331000, email:
alali@net.sy.
96
Choe Jin Myong is a long-time representative of the Chilsong Trading Company, which deals in
military equipment. Choe worked with Han Il, the Beijing representative of the designated
Daeryonggang Trading Corporation, to broker arms-related equipment to a Syrian munitions
company, Yona Star International. See S/2018/171, para. 133.
92
93

42/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

92. In November 2018, the Panel was informed that the Syrian Arab Republic was
one of the two most lucrative markets of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
for arms-related goods and services. 97 According to the Member State, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is continuing its cooperation with both the Scientific
Studies and Research Center and the Army Supply Bureau. The deputy head of
KOMID in the Syrian Arab Republic is named Rim Yong Hyok, while Ryu Jin’s
replacement as head representative in the Syrian Arab Republic is known as “Kim”.
The Panel wrote to the Syrian Arab Republic (see annex 29) requesting information
on all nationals and organizations of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that
are active in the Syrian Arab Republic, attaching an earlier response from the country
(see ibid.). The Syrian Arab Republic replied to previous Panel inquiries, stating that
“existing relations between the Syrian Arab Republic and the Democratic People ’s
Republic of Korea are in harmony with international law and the Charter of the United
Nations” as well as “diplomatic representation” between the two countries (see
annex 31).
Uganda
93. The Panel wrote to Uganda on 10 December 2018 following a media report
alleging that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea had supplied small arms and
light weapons to Uganda and had trained Ugandan special forces, as well as on the
continued presence of KOMID in the country through the Embassy of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in Kampala. In the report, it was also stated that
prohibited joint ventures, such as MKP, were continuing operations in the country
under new names and that these entities and affiliates had links to both the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and Ugandan intelligence services. 98 In its letter of
10 December 2018, the Panel requested copies of all contracts relating to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s military and paramilitary training in
Uganda, together with evidence of their cancellation and the departure of the
personnel of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The Panel also requested
the names and passport details of all nationals of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea in Uganda, including all military advisers. Uganda has yet to reply.
94. The Panel continued its investigation into the presence and activities of KOMID
in Uganda. According to a Member State, the decision by Uganda to expel two
KOMID representatives 99 “prevented KOMID from transferring a substantial amount
of cash believed to be the proceeds from KOMID business in Uganda out of the
country. Ri Kyong Hui, the spouse of Yu Kyong Jin, and Jo Su Yong, the spouse of
Jong Kuk Chol, attempted to remove this cash from Uganda.” The Member State also
informed the Panel: “Senior levels of Uganda’s Ministry of Defense may have been
witting of the relationship with KOMID. The involvement of s uch officials in this
activity is significant and warrants close scrutiny.” Uganda has yet to reply to the
Panel’s request for information on the amount of cash seized or otherwise prevented
from transfer from Uganda by the reported KOMID representatives o r their spouses
as well as information on the bank accounts used.
United Arab Emirates
95. Until at least May 2018, Prime Okryu Art Gallery in Abu Dhabi advertised the
works of artists affiliated with Mansudae Art Studio on its website ( see figure XIX)
__________________

Two Panel members noted a lack of statistical information provide d to the Panel.
Joe Parkinson, “Never take their photos: tracking the commandos, North Korea ’s secret export”,
Wall Street Journal, 9 December 2018. Available at www.wsj.com/articles/secret-workforcefunds-north-koreaand-defies-sanctions-1544379764.
99
The Panel noted in its 2018 final report the decision by Uganda to expel two diplomats of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea acting on behalf of KOMID. See S/2018/171, para. 142.
97
98

19-01704

43/379

S/2019/171

and sold artwork of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea at the gallery. It was
also stated on the website that the gallery was affiliated with the Okryugwan
restaurant group of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (see annex 32).
Following the Panel’s letter to the United Arab Emirates of 9 May 2018, the restaurant
and art gallery website pages became inaccessible. The Panel obtained phot ographs
of a sign stating that “the gallery is temporarily closed for renovation, opening soon ”
on the door of the gallery taken in December 2018. On 2 January 2019, the United
Arab Emirates replied to the Panel stating that “none of the employees of the Prime
Okryu Art Gallery was a DPRK citizen (sic)” and “the Government of the United
Arab Emirates has closed” the gallery. The investigation continues.
Figure XIX
Prime Okryu Gallery

Source: RFA Korean Service, Jinkuk Kim.

United Republic of Tanzania
96. The Panel continued its investigation into the activities of the Haegeumgang
Trading Corporation (a.k.a. Haegumgang) in the United Republic of Tanzania and the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s repair and upgrade of the surface-to-air
missile Pechora (S-125) systems and its P-12 air defence radar, reportedly worth
€10.49 million. 100 The United Republic of Tanzania has yet to respond to the Panel ’s
inquiries.
Yemen
97. The Panel investigated efforts by the Ministry of Military Equipment of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and KOMID to supply a wide array of
conventional arms and ballistic missiles to the Houthi group in Yemen through a
known proxy, Syrian national Hussein al-Ali, and his Syrian-registered company
Consulting Bureau for Marketing. The Panel was given access by a Member State to
an invitation letter dated 13 July 2016 from Houthi leader Major General Zakaria
Yahya al-Shami to the Ministry of Military Equipment of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and Tosong Technology Trading Corporation, a KOMID
subsidiary, to meet in Damascus “to discuss the issue of the transfer of technology
and other matters of mutual interest”. According to the Member State “a protocol of
cooperation between Yemen and North Korea” was then negotiated involving “Naif
Ahmad Al Qanis, Houthi ambassador in Damascus and Syrian arms broker Hussein
Al Ali”. According to the Member State, this involved a “vast array of military
equipment, including Kalahsnikov, PKC machine guns, RPG -7, RPG-29, Fagot
missiles, Igla missiles, tanks, air defence systems, ballistic missiles”. The Panel has
yet to receive replies from Major General Zakaria Yahya al-Shami, Naif Ahmad
al-Qanis and Hussein al-Ali to the Panel’s request for information on their role in
__________________
100

44/379

S/2018/171, para. 143.
19-01704

S/2019/171

these negotiations and attempts to broker and supply such weaponry from or on behalf
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Zimbabwe
98. On 9 June 2018, Zimbabwe provided evidence of the deregistration of the
Mansudae Boka Design Company and the closure of its bank accounts in response to
the Panel’s inquiries about the activities of nationals of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and Mansudae-related companies in Zimbabwe. 101
Implementation of the luxury goods ban
Rolls-Royce Phantom
99. The Panel investigated the first public appearance of a Rolls-Royce Phantom
limousine in Pyongyang on 7 October 2018, an apparent violation of the luxury goods
ban stipulated in paragraph 8 (a) (iii) of resolution 1718 (2006) and paragraph 23 and
annex IV of resolution 2094 (2013), prohibiting the direct or indirect supply, sale or
transfer to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of luxury automobiles. In its
letter to Rolls-Royce Motor Cars Ltd and its parent company Bayerische Motoren
Werke (BMW), the Panel noted a number of distinguishing features to assist the
companies in their identification of the vehicle (see figure XX).
Figure XX
Rolls-Royce Phantom and distinguishing features observed in Pyongyang on
7 October 2018

Source: Voice of America.

100. In its reply, Rolls-Royce informed the Panel that the vehicle appeared to be a
seventh generation Phantom Extended Wheelbase series II manufactured between
August 2012 and February 2017 at its Goodwood manufacturing facility. Rolls-Royce
__________________
101

19-01704

Ibid., para. 144.
45/379

S/2019/171

stressed the importance of the vehicle’s identification number in replying to the
Panel’s inquiries. The investigation continues.
Rolls-Royce Ghost
101. The Panel continued to investigate the transfer of a falsely declared Rolls-Royce
Ghost limousine to Bangladesh by a diplomat of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea seized by the Bangladesh Customs Intelligence in January 2017. 102 The
Panel requested Bangladesh to provide the location of the vehicle and its investigation
report on the seizure. Bangladesh has yet to reply to multiple inq uiries from the Panel.
Mercedes-Benz limousines
102. The Panel continued its investigation of the Mercedes-Benz limousines shipped
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea as part of efforts to determine all their
vehicle identification numbers and whether any had been altered. 103 A number of these
Mercedes-Benz were observed without licence plates during meetings in Singapore
(see figure XXI), Beijing (see figure XXII) and Pyongyang and were utilized by at
least one foreign head of State in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in 2018
(see ibid.). The Panel wrote to Singapore and China to request the vehicle
identification number records following the temporary transfers of these vehicles, or
checks by the Presidential Security Service of the Republic of Korea, the head of
which was reported as a passenger in one of the vehicles.
Figure XXI
Images of illicitly obtained Mercedes-Benz limousines without licence plates in
Singapore, June 2018

Source: YouTube.

__________________
102
103

46/379

S/2017/150, para. 125.
The Panel determined that a number of these Mercedes -Benz had been transported via shipping
container from the port of Long Beach, California, United States, to Dalian, China, at the
direction of George Ma, a Chinese businessman whose company, Seajet, a n agent of the airline of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Air Koryo, had previously been involved in the
shipment of arms-related material to Brazzaville in 2010. These vehicles were then transferred in
shipping containers by the company Liaoning Danxing International Forwarding. See
S/2016/157, paras. 118–121 and annexes 76–85.
19-01704

S/2019/171

Figure XXII
Images of illicitly obtained Mercedes-Benz limousines without licence plates in
Beijing in June 2018 (left) and March 2018 (centre) and in Pyongyang in
September 2018 (right)

Source: Reuters, Pyongyang Press Corps/Pool via Reuters.

103. In its letter of 4 December 2018, Singapore informed the Panel that “it had
requested for the vehicles’ chassis and engine numbers, but the DPRK officials
declined to reveal this information due to national security reasons”.
Lexus LX 570
104. The Panel investigated the appearance of a number of Lexus LX 570 all-wheel
drive luxury vehicles bearing number plates of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea at the inter-Korean summit of September 2018 (see figure XXIII) in an
apparent violation of paragraph 8 (a) (iii) of resolution 1718 (2006) and paragraph 23
and annex IV of resolution 2094 (2013). Toyota Motor Corporation informed the
Panel that it was unable to identify the vehicle identification number and that “Toyota
complies with applicable UN resolutions in relation to the DPRK and has no intention
of the export of these motor vehicles to, or the manufacture of, motor vehicles in the
DPRK. We can only assume that these vehicles come from back channels and are
exchanged among individuals”. Toyota further cooperated with the Panel, stating that
this generation of “LX 570 AWD were produced from January 2012 to July 2015”.
Figure XXIII
Lexus LX 570 vehicles observed at the inter-Korean summit of 18 to
20 September 2018, Pyongyang

Source: YouTube.

Vodka
105. In July 2018, the Netherlands informed the Panel that it had temporarily seized
a consignment of vodka suspected to be en route to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. According to the Netherlands, vodka (Harmonized System code 2208.60)
is considered “luxury goods” under Council regulation (EU) 2017/2062. Shipping
documents accompanying the seized vodka shipment showed that the vodka,
manufactured in Belarus, was destined for Liaoning Danxing International
Forwarding, the company investigated by the Panel as suspected of shipping
Mercedes-Benz limousines to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The other

19-01704

47/379

S/2019/171

company named in the documentation, Transit Prime International Logistics, had the
same phone number and address as Liaoning Danxing International Forwardin g. The
Netherlands noted that Liaoning Danxing had been named in previous Panel reporting
and, as a freight forwarder, would not be the final destination for the consignment.
The Panel wrote to Liaoning Danxing International Forwarding, the website for whi ch
described the company as a container shipping line transporting goods to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. 104 The Panel requested information on the
final destination of the vodka.
106. Two separately obtained contracts for the vodka shipments showed that the
consignment was sold by its Belarus manufacturer to a Georgian entity named Noble
House LLC, which was the buyer in both contracts. The Panel wrote to Noble House
requesting all correspondence and financial transactions between No ble House,
Liaoning Danxing International Forwarding Company and Transit Prime International
Logistics Co. Ltd. Noble House did not provide the requested correspondence and
financial transactions records but replied, stating that China was the final destination
of the cargo and the vodka was to be sold “via the e-commerce channel”. Noble House
provided the name of an individual, a private email address and telephone number it
claimed was its “trading partner” in China. Neither this individual nor Transit Prime
International Logistics nor Liaoning Danxing International Forwarding have replied
to the Panel’s inquiries.

IV. Finance
107. Despite the strengthening of financial sanctions in 2017, their effectiveness is
being systematically undermined by the deceptive practices of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and the failure by Member States to recognize and
prevent them. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea enjoys ongoing access to
the international financial system, as its financial network s have quickly adapted to
the latest sanctions, using evasive methods in ways that make it difficult to detect
illicit activity. Member States also continue to fail to take measures required by the
Security Council resolutions, including the assets freeze and the expulsion of bank
representatives of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea operating abroad.
Individuals empowered to act as extensions of financial institutions of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea abroad allow the country to evade sanctions measures
such as the requirement for Member States to close all subsidiaries of these banks
within their jurisdiction. Cyberattacks by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to illegally force the transfer of funds have become an important tool i n the evasion
of sanctions and have grown in sophistication and scale since 2016.
108. The Panel’s financial investigations also show insufficient implementation by
Member States of their obligation to freeze all assets controlled by designated entities
or members of the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that
are engaged in violation or evasion of any of the sanctions measures. In several cases
investigated by the Panel, Member States closed but did not freeze account balances
of individuals acting on behalf of designated entitles, including the Reconnaissance
General Bureau, and allowed them to transfer funds to banks in other countries.
Global operations of Glocom and MKP continue despite past Panel reporting on their
illicit activities and recommendations to both the Committee and to Member States
to designate them and freeze their assets. While some Member States have moved to
limit the number of accounts of the embassies and diplomats of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea within their jurisdictions as required by the resolutions,
the Panel found evidence that diplomats of the Democratic People’s Republic of
__________________
104

48/379

The Liaoning Danxing International Forwarding website ceased to function in 2018.
19-01704

S/2019/171

Korea are evading this provision by opening and managing accounts in multiple
countries, including in those to which they are not accredited, in order to engage in
illicit business activities. Finally, the Panel investigated the existence of more than
200 potential cooperative entities and self-described joint ventures despite the
requirement that Member States should have closed them by 9 January 2018 (i.e.,
within 120 days of the adoption of resolution 2375 (2017)). Furthermore, the Panel
found information indicating that companies considered cooperative entiti es by the
Panel 105 may have also violated other provisions of the resolutions, including the
prohibition in paragraph 18 of resolution 2321 (2016) on the use of diplomatic
premises of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for non-diplomatic activity.
The Panel also found that a company with links to designated entities, including
Mansudae and the Reconnaissance General Bureau, has formed joint ventures in
another country, where it is undertaking activities.
Cyberattacks
109. The Panel notes a trend in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s evasion
of financial sanctions of using cyberattacks to illegally force the transfer of funds
from financial institutions and cryptocurrency exchanges. According to a Member
State, “cyberspace is used by the DPRK as an asymmetric means to carry out illicit
and undercover operations in the field of cybercrime and sanctions evasion. These
operations aim to acquire funds through a variety of measures in order to circumvent
the sanctions.” (see annex 33). United States court documents, officials and
Government statements and reports have attributed several cyberattacks by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to the Reconnaissance General Bureau,
which plays an overarching role in cyberattacks. 106 In 2017, a third Member State
informed the Panel that the Reconnaissance General Bureau supervised and
conducted cyberattack operations not only for destroying infrastructure and
intelligence-gathering but for the purposes of gaining foreign currency. 107 A fourth
Member State sent a letter to the Panel in 2018 in which cyberattacks attributed to the
Reconnaissance General Bureau were mentioned and in which it was stated that
__________________

The Panel has previously considered two cases of collaborative activity in which an entity is
managed, directed or owned by at least one non-national of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and an individual and/or entity of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea as
prohibited under paragraph 18 of resolution 2375 (2017). See S/2018/171 paras. 89 and 92.
106
See annex 34. In 2017, an assessment by the U.S. National Security Agency r eported in the media
linked the WannaCry ransomware to the Reconnaissance General Bureau, citing as evidence IP
addresses known to have been used by the Reconnaissance General Burea u, see Ellen Nakashima,
“The NSA has linked the WannaCry computer worm to North Korea”, Washington Post, 14 June
2017. Available at https://wapo.st/2EYAVBB (both the United States and the United Kingdom
made further statements that are available at https://bit.ly/2BK7qm6 and https://bit.ly/2GPGUvn).
See Daniel Glaser, Assistant Secretary for Terrorist Financing, Department of Treasury, Unite d
States, statement to Congress in January 2015, available at www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CHRG114hhrg92556/html/CHRG-114hhrg92556.htm. See James R. Clapper, Director of National
Intelligence, United States, “National intelligence, North Korea, and the national cyber
discussion”, remarks during the International Conference on Cyber Security in January 2015. The
United States Congressional Research Service stated “most sources report that North Korean
cyber operations are headquartered in the Reconnaissance General Bureau (RGB)”, available at
https://fas.org/sgp/crs/row/R44912.pdf. The below-mentioned criminal complaint unsealed by the
United States Department of Justice on 6 September 2018 in the case of Park Jin Hyok also
attributes Democratic People’s Republic of Korea cyberattacks to the Reconnaissance General
Bureau. In its United States designation of the Reconnaissance General Bureau in response to the
Sony Pictures Entertainment attack, the United States Treasury stated that “many of the DPRK’s
major cyber operations run through RGB”, see www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/
Pages/jl9733.aspx.
107
The Member State informed the Panel that this is based on estimates reached by assessing coding
and attributes.
105

19-01704

49/379

S/2019/171

reports suggest that “cyber-focused military units are directly tasked to generate
income for the regime”.
110. On 28 July 2016, the National Police Agency of the Republic of Korea attributed
a cyberattack against the online shopping mall, Interpark, to the Reconnaissance
General Bureau, stating that the attack was an attempted “criminal acquisition of
foreign currency” (see annex 35) that would have circumvented the assets freeze. The
Panel considers this case as an attempt by a designated entity to evade sanctions by
using a cyberattack to force the transfer of $2.7 million.
111. On 6 September 2018, the Government of the United States indicted Park Jin
Hyok, a hacker from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea who worked as a
member of the hacking organization of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
known as the Lazarus Group, 108 for engaging in a “wide-ranging, multi-year
conspiracy to conduct computer intrusions and commit wire fraud by co-conspirators
working on behalf of the government of the Democratic People ’s Republic of
Korea”. 109 According to the United States, Park “has travelled to China in the past and
conducted legitimate IT work under the front compan y ‘Chosun Expo’ or the Korean
Expo Joint Venture in addition to activities conducted on behalf of North Korea ’s
Reconnaissance General Bureau” 110 (see annex 36). The Panel requested information
from the Government of China on the activities of Chosun Expo and possible
continued operation as a joint venture or cooperative entity prohibited pursuant to
resolution 2375 (2017). China stated that “China has conducted an investigation based
on the information provided by the Panel. Up until now, China has not found any
company registered as Chosun Expo Joint Venture, and currently does not have
information regarding Park Jin Hyok.”
112. According to the United States, Park Jin Hyok and his co-conspirators also
“targeted and then executed the fraudulent transfer of $ 81 million from Bangladesh
Bank […] and engaged in computer intrusions and cyber-heists at many more
financial services victims in the United States, and in other countries in Europe, Asia ,
Africa, North America, and South America in 2015, 2016, 2017 and 2018, with
attempted losses well over $1 billion”. 111 The $81,000,000 was successfully
transferred using the SWIFT system from Bangladesh Bank’s account at the Federal
Reserve Bank in New York to accounts in the Philippines, where it was “subsequently
laundered through multiple bank accounts, a money remitting business, and casino
junkets”. 112 The Philippines has provided the Panel with internal audit documents,
bank correspondence, CCTV footage and other information relevant to the tracing of
the stolen funds, the majority of which have not been recovered to date. The Panel
continues its investigation of the case.
113. The Panel investigated two additional cases of financially motivated
cyberattacks in which the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea attempted to
__________________
108

The United States Government refers to the cyber actors backed by the Government of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea as “Hidden Cobra”, see www.us-cert.gov/HIDDEN-COBRA-North-KoreanMalicious-Cyber-Activity.
109
United States District Court, Central District of California, United States of America v. PARK JIN HYOK,
Case No. MJ18-1479, Criminal Complaint, 8 June 2018, para. 6. Available at www.justice.gov/opa/pressrelease/file/1092091/download.
110
The United States stated that Chosun Expo is “a front company affiliated with Lab 110, one of the North
Korean government’s hacking organizations. That hacking group is what some private cybersecurity
researchers have labeled the “Lazarus Group.” See annex 36, entitled “Wanted by the FBI, PARK JIN
HYOK, Conspiracy to Commit Wire Fraud; Conspiracy to Commit Computer-Related Fraud
(Computer Intrusion)”.
111
United States District Court, United States of America v. PARK JIN HYOK, para. 8.
112
Ibid., para. 144. The Panel notes that at the time, casinos were not considered financial institutions in the
Philippines and were therefore unregulated by the anti-money-laundering law in the country.
50/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

illegally force the transfer of over $20 million. In May 2018, a Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea cyberattack by an advanced persistent threat group resulted in $10
million being transferred from Banco de Chile mainly to accounts in Hong Kong via
unauthorized transactions using SWIFT. Using IP addresses and other details
published by the United States Department of Justice, open-source technical analysis
has linked the perpetrators with Lab 110, 113 which according to the United States is
part of the Reconnaissance General Bureau. 114 Then, in August 2018, about $13.5
million was withdrawn from Cosmos Bank in India in more than 14,000 simultaneous
automatic teller machine (ATM) withdrawals in 28 countries as well as in additional
transfers to an account belonging to a Hong Kong-based company using SWIFT. On
2 October 2018, the United States responded to these ATM withdrawal attacks by
issuing a “FASTCash Campaign” alert for the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. 115 These more recent attacks show how the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has become an increasingly sophisticated actor in cyberattacks for financial
gain, with tools and tactics steadily improving. The Cosmos attack was a more
advanced, well-planned and highly coordinated operation that bypassed three main
layers of defence contained in International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL) banking/ATM attack mitigation guidance. 116 Not only were the actors
able to compromise the SWIFT network in the Cosmos case to transfer the funds to
other accounts, but they simultaneously compromised internal bank processes to
bypass transaction verification procedures and order worldwide transfers to almost
30 countries where funds were physically withdrawn by individuals in more than
10,000 separate transactions over a weekend.
114. The Panel notes that in addition to attacks on fiat currency, cyberattacks
involving cryptocurrencies provide the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea with
more ways to evade sanctions given that they are harder to trace, can be laundered
many times and are independent from government regulation. In the 2017 WannaCry
attack by the Reconnaissance General Bureau, the ransom demand was made in
cryptocurrency. According to one estimate, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea carried out at least five successful attacks against cryptocurrency exchanges in
Asia between January 2017 and September 2018, resulting in a total loss of
$571 million 117 (see annex 39).
115. In its most recent final report, the Panel included information showing that the
Reconnaissance General Bureau agents (and family members) responsible for illegal
financial activities in Europe, including large bank transfers to accounts in the
European Union and Asia, were both highly trained and skilled in the field of
information technology and that one of them, Kim Su Gwang, managed to ob tain a
position with significant responsibility for the organization’s information systems. 118

__________________

See annexes 37 and 38.
The Member State informed the Panel that this is based on estimates reached by assessing coding
and attributes; see also annex 36.
115
United States, Department of Homeland Security, Alert (TA18-275A) Hidden Cobra – FASTCash
campaign, 2 October 2018. Available at www.us-cert.gov/ncas/alerts/TA18-275A.
116
See Oleg Kolesnikov, “Securonix Threat Research Report: Cosmos Bank SWIFT/ATM
US$13.5 million cyber attack detection using security analytics”, 27 August 2018. Available at
http://bit.ly/2sgABa0.
117
Group-IB, “14 cyberattacks on crypto exchanges resulted in a loss of $882 million ”, 17 October
2018. Available at www.group-ib.com/media/gib-crypto-summary/. See also annex 39; and
Priscilla Moriuchi, “North Korea turning to cryptos to counter economic sanctions ”, The Hill,
22 January 2018. Available at https://thehill.com/opinion/international/370114 -north-koreaturning-to-cryptos-to-counter-economic-sanctions.
118
S/2018/171, annex 46.
113
114

19-01704

51/379

S/2019/171

Recommendations
116. The Panel recommends that the Security Council, when drafting future
financial sanctions measures, take account of cyberattacks carried out by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to circumvent the resolutions by illegally
generating revenue for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
117. Member States should enhance their ability to facilitate robust information
exchange on the cyberattacks by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea with
other Governments and with their own financial institutions, to detect and
prevent attempts by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to employ its
cybercapabilities for sanctions evasion.
118. Information about cyberattacks conducted by the Reconnaissance General
Bureau as a means to evade financial sanctions and to gain foreign currency
should be added to the Reconnaissance General Bureau’s entry on the 1718
sanctions list.
Financial activities of diplomatic personnel of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea
119. The Panel investigated a diplomat of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea formerly posted to Malaysia, Kim Jong Chol (a.k.a. Ri Jong Chol), who
operated on behalf of Korea Ponghwa General Trading Corporation, which according
to documents obtained by the Panel is associated with Korea Kumgang Bank. 119
Owing to space constraints, information in this case is contained in annex 40. That an
individual of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea accredited as a diplomat at
the embassy in Kuala Lumpur did business on behalf of entities of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and on behalf of financial institutions reflects patterns
previously reported by the Panel.
120. The Panel investigated the banking practices of another diplomat of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea accredited in a European Union country, Kim
Chol Yong, who had helped to arrange an attempted shipment of four generator units
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea via China in 2016, which was
interdicted by the Netherlands (see para. 80). Kim Chol Yong used more than a dozen
bank accounts in European Union financial institutions to do business in the
Netherlands and at least three other European Union member States.
121. In the establishment and use of his bank accounts, Kim used many of the same
evasion tactics previously noted by the Panel. These included: opening accounts using
several addresses; opening accounts in the name of a front company; opening multiple
accounts in the name of family members, in particular his wife and son; and opening
accounts in the name of the diplomatic mission of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. He also used various renderings of his own name or those of his co -signors
when opening bank accounts (e.g., Kim Chol, Kim Chol Yong, Kim Cholyong, Chol
Yong Kim). Furthermore, Kim and his wife were the long-term owners of life
insurance savings accounts (also called “cash value life insurance”), which they were

__________________
119

52/379

Korea Kumgang Bank (금강은행, a.k.a. Kumgang Export and Import Bank, 金刚银行), was
established as a specialized bank to settle accounts for export-import transactions of various
trading corporations of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including Korea Ponghwa
General Trading Corporation. Korea Ponghwa General Trading Corporation falls under the
authority of the External Economic Committee of the Cabinet of the Democratic People ’s
Republic of Korea and is associated with Korea Pyongyang Trading Company.
19-01704

S/2019/171

able to cash in for a credit of more than a million euros in late 2017, more than a year
after the interdicted shipment attempt. 120
122. The Panel has previously recommended that Member States include all embassy
personnel within the scope of paragraph 16 of resolution 2321 (2016) and that they
ensure that diplomats do not establish additional bank accounts in the names of family
members or front companies. Relevant authorities should also verify that bank
accounts are closed when a diplomat ends their tour in the country.
123. The Panel also investigated cases of evasion of the provision in paragraph 16 of
resolution 2321 (2016) in which when diplomats’ accounts were closed, they
transferred funds to financial institutions in other countries to which they were not
accredited. In the light of this, as well as the ongoing practice of diplomats of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea residing in one country while engaging in
business in other countries, the Panel recommends that Member States issue guidance
whereby one bank is chosen to serve as the only bank that may hold accounts for the
embassy and diplomats of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and all other
banks are advised not to open accounts for any diplomats of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea or their family members. The Panel notes that the practice of
diplomats holding multiple accounts in different currencies is prohibited under
paragraph 16 of resolution 2321 (2016).
Bank representatives of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea abroad
124. The Panel continued its investigation into more than 30 representatives of
financial institutions of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea operating abroad,
including from the Tanchon Commercial Bank, Korea Kumgang Bank, Foreign Trade
Bank, Cheil Credit Bank, Daesong Bank, Ilsim International Bank, Bank of East
Land, Daedong Credit Bank, Unification Development Bank and Ryugyong
Commercial Bank. The Panel found these banks to be operating through
representatives in China, Libya, the Russian Federation, the Syrian Arab Republic
and the United Arab Emirates (see annexes 41–42). The Panel notes that payment
methods previously used by bank representatives of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to evade sanctions were used in 2018 to process payments for shipto-ship transfers (see annex 43). The Panel notes that all of the above-mentioned
Member States must expel all individuals acting on behalf of a financial institution of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in accordance with paragraph 33 of
resolution 2321 (2016).
125. In its reply to the Panel, the Russian Federation informed the Panel that
“Mr. Han Jang Su is the Third Secretary of the Commercial Counsellor ’s Section of
the Embassy of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to the Russian Federation
and has been officially accredited by the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. He
entered the Russian Federation on 23 June 2017 and is staying in the country legally.
No information is available concerning activities that are inconsistent with his official
status. The banking licence of the bank, Agrosoyuz, which Mr. Han Jang Su allegedly
used to carry out activities linked to the FTB […] has been revoked by the Central
Bank.” The Panel notes that as resolution 2371 (2017) lists Han Jang Su as “Chief
Representative of the Foreign Trade Bank”, Member States are required under
paragraph 33 of resolution 2321 (2016) to expel him. The Panel also notes that the
registered office of the Foreign Trade Bank of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in Moscow lists its director as “Han Zan Su” (Хан Зан Су) according to the
Russian Federation Federal Tax Service State Registry o f Accredited Branches,
__________________
120

19-01704

The balance of that account was transferred to his single, permitted account in accordance with
the above European Union regulation.
53/379

S/2019/171

Representative Offices of Foreign Legal Entities, RAFP (see annex 44). 121 This case
appears to be part of a pattern identified by the Panel whereby dip lomats of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea use their status and embassies to violate the
resolutions. 122
Financial operations of the Reconnaissance General Bureau
126. With regard to the financial activities and assets of Reconnaissance General
Bureau agents Kim Yong Nam and Kim Su Gwang and their family members, Belarus
informed the Panel that Kim Su Gwang had been accredited as Deputy Trade
Representative of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea from 24 September
2015. He lived with members of his family until they departed on 16 December 2017
in a diplomatic vehicle, exiting at the Belarus-Ukraine border. Belarus stated that Kim
had spent most of his time outside of the country and that his wife had purchased
items in neighbouring countries for shipment back to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, using the name of a Chinese company based in Beijing and by
transferring funds for the purchases through an acco unt at a Chinese bank in
Shanghai, which is consistent with the Panel’s previous reporting on cash withdrawals
in Beijing and Shanghai by the Reconnaissance General Bureau from accounts
controlled by Kim Su Gwang. 123 Furthermore, when the accounts of both Kim Su
Gwang and Kim Yong Nam (the latter including joint accounts with his wife , Kim
(Djang) Tcheul (Hy)) were closed by another Member State, funds from one of the
accounts were transferred to an account in the name of Kim Yong Nam ’s wife at the
same Shanghai bank branch. In its reply to the Panel about this bank account, China
stated that “China has not found any account opened by the [RGB] in Chinese
financial institutions.” The Panel notes that Member States are obligated to freeze the
assets of all individuals operating on behalf of the Reconnaissance General Bureau,
which includes bank accounts by Reconnaissance General Bureau agents established
in the name of family members to evade sanctions.
Malaysia-Korea Partners Group of Companies
127. The Panel continued its investigation into MKP, a major joint venture of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea established in Malaysia, which the Panel has
determined to have links with the Reconnaissance General Bureau, Mansudae
Overseas Project Group of Companies and financial institutions of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. 124
128. Zambia launched an investigation into the MKP network and cooperated with
the Panel. Documents it provided show that Han Hun Il (the founder of MKP and a
Reconnaissance General Bureau agent) made at least two trips to Zambia in 2017
using his service passport, No. 8361348791 (expiration 9 March 2021; see annex 45),
violating the travel ban. 125 This travel also further calls into question earlier claims to
the Panel by MKP Malaysia that Zambia operations were run independently. 126 For the
__________________

This is according to an official registration document dated 7 January 2019 (retrieved 8 January
2019), stating that the information was entered on 13 January 2016.
122
S/2018/171, paras. 84, 85, 94, 103, 132 and 142; S/2017/150, paras. 18–21, 25, 91, 103, 161,
162, 182, 189, 208 and table 8; S/2017/742, paras. 49 and50.
123
S/2018/171, paras. 169–172.
124
The Panel has previously reported that Han Hun Il is an operative of the Reconnaissa nce General
Bureau of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (see S/2018/171, paras. 189 and 190). For
the Panel’s previous conclusions on Malaysia-Korean Partners Group of Companies (MKP), see
S/2018/171, paras. 189–202.
125
With regard to the travel of nationals of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to and from
Zambia to work with MKP-related companies, records indicate that Dubai is the most common
transit point.
126
The Panel already showed that this was not the case. See S/2018/171, paras. 189–202.
121

54/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Panel’s updated findings on its investigations of MKP activities in Zambia, see annex
46; in Malaysia, see annex 47; and in Uganda, see paragraphs 155 and 156 and
annex 74.
129. Only one of the 13 MKP-linked companies in Zambia, the Korea General
Corporation for External Construction (a.k.a. GENCO, a.k.a. KOGEN), lists
exclusively nationals of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea as directors.
From the information provided by Zambia and further investigation conducted by the
Panel, it is clear that GENCO/KOGEN, like MKP, has links to Mansudae Overseas
Project Group. 127 Both GENCO/KOGEN and MKP claim to have constructed several
of the same sites in the past, using labour from the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea (see annexes 46–51). Indeed, Mansudae, MKP and GENCO/KOGEN have all,
in some combination, claimed to have worked on the same projects. Furthermore,
according to a KOGEN brochure, its management team in Zambia comprise s
11 nationals of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in addition to Han Hun
Il, Ho Un Ran and Yon Il, whom Zambia claims are connected to KOGEN through a
director relationship with Yazid Merzouk (see annex 52). KOGEN directors in
Zambia also registered an additional company, Chammae Construction Limited, with
the same address, email contact details and directors aside from an additional director,
a Zambian businessman named Sam Maurice Mbewe (National Registration Card
No. 296387 /7 4/1). The company was incorporated on the same date as
KOGEN/GENCO, 15 June 2012 (see annex 59).
130. Analysis of GENCO/KOGEN bank accounts in Zambia, in dollars and in local
currency, showed regular cash and cheque activity and high account turnover. The
accounts demonstrated similar patterns of cheque deposits, followed by incoming
transfers, followed by regular cheque withdrawals. These patterns were also seen in
the case of the bank accounts of MKP TMS Hospital and in the banking practices of
Glocom and Reconnaissance General Bureau agents in Europe and Asia. 128
131. MKP corporate accounts in two banks in Zambia were opened in the name of
two individuals of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ri Kwang Song
(리광송) and Han Chan Ho. Open-source information indicates that a person with the
name Kwang Song Ri previously served as a Counsellor (参赞) at the Embassy of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in Beijing in 2013 (李 光 先) (see
annexes 53–54). Other open-source material indicates that Kwang Song Ri has used
리광송 and the aliases Ri Kwang-Son and Ri Kwangson, with the latter two
transcribed in Korean as 리광선 (see annex 53). Further open-source information
shows that a person with the same name Ri Kwang Song (리광송) served as a
diplomat at the Embassy of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in Cairo until
at least November 2017 (see annexes 55–56). The Panel notes that using a diplomat
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to open these bank accounts fits with
past patterns of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in establishing overseas
bank accounts.
132. The Panel’s ongoing investigation into GENCO/KOGEN showed that in
addition to Zambia, the company has a large reach and extensive network in seve ral
countries in the Middle East, Africa and Eurasia, where it utilizes labourers,
prohibited cooperative entities and joint ventures of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and earns significant revenue. According to a Member State,
GENCO/KOGEN “has worked to supply North Korean laborers in the Middle East

__________________

With regard to operations of MKP on behalf of Mansudae Overseas Project Group of Companies,
see S/2018/171, paras. 189–202.
128
See S/2018/171, paras. 156–202.
127

19-01704

55/379

S/2019/171

for the purpose of earning hard currency for [the] North Korea [n government]”. 129
The Panel’s investigations found evidence of KOGEN activity by a joint venture with
a company of the United Arab Emirates. The Panel is continuing to investigate the
company (see annexes 57–58).
133. The presence of GENCO/KOGEN in Africa covers Nigeria, Côte d’Ivoire and
Equatorial Guinea. In Nigeria, it is registered as “Korea General Company for
External Construction GENCO (Nigeria)” (see annex 60) and lists “Korea General
Co. for External Construction Genco” as the majority shareholder and Kim Yong Sik
and Kim Yong Hwan as minority shareholders. In Côte d’Ivoire, “Korea General
Construction SL (KOGEN GE SL)” was registered in 2012. 130 The website of the
African Union Inter-African Bureau for Animal Resources lists KOGEN GE S.L. as
its implementing partner for a project funded by Equatorial Guinea set to conclude in
2019 (see annex 61). KOGEN was separately reported as a contractor for the Rebola
Municipal Stadium, completed in 2016, which documents suggest earned KOGEN
approximately $30.5 million (see annex 62). Local news claims that KOGEN opened
a new, large national headquarters in Equatorial Guinea the same year. 131 The Panel
has not received a reply from these Governments on its inquiries.
134. According to corporate registration documents, GENCO is the partial owner of
a construction cooperative entity or joint venture company in the Russian Federation,
LLC “SAKORENMA” 132, with majority ownership belonging to a Russian national
(see paras. 150–151 and annexes 76–78). This cooperative entity or joint venture
maintains an account with a Russian bank (see annex 79). Furthermore, the company
shares addresses, contact information and shareholders with three other companies,
all of which engage in construction-related activities (see annexes 63–64). In addition,
corporate registry documents show that GENCO operates two official representative
offices in the Russian Federation, one in Vladivostok and one in Khasan, that together
formally employ 17 foreign nationals (see annex 65). 133
135. In addition to these companies, the Panel also wrote to the Russian Federation
with regard to four companies registered in the country that use GENCO’s name in
Russian, “ZENKO” (in Cyrillic script: ЗЕНКО), the same name used by GENCO’s
official representations in the Russian Federation owned by nationals of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (see annexes 66–68), and that were
authorized in 2018 to employ a combined total of 301 labourers from the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea (see annex 68).
__________________

United States, Department of the Treasury, “Treasury sanctions individuals and entities
supporting the North Korean Government and its nuclear and weapons proliferation efforts ”,
press release, 2 December 2016. Available at www.treasury.gov/press-center/pressreleases/Pages/jl0677.aspx.
130
Corporate registration # CIYOP-12-D-221, incorporation date 25 January 2012.
131
“Guinea Ecuatorial propiedad de Rusia y Corea Del Norte”, Diario Rombe, 5 April 2016.
Accessed on 5 November 2018 at http://diariorombe.es/guinea-ecuatorial-propiedad-de-rusia-ycorea-del-norte/.
132
The corporate paperwork lists the Russian version of the name of the company, both for its
acronym GENCO, “ЗЕНКО” (Zenco), as well as for the full name (Korea General Corporation
for External Construction): “КОРЕЙСКОЕ ГЕНЕРАЛЬНОЕ ОБЩЕСТВО ПО
СТРОИТЕЛЬСТВУ ЗА РУБЕЖОМ “ЗЕНКО” КНДР. (КНДР is DPRK). In other fields of the
registry documents, GENCO is listed as being registered and located in the Democratic People ’s
Republic of Korea. See annex 76.
133
The corporate registration documents for the GENCO representative offices display in the fi eld
for “information about the number of foreign citizens that are employees of the foreign branch or
office” that the number is 12 for the representative office in Vladivostok and 5 for the office in
Khasan. Russian court documents reference the head of t he representative office for GENCO
with the initials of the name of the director of the Vladivostok GENCO office according to the
corporate paperwork (Ko Yongil) (see annex 65).
129

56/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Figure XXIV
GENCO network

Source: The Panel.

136. The Panel reiterates its recommendation for the designation of Han Hun Il
(Edward Han) and also recommends the designation of Yong Kok Yeap and Yazid
Merzouk of MKP Malaysia and MKP Zambia.
Financial operations of Glocom
137. The Panel continued its investigation into Glocom, which has used an extensive
network of individuals, companies and offshore bank accounts to procure, market and
sell arms and related materiel for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
including individuals, companies and bank accounts in China, Indonesia, Malaysia,
Singapore and the Middle East, including through an attempted shipment of military
equipment to Eritrea in 2016. 134 Unlike most front companies of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, which tend to close and reappear with a new guise after
being publicly investigated, Glocom has continued to a ctively use its brand despite
previous Panel recommendations that Member States freeze bank accounts and other
assets owned by all individuals and entities acting on behalf of Pan Systems or
Glocom. To the Panel’s knowledge, no such action has been taken.
138. Glocom reinforced its online presence in 2018 with a website redesign and
descriptions of an array of new products. It describes itself as a technology -oriented
company undertaking research and development, manufacturing and servicing
military communications equipment and systems. 135 Glocom uploaded a new set of
marketing videos to YouTube in 2018 and created and used social media presences on
platforms such as Pinterest (see annex 70), LinkedIn and Instagram. 136 On Twitter,
__________________

In particular, the Panel showed how Pan Systems Pyongyang made regular tra nsfers to various
facilitators with Chinese, Korean, foreign and code names working in China, Indonesia, Malaysia
and the Middle East and how a series of transactions by Glocom were initiated by companies
registered in Hong Kong, China, and cleared through several United States correspondent banks
in New York. See S/2018/171, paras. 173–177; S/2017/150, paras. 72–87 and 232–241; and
S/2017/742, para. 52.
135
Glocom’s previous webpage used to have a physical address in Malaysia, while the new website
lists no physical address.
136
Glocom used a different YouTube account (“Support Glocom”) than in 2017 to upload videos in
2018 before it was removed after September 2018 pursuant to a legal complaint.
134

19-01704

57/379

S/2019/171

Glocom (@GlocomSupport) advertises multiple products, with posts up through the
drafting of the present report, as well as various software packages for military
applications (see annex 69). Glocom similarly unveiled an Android app for customers
in 2018. 137 It claims that its production capacity for secure personal radios is 10,000
sets a year and for Manpack radios, mass production is 6,000 sets a year. An opensource report in August 2018 linked Glocom’s IP address through a second high-tech
front company to restaurants of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in Viet
Nam. 138 Furthermore, in mid-2018, Glocom sought to further expand its reach by
forming relationships with radio technology distribution companies in Malaysia and
Indonesia. In some cases, the products advertised by these e ntities used other
branding, including the brand “FACOM”. 139
139. Although its activities constitute activities prohibited by relevant Security
Council resolutions on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and its Pyongyang
operations were run by a Reconnaissance General Bureau agent (Ryang Su Nyo),
Glocom has not been designated, despite the Panel’s previous recommendation for
such action. The Panel therefore reiterates its previous recommendations for the
designation of Pan Systems 140 to be accompanied by the names of all of its front
companies (including Glocom, International Golden Services and International
Global System) as aliases, for involvement in the financing and sales of arms and
related materiel.
Name:

Pan Systems Pte Ltd (Pyongyang branch)

A.k.a:

Wonbang Trading Co., Glocom, International Golden Services,
International Global System

Address:

Room 818, Pothonggang Hotel, Ansan-Dong, Pyongchon
district, Pyongyang, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Director:

Ryang Su Nyo

Employees:

Pyon Won Gun, Pae Won Chol, Ri Sin Song, Kim Sung Su, Kim
Chang Hyok and Kim Pyong Chol

Telephone:

+850-218-111 (ext. 8636)

140. The Panel continued its investigation into the activities of designated financial
institutions, including Korea Daesong Bank, Daedong Credit Bank (DCB) and DCB
Finance Limited. It previously reported on Li Zhengang (李振刚), a Chinese national
who, since 2011, has owned a 70 per cent foreign equity share in DCB, with the
remaining 30 per cent owned by the designated Korea Daesong Bank. 141 In its 2017
midterm report (S/2017/742), the Panel also mentioned Dandong Zhongrui
Petrochemical Co., Ltd (丹东中瑞石油化工有限公司) as one of two companies
controlled by Li Zhengang (李振刚) and his family member Li Shengda (李胜达). 142
Since that time, the Panel has obtained new open-source information, according to
which Li Zhengang’s company, Dandong Zhongrui Petrochemical Co., Ltd, is part of
a large and currently active network of Chinese companies with a history of doing

__________________

The app is available for download on the Glocom website.
Jason Arterburn, Dispatched: Mapping overseas forced labor in North Korea’s proliferation
finance system (C4ADS, 2018).
139
However, the Glocom label remained clearly visible on several of the products.
140
See S/2017/742, para. 62 and S/2018/171, recommendation 1.
141
See S/2017/742, para. 56.
142
See ibid., annexes 24 and 25.
137
138

58/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

business with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that share contact details,
buildings, office space (i.e., the same room), employees and contact persons.
141. In particular, the Panel’s investigation found that Li Zhengang’s company,
Dandong Zhongrui Petrochemical Co., Ltd, shares addresses with an individual and
entity previously identified by the Panel as associated with shipping activities of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that have violated the resolutions (see
annex 71). The individual is Pan Weichao (潘衛朝), previously identified in a Panel
report as being associated with shipping activities of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea which violated the resolutions by acting as an emergency contact
for K-Brothers, the Marshall Islands-based operator of the Jie Shun (IMO
No. 8518780). Another designated entity shares the same address with Pan Weichao’s
company, the Hong Kong-based Chang An Shipping & Technology Ltd (長安海運技
術有限公司). In reply to the Panel’s inquiries on Li Zhengang (李振刚) and his
connections with above-mentioned entities and individuals, China stated “China has
conducted an in-depth investigation on this case. Through on-site investigation to
Dandong Zhongrui Petrochemical Co. Ltd, China found that it is a very small
company, which has only four staff members and a business volume of 300,000 USD
in the past two years. Li Zhengang had stopped doing business with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea since the year of 2018. China does not have relevant
information on the connection between Dandong Zhongrui Co. Ltd and other three
companies mentioned in the letter – Dandong Jing’ao Trading Co. Ltd, Hong Kongregistered company Jing’ao Dalin Trading Co. Ltd and Chang An Shipping and
Technology Co. Ltd.”
OCN Singapore and T Specialist Singapore
142. The Panel continued its investigation into the financial activities of OCN
(Singapore) Pte Ltd and T Specialist International (Singapore) Pte Ltd. 143 On 19 July
2018, the director of both companies, Ng “Leo” Kheng Wah, was charged in a
Singaporean court with 80 sanctions-related charges and 80 charges of cheating and
conspiracy, including cheating banks out of more than $95 million and supplying
luxury goods worth about $6 million to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
In particular, Ng is accused of “engaging in a conspiracy” with Wang Zhi Guo (王志
国) and T Specialist International to falsify invoices for multipl e trade financing
loans, resulting in payments from banks in Singapore and Malaysia to Wang Zhi
Guo’s company, Pinnacle Offshore Trading. The trial, however, has been delayed four
times.
143. The Panel continued its investigation into these companies (see annex 72).
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea national Li Ik (a.k.a. Ri Ik) had worked for
OCN (Singapore) until January 2018 when his employment pass was revoked, and
Wang Zhi Guo, a Singaporean resident and Chinese national, is still living in
Singapore but had his Chinese passport confiscated (see annex 73). Li Ik’s phone
records showed a wide network of global contacts across four continents and the use
of evasion tactics in his communications. Using three phone numbers associated with
two accounts, he made 1,840 calls to 72 unique numbers in Australia, China, the
Congo, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Liberia, Malaysia, Namibia,
Pakistan, Singapore, Spain, Switzerland and the United Kingdom between
15 February 2014 and 19 April 2016. At least 76 calls were made from one of Li Ik’s
phones to the number of the Foreign Trade Bank of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and Bank of East Land. Li Ik’s phone bills were paid by credit cards with
credit limits of 1 million Singapore dollars ($729,927 United States dollars) from a
__________________
143

19-01704

The Panel refers to the two companies interchangeably, as they have shared the same address and
director, “Leo” Ng Kheng Wah. See S/2018/171, annexes 49 and 55.
59/379

S/2019/171

major Singaporean bank that requires an annual income of 500,000 Singapore dollars
or 3 million Singapore dollars in controlled assets in the bank. Ownership of multiple
bank credit cards with high capital/income requirements by a national of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea engaged in the above-mentioned activities
constitutes evasion of the financial sanctions. A summary of further findings on this
case since the Panel’s most recent final report (S/2018/171) are contained in annex 72.
Ryugyong Commercial Bank and Koryo Commercial Bank
144. While OCN Singapore claimed to the Panel that it had no interests in either
Ryugyong Commercial Bank or Koryo Commercial Bank, it admitted that Ri Ik, its
long-time employee, had the authority to enter into agreement to sell Ryugyong
Commercial Bank and that to this end, he received three transfers of $499,970 each
which were made into the T Specialist account in Singapore by Wang Zhi Guo ’s
company, Pinnacle International, in addition to a transfer from Mars Rock
International for $499,935 (totalling $1,999,845) for the purchase of shares in
Ryugyong Commercial Bank. OCN also admitted knowledge of the business
promotions for Ryugyong Commercial Bank at the Pyongyang Bugsa e stores using
the “OCN” brand (Ri Ik printed the promotional posters in Singapore). China
indicated that Wang Zhi Guo last departed China in 2017 and Singapore has
confirmed that he is a permanent resident.
145. The Panel reiterates its previous recommendation to designate Ri Ik (Li Ik),
Wang Zhi Guo and Ri Ho Nam. 144
Cooperative entities and joint ventures
146. The Panel investigated companies acting as possible cooperative entities or joint
ventures in Argentina, Australia, Cambodia, China, Japan, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Malta, Poland, the Russian Federation, Singapore,
Thailand, Uganda, Viet Nam and Zambia. 145 The Panel wrote to all of the abovementioned countries with lists containing information on possible cooperative entitie s
or joint ventures in their jurisdictions and requested information on the entities. Of
the above Member States, Argentina, Japan and Singapore were able to demonstrate
that the entities investigated were either non-existent, non-operational or had no ties
with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Replies on the entities and measures
being taken in their regard were received from Argentina, Australia, China, Japan, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Poland, the Russian Federation, Singapore,
Thailand, Uganda, Viet Nam and Zambia. Cambodia, Malaysia and Malta have not
replied to the Panel’s inquiries (see annex 74).
Australia
147. In response to the Panel’s request for information on Sonbong Kost J.V.
Company (a.k.a Samhung Kost J.V. Company and Sam Hung KOAST Joint Venture
Pyongyang, 선봉코스트합영회사), 146 Australia cooperated with the Panel by
providing detailed information on the company.

__________________

S/2018/171, Recommendation 1.
The Panel investigated entities based on multiple sources; however, only some of these
ultimately met the Panel’s evidentiary standards.
146
The partner company is Australia Kost/Koast Group, Australia. The Chairman is Chun Yong-su,
a.k.a. Yong Soo Chon. Both the “Koast” and “Kost” spellings seem to have been used by the
relevant companies.
144
145

60/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

China
148. China informed the Panel of the following: “The Ministry of Commerce and
former State Administration for Industry and Commerce of China issued an
Announcement on September 28th, 2017 to require the closure of China-DPRK joint
ventures and cooperative enterprises in accordance with the requirement of the
Security Council resolution. So far, all the China-invested cooperative enterprises in
the DPRK that were approved and put on records by Chinese competent authorities
have been closed. All the DPRK-invested enterprises that registered in China have
completed the closure and stopped business. Any China-DPRK joint venture and
cooperative enterprise that is in operation now violates the Announcement issued by
the relevant Chinese authorities.”
Poland
149. Poland replied to the Panel that Korean-Poland Shipping Co. Ltd (Chopol) had
been closed on 19 June 2018. With regard to Wonye Ltd, Poland confirmed that the
two main shareholders as well as members of the board were nationals of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, one of whom had left the country. Nine
nationals of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea had been granted temporary
residence and work permits valid until 31 August 2019. In an inspection carried out
at the company in 2018, inspectors found irregularities, including civil contracts
instead of employment contracts and the lack of req uired authorization for an
employment agency. With regard to the company, Redshield Ltd, Poland confirmed
that it had two nationals of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea serving as the
main shareholders and board members. An inspection in 2018 found 42 nationals of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea employed at Redshield, 20 of whom were
granted European Union long-term residency status and 20 of whom were granted
residency and the ability to work in Poland. At least one of the entities listed above
constitutes a violation of paragraph 18 of resolution 2375 (2017).
Russian Federation
150. The Russian Federation informed the Panel that “the case of Russian companies
having a sole founder who is a citizen of the [DPRK], such companies are registered
strictly as Russian limited liability companies, rather than joint ventures or
cooperative entities, making them Russian legal persons with all the legal
consequences that follow therefrom. Such companies are not considered subject to
the restrictions imposed on the [DPRK] by the Security Council under paragraph 18
of Security Council resolution 2375 (2017) or under current Russian law.” (annex 74).
The Russian Federation also informed the Panel on 21 January 2019 that “joint
ventures (in Russian law, no such form of legal person exists)”. The Panel’s
investigations during the reporting period have shown that beyond violating the ban
on cooperative entities contained in paragraph 18 of resolution 2375 (2017), Member
States hosting cooperative entities may have violated other provisions of the
resolutions. On 13 August 2018, the Panel wrote to the Russian Federation requesting
information on a company in the Russian official business registry that listed the
owner as a national of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the director as
a Russian national. 147 According to the document, the address of this entity is the same
as that of the Consulate General of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in
__________________
147

19-01704

The Russian Federation replied on 21 January 2019 that “we can report that the investigations
have revealed that the information about the location of Pioner LLC entered in the database of
the Unified State Register of Legal Entities in September 2015 is unreliable. No violations of
paragraph 18 of Security Council resolution 2321(2016) have been identified in this regard.”
61/379

S/2019/171

Vladivostok, 148 which moved to the city in April 2016. 149 According to official
business records, it is engaging in multiple economic activities, including “renting
and operating of own or leased non-residential real estate”; “construction of
residential and non-residential buildings”; and “operation of restaurants and bars in
railway cars and on ships” (see annex 75). The Panel considers that this collaborative
activity with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is prohibited under
paragraph 18 of resolution 2375 (2017). This also constitutes a violation of paragraph
18 of resolution 2321 (2016) unless the company moved out before its adoption. The
Panel continues its investigation.
151. With regard to ties between cooperative entities and possible joint ventures and
designated entities, the Panel’s investigations also found that the construction
company of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Korea General Corporation
for External Construction (GENCO or KOGEN), with ties to Mansudae and Han Hun
Il (Reconnaissance General Bureau) in Zambia (see paras. 126–135), is the co-owner
(along with a Russian national), of a joint venture co nstruction company in Sakhalin
Oblast, Russian Federation, LLC “SAKORENMA” (ООО “САКОРЕНМА”) 150 (see
annexes 76–79). According to official Russian records, it bid on and won supply
contracts for Russian State agencies in June 2018 (see annex 78). 151.
152. According to the company’s official registration documents, it has had
Government contracts in the past year. Another joint venture co-owned by two
nationals of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and directed by a Russian
national in Krasnoyarsk is registered under the Russian name for GENCO and
engages in the same business (construction). 152 While the majority of companies
considered by the Panel as cooperative entities in the Russian Federation are owned
or co-owned by individuals of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (with
Russian co-owners and/or directors also in the paperwork), the following companies
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (in addition to GENCO) are owners of
cooperative entities on the territory of the Russian Federation and therefore in
violation of paragraph 18 of resolution 2375 (2017): Korea Kumgang General
Corporation, the Ministry of Forestry of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
the Academy of Medical Sciences of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Pugang Pharmaceutical Company, “Eighth of March” Korean Trading Company,
Korea Aprokgang Technology Company and Korea Paekma Trading Corporation.
153. The Panel recommends that all Member States take the necessary measures to
ensure that the use of property of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for any
purposes prohibited under paragraph 18 of resolution 2321 (2016) be terminated and
all related registrations or leases cancelled and that all cooperative entities or joint
ventures involving nationals or entities of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
be dissolved in accordance with paragraph 18 of resolution 2375 (2017). Given the
Panel’s findings regarding GENCO’s operation across multiple countries in multiple
continents, it recommends that Member States encourage their corporate service
__________________

12A Nevskaya ul., Vladivostok, Russia, 690018.
See https://primamedia.ru/news/500981/.
150
Tax identification number 6501104474. The Panel notes that LLC “SAKORENMA” was known
as LLC Joint Russian-Korean Enterprise “SAKO RENMA” (Russian: ООО СОВМЕСТНОЕ
РОССИЙСКО-КОРЕЙСКОЕ ПРЕДПРИЯТИЕ “САКО РЕНМА”) until 29 June 2018 (see
annex 77).
151
Information on Government contracts on at least two open-source databases with official Russian
corporate registry data,: see www.rusprofile.ru/gz/2893948 and
www.kartoteka.ru/card/6503378623b837e00e8ff4b9bc1f9b27/#path_Main_Html .
152
According to the official registration information for this joint venture, the name of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea company GENCO is translated into Russian as Корейское
генеральное общество по строительству за рубежом “ЗЕНКО” (Koreyskoye Generalnoye
Obshestvo po Stroyitelstvu za Rubezhom “ZENKO”). See annexes 65 and 76.
148
149

62/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

providers to exercise vigilance to ensure that these companies cannot operate in other
countries in violation of the resolutions.
Thailand
154. In its reply to the Panel’s letter regarding five joint ventures, Thailand said that
its authorities were seeking further details on Pyongyang Haemaji Restaurant and
Mokran Korean Restaurant. It also informed the Panel that Pyongyang Okryu
Restaurant was operated by “Golden Pioneer Entertainment Company Limited”,
which is “entirely own by Thai citizens” (see annex 74).
Uganda
155. The Government of Uganda replied on 6 July 2018 to the Panel’s request for
further information on MKP operations in Uganda. It acknowledged having formed a
joint venture between the National Housing and Construction Company and MKP
Builders SDN BHD, called NH-MKP Builders Limited. As part of one project, the
National Housing and Construction Company paid out $ 3,627,762 as an advance
payment to MKP Builders. Uganda claims that this business relationship ceased at the
beginning of 2014, when it became clear that MKP Builders SDN BHD was unable
to complete the construction contract. The Government has since been involved in a
series of ongoing lawsuits with MKP and its insurance companies to recover the
payment and insists that it cannot dissolve MKP Builders SDN BHD or MKP Capital
Berhad while litigation continues.
156. In its reply, Uganda also included information about Vidas Engineering Services
Company Limited, which it acknowledged as having been contracted for several
Government-funded projects. However, it firmly denied any relationship b etween the
firm and MKP, citing Vidas’s company incorporation documents. Uganda and Vidas
did not provide an explanation for the appearance of the firm’s mailing address,
registered office address, email address and trading name on the corporate registry
documents for MKP Capital and MKP Builders in Uganda. The Panel notes that in
order to mask connections with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
companies of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea commonly use foreign
national facilitators to avoid putting its own nationals on incorporation paperwork,
leverages business contacts to facilitate the establishment of in-country presences and
embeds within foreign firms. Uganda did not respond to the Panel ’s inquiries
pertaining to its recent promotion of foreign investment opportunities in a high-value
MKP Holdings project at the Moroto Marble Mine (see ibid.).
Viet Nam
157. In December 2017, Viet Nam replied to the Panel that with regard to entities of
the businesses and restaurants of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
operating in Viet Nam, in Hanoi, there were three entities and two restaurants,
including Binh Nhuong Restaurant and Koryo Restaurant. In Ho Chi Minh City, there
were seven entities and a Koryo Restaurant (formerly called Ryu Gong Restaurant).
There was one entity in Hai Phong.
Zambia
158. Information on cooperative entities and joint ventures in Zamb ia can be found
in annex 46.

19-01704

63/379

S/2019/171

Recommendations
To the Committee
159. The Panel recommends the designation of Han Hun Il (Edward Han), Yong
Kok Yeap (MKP Malaysia) and Yazid Merzouk (MKP Zambia), as well as Pan
Systems, 153 and the names of all of its front companies (including Glocom,
International Golden Services and International Global System).
160. The Panel recommends that the Committee clarify the definition of joint
ventures and cooperative entities contained in paragraph 18 of resolution 2375
(2017).
To Member States
161. Given the pervasive use of accounts in the names of family members to
evade sanctions, the Panel recommends that Governments provide their financial
institutions with a list not only of accredited diplomats, but of their family
members, to ensure that diplomats do not establish additional bank accounts in
their names.
162. The Panel recommends that Member States issue guidance for a single bank
to be identified as the only bank that may hold accounts for the embassy and
diplomats of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and that all others be
advised not to hold accounts for diplomats of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea or their family members.
163. The Panel recommends that Member States advise their financial
institutions not to open accounts for diplomats of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea who are not accredited to their country and to share
information on the financial activities of diplomats of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea with other Member States where records show that there has
been financial activity, to avoid cross-border circumvention of sanctions.
164. Member States should advise their financial institutions that only closing
bank accounts (as opposed to freezing) does not meet the requirements of the
resolutions, which stipulate that they must freeze all assets controlled by
designated individuals or entities and those operating on their behalf, as well as
of any members of the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea that are engaged in violating or evading any of the provisions of the
resolutions.
165. Member States should offer technical assistance to other Member States to
help them to strengthen their legal frameworks and related mechanisms to
implement the financial provisions in the resolutions, as appropriate and in line
with Article 49 of the Charter of the United Nations.
166. As part of their implementation of paragraph 18 of resolution 2375 (2017),
Member States should request their corporate registries to extract the details of
all companies with a national director or shareholders of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, bearing in mind that the registration of such
companies may de facto violate the ban.
167. Given that joint ventures have violated other provisions of the resolutions
in addition to paragraph 18 of resolution 2375 (2017), the names of those
directors and shareholders should be shared with investigation agencies,
financial intelligence units and financial institutions.
__________________
153

64/379

S/2017/742, para. 62; and S/2018/171, recommendation 1.
19-01704

S/2019/171

168. The Panel recommends that Member States clarify with their national
agencies that insurance providers are financial institutions and therefore subject
to all of the relevant financial provisions in the resolutions, including the need to
freeze assets under the resolutions.

V. Recent activities related to the nuclear and ballistic
missile programmes
Nuclear
169. The Yongbyon nuclear complex remained active. The 5 MW (e) reactor has been
in operation since December 2015 and, according to a Member State, while operations
were suspended for a few days in February, March and April 2018, each period was
insufficient to shut down for discharge and was likely for maintenance operations. In
November 2018, a Member State informed the Panel that the reactor’s operation had
been suspended from September to October 2018 and that the discharge of spent fuel
rods could have taken place during those two months. Satellite imagery from February
to November 2018 shows the excavation of water channels. The imagery also captures
the construction of a building near the reactors’ water discharge facilities. A Member
State observed the discharge of water through the newly built structure in
mid-June 2018. The Panel also observed a new building on the west side of the light
water reactor (see annex 80).
170. Satellite imagery indicates possible operation of the radiochemical laboratory
and associated steam plant. Plumes of smoke and fluctuating amounts of coal reserves
were seen between 27 April and 8 May 2018 (see annex 81), which was likely for
maintenance work. In November 2018, a Member State reported to the Panel that it
had detected a heat change within the building.
171. On 24 May 2018, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea held a ceremony
for the dismantling of the Punggye-ri nuclear test site, followed by a statement by its
Nuclear Weapons Institute. 154 Satellite imagery indicates several changes in the
above-ground infrastructure as a result of the “dismantling” in May. The Panel
observed the removal of stockpiled materials in November 2018 (see annex 82).
172. The Panel continues monitoring uranium concentration plants and mining sites.
The Panel observed the removal of spoil piles in Pyongsan in 2018, which indicates
that mining may be ongoing (see annex 83). The Panel observed no significant change
around the possible uranium enrichment facility in Kangson during the reporting
period, except for the periodic movement of oversize trucks.
Use of civilian infrastructure for ballistic missile assembly and launches
173. In April 2018, a Member State informed the Panel that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea was repeatedly using civilian factories and other non-military
facilities as part of a strategy to prevent any possible “decapitation” strike on the
country’s smaller number of identified nuclear and ballistic missile assembly and
manufacturing sites. The Member State noted that these sites have all the necessary
rail links, road and other infrastructure for the transport, assembly and testing of the
weapons systems. One example provided to the Panel was the intercontinental
ballistic missile Hwasong-15 assembly at the Pyongsong truck factory, also known as
the March 16th Automotive Plant (see figure XXV), and its subsequent launch site.
In November 2018, the Member State informed the Panel that the Democratic
__________________
154

19-01704

“Statement of Nuclear Weapons Institute of DPRK”, Korean Central News Agency, 24 May
2018.
65/379

S/2019/171

People’s Republic of Korea was developing intercontinental ballistic missile bases
close to its northern border.
Figure XXV
Member State example of use of civilian facilities for ballistic missile assembly
(left); Chairman Kim Jong Un visiting the truck factory three weeks prior to
launch (4 November 2017) (right)

Sources: Member State, Korean Central News Agency.

174. The Panel surveyed, confirmed and reported ballistic missile activity sites and
found evidence of a consistent trend on the part of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to disperse its assembly, storage and testing locations. In addition to the use
of civilian facilities, the Panel found that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
used previously idle or sprawling military-industrial sites as launch locations. These
may be situated close by, up to 10 km from the assembly or storage sites. Examples
of this trend include the test launch sites for the Hwasong-14 intercontinental launch
of 4 July (Panghyon aircraft factory) and 28 July 2017 (Mupyong-ni). Pyongyang
Sunan International Airport, the country’s largest civil-military airfield, was used for
the intermediate range Hwasong-12 launches of 29 August and 15 September 2017.
See annex 84 for satellite and ballistic missile-related imagery.

VI. Unintended impact of sanctions
175. In order to strengthen the humanitarian exemption mechanism, on 6 August
2018, the Committee adopted “Implementation Assistance Notice No.7: Guidelines
for Obtaining Exemptions to Deliver Humanitarian Assistance to the DPRK”. 155 From
January 2018 to January 2019, the Committee received 25 humanitarian exemption
requests made by Member States, United Nations agencies and humanitarian
organizations. 156 As at the time of writing, the Committee had granted 16 approvals,
while seven requests remain under consideration by the Committee (two requests
were withdrawn). 157
176. Member States, United Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations have
expressed concern that despite the exemption clauses and the Committee’s efforts,
__________________

In addition, the Committee in its 24 April 2018 updated “Implementation Assistance Notice No. 2:
Guidelines on the Preparation and Submission of National Implementation Reports ”, encouraged
States, as part of their national reporting, to explain, where appropriate, their domestic laws and
other relevant authorities for implementing exemptions from the measures imposed by the
resolutions. See www.un.org/sc/suborg/en/sanctions/1718/implementation-notices.
156
The Panel notes that some exemption requests contain items that are not listed.
157
Information about the exemptions approved by the Committee are posted on the website, see
www.un.org/sc/suborg/en/sanctions/1718/exemptions-measures/humanitarian-exemptionrequests.
155

66/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

United Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations continue to experience
unintended consequences on their humanitarian program mes that make it impossible
to operate normally in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The six main areas
of concern communicated to the Panel are: delays in receiving exemptions; the
collapse of the banking channel; delays in customs clearance; a decrease in willing
foreign suppliers; the increased cost of humanitarian-related items and operations;
and diminished funding for operations (see annexes 85–87). These are negatively
affecting their ability to implement humanitarian-related programmes. In particular,
the sectoral sanctions are affecting the delivery of a number of humanitarian -sensitive
items (see ibid.). For the Panel’s assessment of adverse humanitarian consequences
of sanctions for the civilian population of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
see annex 85.
Recommendations
177. The Panel recommends that discussions in the Committee on humanitarian
exemption requests be time-bound and that focus groups within the Committee
meet on a regular basis to examine humanitarian issues with a view to expediting
the processing of such requests.
178. To alleviate unnecessary burdens on Member States, United Nations
agencies and humanitarian organizations, the Committee should publish a
whitelist of certain non-sensitive items used in humanitarian operations that fall
under the broad categories of items subject to the sectoral sanctions in paragraph
7 of resolution 2397 (2017) requiring an exemption for humanitarian shipment
into the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
179. The Committee should continue to seek feedback from Member States,
United Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations applying for
exemptions under the terms of the Implementation Assistance Notice No. 7
guidelines and work to streamline and simplify the application process to the
extent possible, including by providing greater flexibility regarding the technical
specifications of planned shipments, the parties involved and the frequency of
requests and submissions.
180. The Secretary-General should request the Secretariat to carry out an
assessment of the humanitarian impact of sanctions in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.

VII. National implementation reports
181. As at January 2019, 68 Member States had submitted reports on their
implementation of resolution 2397 (2017); 83 Member States on resolution 2375
(2017); 84 Member States on resolution 2371 (2017); 102 Member States on
resolution 2321 (2016) and 111 Member States on resolution 2270 (2016). 158 Despite
the increase in overall reporting, the Panel notes that the number of non -reporting
States (124, 6 of which served as non-permanent members of the Security Council in
2018) for resolution 2397 (2017) remains significant (see annex 88).
182. The Panel recalls that Member States are to submit their reports in a timely
manner in accordance with paragraph 17 of resolution 2397 (2017).
183. For a consolidated list of recommendations, see annex 89.
__________________
158

19-01704

See www.un.org/sc/suborg/en/sanctions/1718/implementation-reports, accessed on 30 November
2018.
67/379

S/2019/171

Annex 1: Information provided to the Panel by the United States, 6 July 2018
The United States stated that if each of the below 89 port calls delivered only one third of each
vessel’s capacity, the associated volume would exceed the annual cap for 2018 by 30 May 2018.
Fully loaded, the DPRK tankers could have exceeded the cap nearly three times over with an
estimated total of 1,367,628 barrels (figure 1).
Figure 1

Figure 2: DPRK tanker deliveries to DPRK ports

Port

Ship Name
*Designated

Dead Weight
Tonnage

Arrival
Month
2018

Delivery
Volume
33% Laden

Delivery
Volume
50% Laden

Delivery
Volume
90% Laden

Nampo

Ji Song 6*

1,250.00

January

416.67

625.00

1,125.00

Nampo

Sam Jong 1*

1,665.00

January

555.00

832.50

1,498.50

Nampo

Kum Un San 3

3,279.00

January

1,093.00

1,639.50

2,951.10

Nampo

An San 1*

3,003.00

January

1,001.00

1,501.50

2,702.70

Najin

Kum Un San

2,070.00

January

690.00

1,035.00

1,863.00

Nampo

Yu Phyong 5*

1,966.00

January

655.33

983.00

1,769.40

Nampo

Yu Son (Y Chun)*

3,398.00

January

1,132.67

1,699.00

3,058.20

Nampo

Chon Ma San*

2,750.00

January

916.67

1,375.00

2,475.00

Nampo

Paek Ma*

2,250.00

January

750.00

1,125.00

2,025.00

Nampo

Saebyol (Chong Rim 2)*

1,150.00

January

383.33

575.00

1,035.00

Nampo

Sam Jong 2*

2,507.00

January

835.67

1,253.50

2,256.30

Wonsan

Kum Un San 3

3,279.00

January

1,093.00

1,639.50

2,951.10

Nampo

Rye Song Gang 1

3,003.00

January

1,001.00

1,501.50

2,702.70

Najin

Kum Un San

2,070.00

January

690.00

1,035.00

1,863.00

Wonsan

Sam Ma 2*

1,731.00

January

577.00

865.50

1,557.90

68/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Nampo

Ji Song 6*

1,250.00

February

416.67

625.00

1,125.00

Nampo

Sam Jong 1*

1,665.00

February

555.00

832.50

1,498.50

Wonsan

Kum Un San

2,070.00

February

690.00

1,035.00

1,863.00

Wonsan

Kum Un San 3

3,279.00

February

1,093.00

1,639.50

2,951.10

Nampo

Chon Ma San*

2,750.00

February

916.67

1,375.00

2,475.00

Nampo

Yu Phyong 5*

1,966.00

February

655.33

983.00

1,769.40

Nampo

Saebyol (Chong Rim 2)*

1,150.00

February

383.33

575.00

1,035.00

Nampo

An San 1*

3,003.00

February

1,001.00

1,501.50

2,702.70

Nampo

Sam Jong 2*

2,507.00

February

835.67

1,253.50

2,256.30

Nampo

Rye Song Gang 1

3,003.00

February

1,001.00

1,501.50

2,702.70

Nampo

Sam Jong 1*

1,665.00

February

555.00

832.50

1,498.50

Nampo

Yu Son (Y Chun)*

3,398.00

February

1,132.67

1,699.00

3,058.20

Nampo

Yu Phyong 5*

1,966.00

February

655.33

983.00

1,769.40

Nampo

Yu Jong 2*

1,206.00

March

402.00

603.00

1,085.40

Nampo

Ji Song 6*

1,250.00

March

416.67

625.00

1,125.00

Nampo

Sam Jong 2*

2,507.00

March

835.67

1,253.50

2,256.30

Nampo

Ji Song 6*

1,250.00

March

416.67

625.00

1,125.00

Chongjin

Un Pha 2, ex Kum Gang 3

1,205.00

March

401.67

602.50

1,084.50

Nampo

An San 1*

3,003.00

March

1,001.00

1,501.50

2,702.70

Nampo

Paek Ma*

2,250.00

March

750.00

1,125.00

2,025.00

Nampo

Rye Song Gang 1

3,003.00

March

1,001.00

1,501.50

2,702.70

Nampo

Sam Jong 1*

1,665.00

March

555.00

832.50

1,498.50

Nampo

Saebyol (Chong Rim 2)*

1,150.00

March

383.33

575.00

1,035.00

Nampo

Kum Un San 3

3,279.00

March

1,093.00

1,639.50

2,951.10

Nampo

Yu Son (Y Chun)*

3,398.00

March

1,132.67

1,699.00

3,058.20

Nampo

Wan Heng 11*

4,983.00

March

1,661.00

2,491.50

4,484.70

Nampo

Sam Jong 2*

2,507.00

March

835.67

1,253.50

2,256.30

Hamhung

Sam Ma 2*

1,731.00

March

577.00

865.50

1,557.90

Nampo

Chon Ma San*

2,750.00

March

916.67

1,375.00

2,475.00

Nampo

Ji Song 6*

1,250.00

March

416.67

625.00

1,125.00

Nampo

Yu Jong 2*

1,206.00

March

402.00

603.00

1,085.40

Nampo

Kum Un San

2,070.00

March

690.00

1,035.00

1,863.00

Nampo

Saebyol (Chong Rim 2)*

1,150.00

March

383.33

575.00

1,035.00

Nampo

An San 1*

3,003.00

March

1,001.00

1,501.50

2,702.70

Nampo

Yu Phyong 5*

1,966.00

March

655.33

983.00

1,769.40

Nampo

Chon Ma San*

2,750.00

April

916.67

1,375.00

2,475.00

Nampo

Ji Song 6*

1,250.00

April

416.67

625.00

1,125.00

Nampo

Kum Pit 1

1,091.00

April

363.67

545.50

981.90

Nampo

Kum Un San 3

3,279.00

April

1,093.00

1,639.50

2,951.10

Nampo

Paek Ma*

2,250.00

April

750.00

1,125.00

2,025.00

Chongjin

Sam Ma 2*

1,731.00

April

577.00

865.50

1,557.90

Nampo

Nam San 8*

3,150.00

April

1,050.00

1,575.00

2,835.00

Nampo

Yu Son (Y Chun)*

3,398.00

April

1,132.67

1,699.00

3,058.20

Nampo

Wan Heng 11*

4,983.00

April

1,661.00

2,491.50

4,484.70

19-01704

69/379

S/2019/171

Nampo

Chon Ma San*

2,750.00

April

916.67

1,375.00

2,475.00

Nampo

Sam Jong 2*

2,507.00

April

835.67

1,253.50

2,256.30

Hamhung

Sam Ma 2*

1,731.00

April

577.00

865.50

1,557.90

Wonsan

Ma Du San

949.00

April

316.33

474.50

854.10

Chongji

Sam Ma 2*

1731.00

April

577.00

865.50

1,557.90

Najin

Song Won

2101.00

April

700.33

1,050.50

1,890.90

Wonsan

Kum Un San

2070.00

April

690.00

1,035.00

1,863.00

Nampo

An San 1*

3003.00

April

1,001.00

1,501.50

2,702.70

Nampo

Kum Jin Gang 2

2100.00

April

700.00

1,050.00

1,890.00

Nampo

Paek Ma*

2250.00

May

750.00

1,125.00

2,025.00

Chongjin

Sam Ma 2*

1731.00

May

577.00

865.50

1,557.90

Nampo

Ji Song 6*

1250.00

May

416.67

625.00

1,125.00

Nampo

Yu Phyong 5*

1966.00

May

655.33

983.00

1,769.40

Nampo

Sam Jong 2*

2507.00

May

835.67

1,253.50

2,256.30

Wonsan

Chon Myong 1*

2750.00

May

916.67

1,375.00

2,475.00

Nampo

Myong Ryu 1

900.00

May

300.00

450.00

810.00

Nampo

Sam Jong 1*

1665.00

May

555.00

832.50

1,498.50

Wonsan

Kum Un San

2070.00

May

690.00

1,035.00

1,863.00

Nampo

Saebyol (Chong Rim 2)*

1150.00

May

383.33

575.00

1,035.00

Nampo

Nam San 8*

3150.00

May

1,050.00

1,575.00

2,835.00

Nampo

An San 1*

3003.00

May

1,001.00

1,501.50

2,702.70

Hamhung

Sam Ma 2*

1731.00

May

577.00

865.50

1,557.90

Nampo

Yu Jong 2*

1206.00

May

402.00

603.00

1,085.40

Nampo

Yu Phyong 5*

1966.00

May

655.33

983.00

1,769.40

Nampo

Yu Son*

3398.00

May

1,132.67

1,699.00

3,058.20

Nampo

Kum Jin Gang 2

2100.00

May

700.00

1,050.00

1,890.00

Nampo

Ji Song 6*

1250.00

May

416.67

625.00

1,125.00

Nampo

Paek Ma*

2250.00

May

750.00

1,125.00

2,025.00

Nampo

Sam Jong 2*

2507.00

May

835.67

1,253.50

2,256.30

Nampo

Myong Ryu 1

900.00

May

300.00

450.00

810.00

Percent Laden

33%

50%

90%

Total (Metric Tons)

65,782.99

98,674.50

177,614.10

Total (Barrels)

506,529.05

759,793.65

1,367,628.57

Source: Member State

70/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 2: United States submission to the Committee of 17 September 2018
UNITED STATES NON-PAPER TO THE UN 1718 DPRK SANCTIONS COMMITTEE:
NORTH KOREA’S BREACH OF UNSCR 2397 REFINED PETROLEUM CAP
• UNSCR 2397 operative paragraph 5 limits the DPRK’s import of refined petroleum products
to 500,000 barrels per year beginning in 2018 if those transfers are a) fully reported to the
Committee within 30 days, b) do not involve any individual or entity associated with the
DPRK’s nuclear, ballistic missile, or other prohibited activities, and c) are used to exclusively
meet the livelihood needs of DPRK nationals and not used to generate revenue for the DPRK’s
nuclear, ballistic missile, or other prohibited activities.
• UNSCR 2375 operative paragraph 11 prohibits ship-to-ship (STS) transfers with DPRKflagged, owned, or operated vessels. UNSCR 2094 further makes clear that any individual or
entity assisting in the evasion of sanctions are also liable for 1718 sanctions.
• These STS transfers are of great concern to the United States and in our view represent the
most urgent area in need of more rigorous UN member state implementation.
• Since the United States last provided the UN 1718 Committee with a report on oil tanker
deliveries to the DPRK on July 12, we have information revealing that these deliveries
continue. The continuing arrival of these tankers in DPRK ports confirm that the DPRK
maintains its imports of illicitly sourced refined petroleum products that expand the degree to
which the DPRK is violating UNSCR 2397’s annual limitation on refined product imports.
Further, the 1718 Committee has not received any reporting from the DPRK or other memb er
states about these transfers in contravention of UNSCR 2397.
• We are providing updated information showing data on each of these port calls to supplement
our previous reporting and to emphasize that this problem continues due to the inaction of the
1718 Committee and the objections raised by Russia and China.
• The table provided in Tab 1 lists each of the port calls by date and associated delivery volume
scenarios from 1 January 2018 to 18 August 2018, which have grown substantially since our
previous submission and, in aggregation, exceed the UNSCR 2397 annual quota for refined
petroleum products.
• Since our last report in July summarizing transactions observed in January through May, at
least an additional 59 tanker deliveries to the DPRK have occurred from June 1 through August
18, bringing the 2018 total to at least 148 deliveries, all of which involved deliveries to North
Korean ports to unload refined petroleum products procured through UN-prohibited STS
transfers.
• If each of these tankers was fully laden when it made its delivery, the DPRK has imported
almost six times the allowable amount under UNSCR 2397. Even if these tankers were not
fully laden upon delivery, the figure found in Tab 2 show the three scenarios for how much
refined petroleum products the DPRK procured in 2018 from 1 January to 18 August. All
three scenarios make clear that the DPRK has obtained far more than the 500,000 barrels it is
authorized to procure in 2018.
19-01704

71/379

S/2019/171

• All further transfers of refined petroleum products must be halted, period, to prevent the DPRK
from procuring any additional products in violation of UNSCR 2397.
• To further underscore our confidence in the updated data on tanker deliveries, we are also
providing three images—one from each of the past three months in Tabs 3 through 5—that
document several of these deliveries into a DPRK port outfitted with oil unloading and storage
infrastructure as well as an image of the port infrastructure more broadly in Tab 6.
• The images of these tanker ships depict DPRK-flagged vessels that are outfitted for the
transport of refined petroleum products and used exclusively for that purpose when moored —
or anchored—at a single point offshore mooring system. The single point mooring system
consists of mooring buoys, which keep the tankers anchored in place, and an offloading buoy
that connects to an underwater pipeline allowing for the physical transfer of the refined
petroleum products from the tankers to onshore infrastructure.
• Specifically, this pipeline transfers the refined petroleum products to the associated onshore
infrastructure including refined petroleum storage tanks, pumping equipment, a rail transfer
point, and tanker truck filling station, all of which are outfitted to facilitate the unloading,
storage, and transporting of the refined products to areas where the products are consumed
throughout North Korea, including by the regime and military.
o The first image in Tab 3 highlights this process by showing both marine import
terminals in Nampo that are configured to import, store, and transport refined
petroleum products through an offloading pier and single point mooring systems. As
can be seen in the image, various DPRK tankers are at anchorage to cycle through
offloading infrastructure to make individual deliveries of refined petroleum products
before departing the port in search of additional, illicit STS transfer transactions.
o The second image in Tab 4 shows the DPRK-flagged M/T MU BONG 1 anchored at
an offloading buoy at the Nampo port facility in the Taedong River on June 16, 2018.
The vessel is fully loaded and is in the process of delivering refined petroleum
products procured via an illicit STS transfer.
o The third image in Tab 5 shows the DPRK-flagged M/T YU JONG 2 anchored at an
offloading buoy at the Nampo port facility in the Taedong River on July 21, 2018. The
vessel is fully loaded and is in the process of delivering refined petroleum products
procured via an illicit STS transfer.
o The fourth image in Tab 6 shows the DPRK-flagged M/T AN SAN 1 anchored at an
offloading buoy at the Nampo port facility in the Taedong River on August 17, 2018.
The vessel is fully loaded and is in the process of delivering refined petroleum
products procured via an illicit STS transfer.
• We are supplementing this imagery with three storyboards that demonstrate the entire process
by which North Korean tankers depart North Korean ports, rendezvous with a foreign “feeder
vessel” to engage in an illicit STS transfer, and return to a North Korean port to deliver refined
petroleum products.

72/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

o The first storyboard in Tab 7 shows the entire process in which the North Koreaflagged MYONG RYU 1 conducted an STS transfer with the Panama-flagged SHANG
YUAN BAO.
o The second storyboard in Tab 8 shows the entire process in which the North Koreaflagged PAEK MA conducted an STS transfer with the Panama-flagged SHANG
YUAN BAO.
o The third storyboard in Tab 9 shows the entire process in which the North Korea flagged MU BONG 1 conducted an STS transfer with the Sierra Leone-flagged XING
MING YANG 888.
• The United States has now provided two tables documenting 148 deliveries of refined
petroleum products to the DPRK and 10 images and storyboards clearly demonstrating the
process by which this occurs to the 1718 Committee. This body of evidence should remove
any remaining doubts that the DPRK has seriously violated the refined petroleum cap and that
the Committee must urgently act to halt all refined petroleum product exports to the DP RK.
ATTACHMENTS
Tab 1: Table of DPRK tanker deliveries of refined petroleum products to DPRK ports
Tab 2: Figure of estimated volumes of refined petroleum product deliveries to DPRK
Tab 3: Image of Nampo Port marine import terminals for refined petroleum products
Tab 4: M/T Mu Bong 1 delivery at Nampo Port
Tab 5: M/T Mu Bong 1 delivery at Nampo Port
Tab 6: M/T Mu Bong 1 delivery at Nampo Port
Tab 7: Storyboard of Myong Ryu 1 STS transfer with Shang Yuan Bao
Tab 8: Storyboard of Paek Ma STS transfer with Shang Yuan Bao
Tab 9: Storyboard of Mu Bong 1 STS transfer with Xing Ming Yang 888

19-01704

73/379

S/2019/171

74/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

75/379

S/2019/171

76/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

77/379

S/2019/171

78/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

79/379

S/2019/171

Source: Member State

80/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 3: Communication of the Russian Federation to the Committee of 21 September 2018

Source: Member State
19-01704

81/379

S/2019/171

Annex 4: Address location provided by Golden Luxury Corporation to Yuantai

Source: The Panel

82/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 5: Panel letter to Golden Luxury Corporation and their associates

19-01704

83/379

S/2019/171

84/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex I. Images showing the Ocean Explorer conducting a ship-to-ship transfer with a
UN designated vessel controlled by UN designated entity

Source: Member State

19-01704

85/379

S/2019/171

86/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

159

__________________

One Panel Member objected to the disclosure of the Panel’s letter without an accompanying reply due to the sensitivity of the
information. The Coordinator notes that it is standard practice to provide evidence of the Panel’s activities and the evidence
obtained in the annexes.
159

19-01704

87/379

S/2019/171

Annex 6: Vanguard correspondence
From: vanguard xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 2:08 PM
To: Hugh Griffiths
Cc: 'van.guard'
Subject: RE: Outgoing Communication # 367 from the Panel of Experts on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea (DPRK) to Vanguard

Dear Mr.Hugh Griffiths,
Good day.
We have to affirm that Vanguard Shipping Safety Management Consultant Co. Ltd
never involved in the owner’s cargo operation and finance. our company only
responsible for the regulation of International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea
(SOLAS 1974) Appendix IX and Chapter X1-2 issued by International Maritime
Organization (IMO).
Our company is not responsible for the management of trade operation and crew
management of this Virtue Base Developments Limited (IMO No.5893594), nor
involved in matters such as ownership and chartering of the ship to which this
company belongs and trade operation and crew management.
So we don't know the following information from Virtue Base Developments Limited
(IMO No.5893594).
names, addresses, email addresses, fax numbers and other records for the
individuals responsible for Virtue Base Developments.
Our company was entrusted by Mr.Lai (phone number +886978882693) at the end of
May 2017, by our employee Penny to assist the applicant company IMO number, but
soon after, We also cannot contact this Mr.Lai.
Hope above mention will help your investigation.
Best Regards.

汎德船舶安全管理顧問有限公司
VANGUARD SHIPPING SAFETY MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT COMPANY LIMITED.
From: Hugh Griffiths [xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
Sent: Monday, December 10, 2018 8:27 PM
To: van.guard
Subject: Re: Outgoing Communication # 367 from the Panel of Experts on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea (DPRK) to Vanguard

88/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Dear Vanguard,
Thank you for your email.
Is this Penny Lee 李沛瑀(Ms.) that is replying to the United Nations?
Or another employee?
I would be grateful if you could identify yourself and provide informa tion on an important case.
Virtue Base Developments (see attachment)
This is an entity registered in the Seychelles for which you submitted an IMO number request in 2017.
Please supply the names, addresses, email addresses, fax numbers and other records for the
individuals responsible for Virtue Base Developments.
I am basing this request on the attached Equatorial Guinea registry certificate.
Virtue Base Developments are shielding their identity.
However, your company, Vanguard is named as a "care of" address with a UN international
organisation for Virtue Base Developments.
Please provide us with the information on the individuals behind Virtue Base Development within 24
hours.
Best regards,
Hugh Griffiths

From: van.guard xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
Sent: Monday, December 10, 2018 9:56 AM
To: DPA-POE1874
Cc: ''Vanguard(汎德公司)''; Hugh Griffiths
Subject: RE: Outgoing Communication # 367 from the Panel of Experts on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea (DPRK) to Vanguard

Dear Mr.HUGH GRIFFITHS,
Good day.
At beginning, we have to affirm that Vanguard Shipping Safety Management
Consultant Co. Ltd never involved in the owner’s cargo operation and finance. We only pay
attention to ship’s safety. It’s most management company done at Kaohsiung. Besides, we
have never received the Panel’s previous notice S/AC.49/2017/PE/OC.1151 of 19 December
2017, only received S/AC.49/2018/PE/OC.367 on 7 December 2018.

19-01704

89/379

S/2019/171

You said our company was associated with 5 ships engaged in prohibited ship-to-ship
transfers. We would like to clarify as following:
1.

Lighthouse Winmore (IMO number: 9635987) ─ She belongs to Mr. Hsih-Shien Chen,
which was never under our management. If she holds our company’s DOC, then it must
be a fake certificate and please provide your evidence in hand. It’s easy to find out from
her SMC.

2.

Billions No. 18 (IMO number: 8711021) ─ She also belongs to Mr. Hsih-Shien Chen. It
changes ship’s name to "SUN CROWN". And then it was sold to other people.

3.

Jin Hye (IMO number: 8518572) ─ In December 2017, we were informed by
Investigation Bureau about the vessel was involved with illegal transfers. Then we
broke the agreement with the owner immediately and accepted Investigation Bureau
and prosecutor’s investigation. You may check with them. The owner was in litigation
now and we are clear from the investigation. After breaking the agreement, we have
delivered the deletion certificate to the owner from Flag State. The ship has left us and
we didn’t get further information from her.

4.

Wan Heng 11 (IMO number: 8688717) ─ This vessel was never under our
management. Please provide the evidence for us to report to Investigation Bureau.

5.

Heng Xing (IMO number: 8669589) on 7 May 2018 ─ Please check your Annex 2 and
amplify stern part of the small ship, you will clearly indicate port registration of two
Chinese words "舟山"(ZHOUSHAN) that is a Chinese ship. (Please see the red column)

Source: The Panel

90/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 7: Panel letter to Hin Leong 10 May 2018

19-01704

91/379

S/2019/171

92/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

93/379

S/2019/171

94/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Hin Leong responses to best practice clauses and Panel letter

19-01704

95/379

S/2019/171

Source: The Panel

96/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 8: Hika scrapping documentation

Source: The Panel

19-01704

97/379

S/2019/171

Annex 9: Panama’s reply to the Panel

98/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

99/379

S/2019/171

100/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

101/379

S/2019/171

Annex 10: Jui Zong’s reply to the Panel

Source: The Panel

102/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 11: Jui Zong correspondence to the Panel

19-01704

103/379

S/2019/171

Source: The Panel

104/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 12: Qihang International Shipping Management’s reply to the Panel

Source: The Panel
19-01704

105/379

S/2019/171

Annex 13: Ship-to-ship transfers and coal vessels
1.
Unsurprisingly, the transfers have continued to occur in international waters where there is
weak or nonexistent monitoring by flag states, insurers and most traders. In the context of these
transfers, the Panel notes the use of increasingly sophisticated evasion in addition to AIS
manipulation which remains an overarching feature of the transfers. Other methods of evasi on
include physical disguise of DPRK tankers, the use of small, un -registered vessels, illegal namechanging and other forms of identity fraud, night transfers and use of other vessels for transshipment.
The below text and figures show examples of each typ e of evasion.
2.
The DPRK has been disguising tankers as cargo ships through the construction of fake cargo
hatches 160 (see figure I) and the false reporting of these ships as cargo ships when AIS is switched
on.
Figure I: Fake cargo hatches

Source: Member State
3.
The below figures show the use of small, nondescript vessels not requiring an IMO number,
making nationality and identity more difficult to determine, especially when the vessels obscure or
paint false names (see figure II -IV for examples).
Figure II: Small ship transfer to tanker Yu Phyong 5 of 19 June 2018

Source: Member State
Figure III: Small ship transfer to Ji Song of 19 May 2018

Source: Member State
__________________
160

Made of wood and lashed with canvas.

106/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Figure IV: Small ship transfer to Yu Jong 2 of 16 February 2018

Source: Member State
Vessel identity fraud
4.
Larger, internationally-registered, foreign-flagged vessels are also engaging in name
falsification and other forms of identity fraud along with their DPRK counterparts. On 18 May 2018,
the Panama-flagged Shang Yuan Bao (IMO number: 8126070) obscured the name on its bow and
stern before engaging in a ship-to-ship transfer with the designated DPRK tanker Paek Ma (IMO
number: 9066978) as the “Puma” which was painted on the vessel’s bow. (see figure V). The vessel
also engaged in the now-common practice of switching off its AIS. 161 (figure VI)
Figure V: Shang Yuan Bao ship-to-ship transfer and disguise of name

Source: Member State

__________________

The vessel’s operator, Jui Zong Ship Management Co., Ltd., in Taiwan Province of China, claimed to the Panel that the vessels
did not “transfer bunker to the DPRK vessel” and that DPRK tanker had requested “fresh water to them based on humanitarian
aid”. See annex 10.
161

19-01704

107/379

S/2019/171

Figure VI: Shang Yuan Bao AIS transmission record

Source: Windward
5.
Taking advantage of the lack of monitoring, oversight and regulation by flag of convenience
states, DPRK vessels have falsified their ports of registry and name to give the impression of being
under a non-DPRK jurisdiction. This was seen when on 29 June the DPRK tanker An San 1 disguised
itself as the “Hope Sea”, of Freetown, Sierra Leone (figure VII).
Figure VII: An San 1 disguised as “Hope Sea” during 29 June illicit transfer

Source: Member State
6.
In a new technique involving only non-DPRK-flagged vessels, one of which was later used to
deliver petroleum to the DPRK, the former Belize-registered designated tanker Wan Heng 11 (IMO

108/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

number: 8791667) 162 conducted a daytime ship-to-ship transfer on 10 April with the Patriot (IMO
number: 9003550) a Russian Federation-flagged vessel.
Figure VIII: Ship-to-ship transfer between Wan Heng 11 and Patriot

Source: Member State
7.
Both vessels’ AIS transponders appeared to be switched off at the time of the transfer although
the Patriot’s AIS appeared later that day, registering a draft change which indicated that a cargo had
been discharged. (see figure IX)
Figure IX: Patriot AIS transmission record

Source: Windward
__________________

The Wan Heng 11 had already been designated (for de-flagging pursuant to paragraph 12 of resolution 2321 (2016) and
prohibited from port entry pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 2371 (2017) on 30 March 2018 after it was observed engaging in a
ship to ship transfer with the DPRK tanker Rye Song Gang 1 on 13 February.
162

19-01704

109/379

S/2019/171

8.
While the Wan Heng 11 kept its AIS transponder off following the transfer, the vessel was
observed delivering cargo to Nampo, DPRK, on 15 April (figure X).
Figure X: Wan Heng 11 in Nampo, 15 April

Source: Member State, Map: Panel
9.
The Panel notes that while the Wan Heng 11 violated paragraph 5 of resolution 2397 (2017),
the Patriot did not violate either this provision or paragr aph 11 of resolution 2375 (2017). The Wan
Heng 11 was designated for de-registration and a port call ban (and not for ship-to-ship transfer). In
this context, the Panel recommends that the Committee incorporate paragraph 11 of resolution
2375 (2017) to the designation list in order to prohibit designated vessels from conducting shipto-ship transfers with other foreign-flagged vessels.
10. Since 30 May 2018, Member States have continued to report further transfers. For example, a
Member State reported that the designated DPRK vessel Chon Ma San (IMO 8660313) 163 engaged
in ship-to-ship transfers with and received fuel from the Myong Ryu 1 and the Jin Yang 36 (金洋 36)
(figure II), both of unknown nationality, on 4 June and 25 June 2018, respectively. On 29 June, th e
designated An San 1 received product from another tanker of unknown nationality in the same area.

__________________
163

Designated on 30 March 2018. The Panel previously reported that this tanker attempted to disguise its identity as the “Whale”.

110/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Figure XI: Jin Yang 36 transfer to the Chon Ma San on 25 June 2018

Source: Member State
Coal vessel identity fraud and AIS manipulation
11. In 2018, the DPRK continued to violate the ban on coal exports through vessel identity fraud
in order to deliver coal to Chinese ports as well as numerous, large -scale transfers of coal in
international waters to small, unidentified vessels. These new strategies seem to be a response to the
relatively successful curbing of the sale of coal by China and Vietnam following the adoption of
resolution 2371 (2017).
12. The DPRK vessel Kal Ma (IMO number: 8503228) loaded coal at Nampo on 19 May and eight
days later loitered off the Chinese port of Xiongyuo where it discharged its cargo before returning
empty to Nampo on 9 June (figure I).

19-01704

111/379

S/2019/171

FigureXII: Kal Ma observed through satellite imagery May-June 2018

Source: Member State, Map: Panel
13. In so doing the Kal Ma concealed its identity and manipulated its AIS to portray itself as the
“K Ma” and later the “KM” 164 both falsely broadcast as Cambodia registered. Under its false iden tity
the Kal Ma indicated that its final destination was the port of Bayuquan, China, before it di verted to
Xiongyuo (figures II and III). China informed the Panel that “based on the disguised name KM and
the fictitious IMO number 9603128 of the vessel ind icted by the Panel, the Chinese authority cannot
find the record data of the vessel as well as any information showing the vessel discharging cargoes
in the relevant sea area in China between 27 May and 1 June 2018. China also stated that the “Chinese
Customs authority has not found any entry or exit border information for this vessel after 1 January
2018 or any record information on the vessel with the disguised IMO number. China will closely
monitor the vessel Kal Ma, and prevent the vessel from conductin g activities violating the Security
Council resolutions in China.”

__________________
164

The Kal Ma’s AIS transponder provided a fictitious IMO number 9603128 while broadcasting as the KM.

112/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Figure XIII: Kal Ma reports false identity in AIS transmission on entering Chinese waters

Source: Windward

19-01704

113/379

S/2019/171

Annex 14: Panel letters to Primorye/Gudzon

114/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

115/379

S/2019/171

116/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

117/379

S/2019/171

118/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

119/379

S/2019/171

Annex 15: Vessels documented through imagery as loading and transporting DPRK coal
#

Date

Location

1

10 December 2017

Taean, DPRK

2

30 September 2018

Gulf of Tonkin

3

1 February 2018

Near Qinzhou,
China

4

22 August 2018

Gulf of Tonkin

5

24 April 2018

Nampo, DPRK

6

22 May 2018

Gulf of Tonkin

7

24 July 2018

Nampo, DPRK

8

5 September 2018

Gulf of Tonkin

9

15 August 2018

Nampo, DPRK

10

21 September 2018

Gulf of Tonkin

11

21 September 2018

Gulf of Tonkin

12

25 May 2018

Nampo, DPRK

13

10 June 2018

Gulf of Tonkin

14

24 July 2018

Nampo, DPRK

15

2 August 2018

Posan Ni, DPRK

120/379

Vessel
Forever Lucky
IMO: 9003653
Current flag: unknown
Former flag: Panama until 11 December 2017
Forever Lucky
IMO: 9003653
Current flag: unknown
Former flag: Panama until 11 December 2017
Hua Fu
IMO: 9020003
Current flag: unknown
Former flag: Panama until May 2017
Hua Fu
IMO: 9020003
Current flag: unknown
Former flag: Panama until May 2017
Jang Un
IMO: 8822260
Current flag: DPRK
Jang Un
IMO: 8822260
Current flag: DPRK
Jang Un
IMO: 8822260
Current flag: DPRK
Jang Un
IMO: 8822260
Current flag: DPRK
Ka Rim Chon
IMO: 8314811
Current flag: DPRK
Ka Rim Chon
IMO: 8314811
Current flag: DPRK
Pho Phyong
IMO: 8314811
Current flag: DPRK
Nam Dae Chon
IMO:9138680
Current flag: DPRK
Nam Dae Chon
IMO:9138680
Current flag: DPRK
Nam Dae Chon
IMO:9138680
Current flag: DPRK
Paek Yang San
IMO: 9020534
Current flag: DPRK

Status

Loading coal

At anchor

At pier

Conducting STS
transfer
of coal
Loading coal
Conducting STS
transfer
of coal
Loading coal
Conducting STS
transfer
of coal
Loading coal
Conducting STS
transfer
of coal
Conducting STS
transfer
of coal
Loading coal
Conducting STS
transfer
of coal
Loading coal
Loading
bagged coal

19-01704

S/2019/171

16

5 September 2018

Gulf of Tonkin

17

27 October 2018

Songnim, DPRK

18

20 November 2018

Near Dao Bach
Long Vi Island,
Vietnam

19

16 December 2017

Nampo, DPRK

20

6 December 2018

Gulf of Tonkin

21

27 March 2018

Nampo, DPRK

22

18 April 2018

Gulf of Tonkin

23

27 August 2018

Songnim, DPRK

24

25 October 2018

Gulf of Tonkin

25

6 December 2018

Gulf of Tonkin

Hua Fu
Paek Yang San
IMO: 9020003
IMO: 9020534
Current flag: unknown
Current flag: DPRK
Lucky Star (formerly Asia Bridge 3)
IMO: 9015278
Flag: Togo
Lucky Star (formerly Asia Bridge 3)
IMO: 9015278
Flag: Togo
Oriental Treasure (renamed Dong Pang)
IMO: 9115028
Current flag: unknown / Former flag: Comoros
Oriental Treasure (renamed Dong Pang)
IMO: 9115028
Current flag: unknown / Former flag: Comoros
Tae Yang
IMO: 9115028
Current flag: DPRK
Tae Yang
IMO: 9115028
Current flag: DPRK
Tae Yang
IMO: 9115028
Current flag: DPRK
Tae Yang
IMO: 9115028
Current flag: DPRK
Ho Chon Gang
IMO: 8415287
Current flag: DPRK

Conducting STS
transfer
of coal
Loading coal

At anchor

Loading coal
Conducting STS
transfer
of coal
Loading coal
Conducting STS
transfer
of coal
Loading coal
Conducting STS
transfer
of coal
At anchor

Source: Member State

19-01704

121/379

S/2019/171

Annex 16: Indonesia’s reply to the Panel

122/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

123/379

S/2019/171

124/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 17: Contract for coal aboard the Wise Honest

19-01704

125/379

S/2019/171

126/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Source: The Panel

19-01704

127/379

S/2019/171

Annex 18: Correspondence with Novatobacco

128/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

129/379

S/2019/171

Source: The Panel

130/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 19: Panel correspondence with Hamid Ali

19-01704

131/379

S/2019/171

132/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

133/379

S/2019/171

134/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

135/379

S/2019/171

136/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

137/379

S/2019/171

138/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

139/379

S/2019/171

140/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

141/379

S/2019/171

Email attachment provided by Mr. Hamid Ali

Source: The Panel

142/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Email attachment provided by Mr. Hamid Ali

19-01704

143/379

S/2019/171

Source: The Panel

144/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 20: The Panel’s proposal for an amended delisting procedure for vessels
Paragraph 9 of resolution 2397 (2017) encourages Member States to consult with the flag
States of relevant vessels once they are seized, inspected, and frozen (impounded). Six months
after such vessels were frozen (impounded), the Committee may decide upon request of a fla g
State to release the vessel if adequate arrangements have been made to prevent the vessel from
contributing to future violations of the resolutions. However, once the vessel has been de registered by a flag State in compliance with the resolutions (and therefore no longer under its
jurisdiction), and since it would be a violation for flag States to re-register any such vessel that
has been de-registered by another Member State, it is unlikely that a flag State will submit a
request to the Committee to re-register the vessel and then submit a request for a seized or
impounded vessel to be released.
To resolve this conundrum and to lessen the burden on Member States seizing or
impounding a vessel in compliance with the resolutions, the Panel recommends that the
Committee introduce a procedure whereby:
1) After a six-month period the vessel owner 165 may be permitted to make representation to
the Committee for approval to have the vessel de-listed and released, provided that:
a) proof of ownership of the vessel is provided; and
b) adequate arrangements have been made to prevent the vessel from contributing to
future violations of the resolutions.
2) If approved, the vessel is then de-listed from the Committee’s list of designated vessels
and the re-registration of the vessel approved. 166
3) Once a period of six months has elapsed and no request for de-listing has been tendered
within 31 days from that date, the Member State may approach the Committee for
approval to submit the vessel for public auction to defray costs incurred.
In addition, this procedure should be published on the Committee’s website under
“Procedures for delisting” at https://www.un.org/sc/suborg/en/sanctions/1718/materials.

__________________
165 A vessel’s beneficial owner is in the best position to ensure that ad equate arrangements have been made to prevent the vessel from
contributing to future violations of the resolutions since they are directly impacted by loss of trade.
166 The Committee’s website should not remove the vessel’s name, but rather indicate the date that the vessel has been de-listed in order to
provide verification for flag States and companies providing vessel services.
19-01704

145/379

S/2019/171

Annex 21: Imports from and exports to the DPRK of commodities according to trade data
Table 1
States importing zinc and articles thereof and zinc ores and concentrates (HS codes 79 and 26)
from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, October 2017 to March 2018
(United States dollars)

Importing State

October 2017

November
2017

20 950

7 901

28 851

20 950

7 901

28 851

India
Total

December
2017

January 2018

February
2018

March 2018

Total

Source: Global Trade Atlas.

1.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea exported a total of $28,851 in zinc and articles
thereof and zinc ores and concentrates (HS codes 79 and 26) to India in October and November
2017. All exports constituted violations of paragraph 28 of resolution 2321 (2016).
Imports from the DPRK of commodities with exemption provisions (iron and steel and articles
of iron and steel, textiles, food and agricultural products, machinery, electrical equipment,
earth and stone including magnesite and magnesia, and wood)
Table 2
States importing iron and steel and articles of iron and steel (HS codes 72 and 73) from the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, October 2017 to March 2018
(United States dollars)

Importing State

China

October 2017

November
2017

December
2017

January 2018

February 2018

March 2018

Total

1 796 752

2 411 042

2 725 465

2 393 996

1 839 505

1 846 788

13 013 548

7 507

18 994

26 501

9 532

283 146

313 546

El Salvador
Ghana

20 868

India

65 189

3 194

Nicaragua

12 405

64 873

Serbia

3 186

29 981

68 383
38 890

1 898 400

2 509 090

107 920

25 143

9 083

2 729 890

1 956 508

47 250

279 949
33 167

Thailand
Total

8 611

2 781 394

34 226
1 894 038

13 769 320

Source: Global Trade Atlas.

2.
According to Global Trade Atlas data, the Democratic People ’s Republic of Korea violated
paragraph 8 of resolution 2371 (2017) by exporting a total of $13,769,320 in iron and steel and
articles of iron and steel (HS codes 72 and 73) to China, El Salvador, Ghana, India, Nicaragua, Serbia
and Thailand from October 2017 to March 2018. China replied to the Panel that the “relevant data
don’t indicate the commodities under the items of HS code 7201”, and that, under Chinese law and
regulations, only items with HS codes 7201 are consider ed as constituting iron and steel and articles
of iron and steel prohibited by the relevant resolutions.

146/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Table 3
States importing textiles (HS codes 50–63) from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
October 2017 to March 2018
(United States dollars)
Importing State

October 2017

November 2017

December 2017

January 2018

China a

47 105 525

40 825 592

12 780 948

16 799

100 728 864

14 173

85 040

64 985

164 198

15 497

5 929

Ghana
India

234 163

Mexico

15 438

Russian
Federation b

76 537

Thailand

26 617

Total

47 339 688

40 973 854

February 2018

Total

255 589
15 438

11 815

88 352
3 486

12 883 732

81 784

3 486

30 103
101 282 544

Source: Global Trade Atlas.
a
In a note verbale to the Committee dated 12 January 2018, China s tipulated that the total value of its
imports from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of textiles from 11 September 2017 to 10 December
2017 was $5,139,300.
b
In a note verbale to the Committee dated 6 December 2017, the Russian Federation stated that, on
18 October 2017, 14,340 items of men’s apparel were imported from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
in fulfilment of two contracts.

3.
According to Global Trade Atlas data, the Democratic People ’s Republic of Korea violated the
textiles import ban stipulated in paragraph 16 of resolution 2375 (2017) by exporting a total of
$101,282,544 in textiles (HS codes 50–63) to China, Ghana, India, Mexico and Thailand. from
October 2017 to February 2018. Only China and the Russian Federation reported to the Committee
pursuant to paragraph 16 of resolution 2375 (2017). With regard to China, the figure reported by
China to the Committee of its imports from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is lower than
indicated in Global Trade Atlas trade data, by $95,589,564. In order to benefit from the re porting
exemption in paragraph 16 of resolution 2375 (2017), these two figures should have been
comparable. In addition to its reporting of $5,139,300 worth of textiles imported during the period,
China further replied to the Panel that all its imports “went through the customs formalities within
90 days” from the adoption of resolution 2375 (2017). With regard to the Russian Federation, the
Panel notes that the unit of measurement (items of textile) is different from that reflected in table 3
(United States dollars) and recommends that future Security Council resolutions stipulate the
unit of measurement to be used by Member States in their reporting to the Committee.
Table 4
States importing food and agricultural products (HS codes 07, 08 and 12) from the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, January to March 2018
(United States dollars)
Importing State

January 2018

China a

10 158 965

10 158 965

10 158 965

10 158 965

Total

February 2018

March 2018

Total

Source: Global Trade Atlas.
a
In a note verbale to the Committee dated 5 February 2018, China stipulated that the value of
its imports from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of food and agricultural
products from 22 December 2017 to 21 January 2018 was $16,872,600 (14,900 tons).

19-01704

147/379

S/2019/171

4.
According to Global Trade Atlas data, the Democratic People ’s Republic of Korea exported a
total of $10,158,965 in food and agricultural products (HS codes 07, 08 and 12) to China in January
2018. China further replied to the Panel that all of its imports “went through the customs formalities
within 30 days” from the adoption of resolution 2397 (2017).
Table 5
States importing machinery (HS code 84) from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
January to March 2018
(United States dollars)
Importing State

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

January 2018

February 2018

11 736

1 296

March 2018

Total

13 032

a

29 395

Costa Rica

21 053

5 017

26 070

El Salvador

73 711

1 444

75 155

China

29 395

India

12 961

12 961

Malaysia c

16 387

16 387

Total

165 243

7 757

173 000

Source: Global Trade Atlas.
a
In its note verbale to the Committee dated 5 February 2018, China stipulated that the value of its imports of
machinery from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea from 22 December 2017 to 21 January 2018 was
$43,000.
b
Malaysia replied to the Panel that “based on the statistics from Department of Statistics Malaysia (DOSM),
there is no product under the HS codes of 84–85 being imported by Malaysia from the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea from January 2018 to February 2018”.

5.
According to Global Trade Atlas data, the Democratic People ’s Republic of Korea exported a
total of $173,000 in machinery (HS code 84) to Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Costa Rica,
El Salvador, India and Malaysia in January and February 2018. All exports by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea after 21 January 2018 without notification to the Committee of those
imports by 5 February 2018 violated paragraph 6 of resolution 2397 (2017). Of the above-mentioned
Member States, only China provided notification to the Committee, and China further replied to the
Panel that all of its imports “went through the customs formalities within 30 days” from the adoption
of resolution 2397 (2017).
Table 6
States importing electrical equipment (HS code 85) from the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, January to March 2018
(United States dollars)
Importing State

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
China

a

January 2018

February 2018

5 045

6 489

990 919

March 2018

Total

11 534
990 919

Thailand

17 584

7 596

25 180

Total

1 013 548

14 085

1 027 633

Source: Global Trade Atlas.
a In its note verbale to the Committee dated 5 February 2018, China stipulated that the value of its imports from
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of electrical equipment from 22 December 2017 to 21 January
2018 was $1,346,300.

148/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

6.
According to Global Trade Atlas data, the Democratic People ’s Republic of Korea exported a
total of $1,027,633 in electrical equipment (HS code 85) to the Plurinational State of Bolivia, China
and Thailand in January and February 2018. All exports after 21 January 2018 without notification
to the Committee of those imports by 5 February 2018 violated paragraph 6 o f resolution 2397
(2017). Of the above-mentioned Member States, only China provided notification to the Committee
in accordance with paragraph 6 of resolution 2397 (2017).
Table 7
States importing earth and stone including magnesite and magnesia (HS code 25) from the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, January to March 2018
(United States dollars)
Importing State

January 2018

China a

10 070 444

10 070 444

10 070 444

10 070 444

Total

February 2018

March 2018

Total

Source: Global Trade Atlas.
a
In its note verbale to the Committee dated 5 February 2018, China stipulated that the value of its imports
from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of earth and stone including magnesite and magnesia from
22 December 2017 to 21 January 2018 was $10,434,800 (106,700 tons).

7.
According to Global Trade Atlas data, the Democratic People ’s Republic of Korea exported a
total of $10,070,444 in earth and stone including magnesite and magnesia (HS code 25) to China in
January 2018. China provided notification to the Committee pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution
2397 (2017), and further replied to the Panel that all of its imports “went through the customs
formalities within 30 days” of the adoption of resolution 2397 (2017).
Table 8
States importing wood (HS code 44) from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, January
to March 2018
(United States dollars)
Importing State

China a
Total

January 2018

February 2018

March 2018

Total

2 405 718

2 405 718

2 405 718

2 405 718

Source: Global Trade Atlas.
a
In its note verbale to the Committee dated 5 February 2018, China stipulated that the value of its imports from
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of wood from 22 December 2017 to 21 January 2018 was
$2,858,500 (16,200 tons).

8.
According to Global Trade Atlas data, the Democratic People ’s Republic of Korea exported a
total of $2,405,718 in wood (HS code 44) to China in January 2018. China provided notification to
the Committee pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 2397 (2017), and further replied to the Panel
that all of its imports “went through the customs formalities within 30 days” from the adoption of
resolution 2397 (2017).

19-01704

149/379

S/2019/171

Table 9
States exporting iron, steel and other metals (HS codes 72–83) to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, January to March 2018
(United States dollars)
Exporting State

China a

January 2018

February 2018

1 889 683

28 791

Honduras

March 2018

1 918 474

11 461

Malaysia

93 407

Total

1 983 090

Total

11 461
93 407

40 252

2 023 342

Source: Global Trade Atlas.
a
China replied to the Panel that, while all of its exports in iron, steel and other metals, all industrial machinery
and transportation vehicles had been processed and released before 6 January 2018, for technical reasons
relating to its customs system, the clearance operations were completed when “means of transport actually left
the Chinese territory”. China also replied that all exports after the date are “self-use materials for diplomatic
mission in the DPRK or humanitarian aids to the DPRK”, for which their “export formalities are completed
and in line with the requirement” of the relevant resolutions.

9.
According to Global Trade Atlas data, China, Honduras and Malaysi a exported a total of
$2,023,342 in iron, steel and other metals (HS codes 72–83) in January and February 2018 to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea which violated paragraph 7 of resolution 2397 (2017). China
replied to the Panel on the precise nature of the exports during this period (see table 9, footnote a).
Table 10
States exporting all industrial machinery (HS codes 84 and 85) to the Democratic People ’s
Republic of Korea, January–March 2018
(United States dollars)
Exporting State

January 2018

February 2018

March 2018

Total

China a

14 215 799

218 602

28 674

14 463 075

Honduras

38 254

16 322

India

19 412

Total

14 273 465

54 576
19 412

234 924

28 674

14 537 063

Source: Global Trade Atlas.
a
See table 9, footnote a.

10. According to Global Trade Atlas data, China, Honduras and India exported a total of
$14,537,063 in all industrial machinery (HS codes 84 and 85) from January to March 2018 to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea which violatedparagraph 7 of resolution 2397 (2017). China
replied to the Panel on the precise nature of the exports in this period (see table 9, footnote a).

150/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Table 11
States exporting transportation vehicles (HS codes 86–89) to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, January to March 2018
(United States dollars)
Exporting State

January 2018

China a

February 2018

1 803 351

March 2018

Total

55 094

1 858 445

9 176

9 176

64 270

867 621

Thailand
Total

1 803 351

Source: Global Trade Atlas.
a
See table 9, footnote a.

11. According to Global Trade Atlas data, China and Thailand exported a total of $1,867,621 in
transportation vehicles (HS codes 86–89) between January and February 2018 to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea which violated paragraph 7 of resolution 2397 (2017). China replied to
the Panel on the precise nature of the exports for the period (see table 9, footnote a).

Exports of commodities to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea with
exemptions (refined petroleum products and crude oil)
Table 12
States exporting petroleum (HS code 2710) to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, October 2017 to
March 2018
(United States dollars)
Exporting State

October 2017

November 2017

December 2017

January 2018

February 2018

March 2018

Total

China a

245 279

484 206

480 382

115 553

261 210

473 979

2 060 609

India

16 513 783
220 632

447 774

584 783

275 639

66 852

138 306

1 203 795

767 188

399 516

Russian Federation b

238 173

16 513 783

South Africa
Total

16 997 235

704 838

1 491 362
480 797
473 979

20 546 551

Source: Global Trade Atlas collated as of June 2018.
a
In five notes verbales from 2 January to 30 April 2018, China notified the Committee of the tr ansfer of 2,165.1 tons of refined
petroleum products to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for October 2017; 497.6 tons for November 2017;
463.214 tons for December 2017; and the further transfer of 4,032.72 tons of such products from January to Mar ch 2018. The
corresponding values in United States dollars of the transfers made each month have been reported as: 1,188,000 (October
2017), 527,000 (November 2017), 490,000 (December 2017), 130,300 (January 2018), 835,800 (February 2018), and 1,592,400
(March 2018).
b
In three notes verbales from 27 December 2017 to 31 May 2018, the Russian Federation notified the Committee of its exports
of 212.54 tons of petroleum products to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for November 2017; 589.664 tons for
December 2017; and 4,148.381 tons from January to March 2018.

19-01704

151/379

S/2019/171

Table 13
States exporting other petroleum (HS codes 2711–2713) a to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
October 2017 to March 2018
(United States dollars)
Exporting State

China b
Russian Federation
Total

October 2017

November 2017

December 2017

January 2018

February 2018

March 2018

Total

1 174 266

453 852

228 645

672 618

814 742

1 318 450

4 662 573

184 286

216 129

412 931

888 747

c

1 174 266

453 852

400 415
814 742

1 318 450

5 062 988

Source: Global Trade Atlas.
a
China informed the Panel that it uses HS Codes 2710, 2712 and 2713 as HS Codes for refined petroleum products. China also
informed the Panel that its Ministry of Commerce considers HS Code 2711.11 as “liquefied natural gas”, whereas the Panel
uses HS Code 2711 as a part of “condensates and natural gas liquids”, prohibited by paragraph 13 of resolution 2375 (2017).
The Panel has previously recommended that all Security Council resolutions on sectoral sanctions specify the HS codes (see
S/2018/171, paras. 31 and 74).
b
See table 12, footnote a.
c
See table 12, footnote b.

12. Based upon the International Trade Centre (ITC) Trade Map, the Panel sent letters to South Africa
(March-June 2018) and Turkey (March-July 2018) regarding the reported export of petroleum
products (HS 2710) of 322,000 USD and 2.29 million USD r espectively. Turkey clarified with
supporting documentation to show that the export was made to the Republic of Korea. South Africa
informed the Panel that “the letter has been forwarded to Pretoria for action.”
13. The Panel sent a letter to the Republic of Korea regarding August media reports of a transfer of
petroleum products to Kaesong for a planned inter-Korean liaison office. The ROK replied, “in the
process of carrying out the [inter-Korean] projects, the ROK personnel used the petroleum products
exclusively for the implementation of the projects, while ensuring that no transfer of economic values
to the DPRK occurs.” The ROK explained that “among 338,737 kg of petroleum products used for
the implementation of the joint projects from January 2018 to November 2018, 4,039 kg were unused
and brought back to the ROK.” The Panel notes that the specific language of paragraph 5 of
resolution 2397 (2017) requiring Member States to notify the Committee of any transfer to the DPRK
of refined petroleum products is by territory as opposed to possession and does not differentiate
between temporary and permanent transfers, or under whose control the items will be after transfer.
14. According to Global Trade Atlas data, the Democratic People ’s Republic of Korea imported
$20,946,917 of refined petroleum products during the last three months of 2017. Starting from 2018,
pursuant to paragraph 5 of resolution 2397 (2017), all Member States are prohibited from supplying,
selling or transferring refined petroleum products to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea over
500,000 barrels in total. Since January 2018, China and the Russian Federation have notified to the
Committee on their supply, sale or transfer of refined petroleum products to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Although in paragraph 5 of resolution 2397 (2017) the cap was set using barrels
as the unit of measurement, the unit to be used by Member States in their required notifications was
not stipulated. The figures in table 14 from China after April are based solely on Member State
reporting to the Committee. 167

__________________

According to the General Administration of Customs database centre, China Customs ceased reporting trade data on
individual countries as from 1 April 2018 and Chinese Customs information web pages issued three web announcements
on 23 May, 20 June and 20 July, each stating that the publication of customs statisti cs for [each month] has been
temporarily suspended owing to technical reasons. See http://haiguan.info/noted395.aspx,
http://haiguan.info/noted396.aspx and http://haiguan.info/noted397.aspx. See also http://english.customs.gov.cn
/newsroom/statistics (accessed 30 July 2018).
167

152/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Table 14
Data from Member States’ notifications to the Committee pursuant to paragraph 5 (a) of
resolution 2397 (2017)
(Tons)
Month in 2018

China

Russian Federation

Total

January

201.380

368.240

569.620

February

1 392.350

1 882.562

3 274.912

March

2 438.990

1 897.579

4 336.569

April

437.460

4 293.472

4 730.932

May

1 451.410

1 286.138

2 737.548

June

1 507.900

1 570.444

3 078.344

July

903.870

576.126

1 479.996

August

2 725.810

1 369.497

4 095.307

September

1 814.600

1 859.283

3 673.883

October

1 886.890

3 777.731

5 664.621

November

2 928.870

3 377.243

6 306.113

December

1 510.870

-

1 510.870

Total

19 200.400

22 258.315

41 458.715

Source: https://www.un.org/securitycouncil/sanctions/1718/s upply-sale-or-transfer-of-all-refined-petroleum,

Crude oil
16. In Paragraph 4 of resolution 2397 (2017), the Security Council decided that all Member States
should prohibit the direct or indirect supply, sale or transfer of crude oil to the Democratic People ’s
Republic of Korea exceeding 4 million barrels or 525,000 tons, unless the Committee approves in
advance on a case-by-case basis for a 12-month period after the date of adoption of the resoluti on,
22 December 2017. Pursuant to the reporting clause contained therein, the Russian Feder ation
reported that there were no declarations or exports of crude oil to the Democratic People ’s Republic
of Korea from January to June 2018, and China reported tha t the amount of the supply of crude oil
by China to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was 150,500 tons from December 2017 to
February 2018; 147,900 tons from March to May 2018; 108,500 tons from June to August 2018; and
118,100 tons from September to November 2018.

Recommendation
17. The Panel recommends that the Committee agree upon a single conversion rate between
tons and barrels for all refined petroleum products and specify the ton measurement referred
to in the resolutions.

19-01704

153/379

S/2019/171

Annex 22: Angola’s reply to the Panel

154/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

155/379

S/2019/171

156/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

157/379

S/2019/171

Source: Member State

158/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 23: The Panel’s letter to Iran

United Nations
HEADQUARTERS
• SIEGE
TEL. : +1 212 963 1055 •

REFERENCE

:

Nations Unies
NEW YORK, NY 10017
F AX : +1 212 963 2013

S/AC.49/2018/PE/OC.359

YOUR REFERENCE

29 November 2018

Excellency,
I have the honour to write to you with regard to ongoing efforts of the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to United Nations Security Council resolution 1874 (2009) to gather,
examine and analyse information regarding the implementation of the measures imposed on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) by Security Council resolutions 1718 (2006),
1874 (2009), 2087 (2013), 2094 (2013), 2270 (2016), 2321 (2016) and 2356 (2017), 2371 (2017),
2375 (2017) and 2397 (2017), in particular incidents of non-compliance.
According to a Member State, the DPRK has its most lucrative arms-related trade with
the Syrian Arab Republic and Iran. The Member State has informed the Panel that two United
Nations designated entities, the Korea Mining Development Technology Corporation and Saeng
Pi’l (aka Green Pine Associated Corporation) maintain offices in Iran and that these offices are
active.
In addition, the Member State informed the Panel that one pattern recently observed is of
DPRK nationals on flights between Tehran and Dubai whereby these individuals return to Tehran
within 24 hours. The assessment is that these individuals are cash couriers.
In this regard, the Panel recalls the evidence and information derived from airline
companies, various Member States and the United Nations Security Council regarding KOMID
officials Mr. Kim Yong Chol (passport number 472310168) and Mr. Jang Jong Son (passport
number 563110024) 168 (see Annex 1) resident in Iran and accredited as diplomats at the DPRK
embassy in Tehran until their removal in 2016, and their frequent visits to Dubai as well as
various
locations
in
Pakistan. 169
The
Panel’s
letter
to
Iran
dated
25 November 2015 (S/AC.49/2015/PE/OC.791) noted that these two individuals flew TehranDubai more than 282 times between 21 October 2012 and 5 October 2015, a pattern that
continued into 2016.
__________________
168
169

See Table 8, S/2017/150, p.68-69
See Tables 8 and 9, S/2017/150, p.68-69

19-01704

159/379

S/2019/171

The Panel also notes as indications of previous cooperation between Iran and the
designated entities KOMID and Green Pine Associated Corporation the visits by KOMID
President Kang Myong Chol (see Annex 1 for passport) to Iran from Dubai from 16 to 25
December 2013 170 and Green Pine Association Corporation President Ri Hak Chol between 6
and 10 October 2014. 171
As a number of the individuals listed above and featured in Annex 1 together with other
KOMID and Green Pine Associated Corporation representatives are known to have acquired new
passports and/or false identities, the Panel:
•

Kindly reiterates its request contained in its letter of 31 October 2017
(ref. S/AC.49/2017/PE/OC.918) (see Annex 2) requesting names and passport
numbers of DPRK diplomats accredited in Iran;

•

Kindly reiterates its request contained in its letter of 12 October 2017
(ref. S/AC.49/2017/PE/OC.678) (see Annex 3) requesting immigration and visa
checks and information on 78 DPRK nationals and others under investigation by
the Panel;

•

In light of the lack of a substantive response from Iran on the above matters for
more than 12 months and in light of the recent information provided by a Member
State, the Panel is now requesting copies of the relevant passport pages of all
DPRK diplomats accredited in Iran;

•

A full list of all other DPRK nationals residing in, or working in Iran, together with
copies of their passports, and

•

A full list of DPRK entities and companies operating in Iran, their contracts with Iranian
military and/or civilian institutions and entities, para-statal companies and private
institutions.

As the Panel intends to report on this case in its next report to the Security Council, we would
be most grateful for any information to be supplied within one month of the date of this letter. The
Panel may name your country in our reporting and would therefore appreciate a reply from your
country in order to consider reflecting your views in our next report.
Should you wish to discuss this request or any follow-up matters, please contact the Panel
via Mr. Hugh Griffiths (email: xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx) and Mr. Olaf
Andrieu (xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx).
Please accept, Excellency, the assurances of my highest consideration.

__________________

Flight and ticket records held on file by the Panel
171
In our letter dated 29 August 2016, reference number S/AC. 49/2016/PE/OC.659, the Panel wrote to Iran requesting information
on Mr. Ri Hak Chol’s activities in Tehran between 6-10 October 2014 but received no substantive response.
170

160/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Hugh Griffiths
Coordinator of the Panel of Experts established pursuant
to Security Council Resolution 1874 (2009)

Annex 1: Copies of multiple DPRK diplomatic passports previously used by KOMID and
Green Pine Associated Corporation officials while accredited in Iran, travelling to Iran or
travelling between Tehran and Dubai
Annex 2: Panel letter of 31 October 2017 (ref. S/AC.49/2017/PE/OC.918), requesting names
and passport numbers of DPRK diplomats accredited in Iran
Annex 3: Panel letter of 12 October 2017 (ref. S/AC.49/2017/PE/OC.678), requesting
immigration and visa checks and information on 78 DPRK nationals and others under
investigation by the Panel.

19-01704

161/379

S/2019/171

Jang Yong Son: UN designated KOMID representative formerly accredited to DPRK Embassy
in Tehran

162/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Kang Myong Chol: KOMID President who visited Iran

19-01704

163/379

S/2019/171

Ri Hak Chol, Green Pine Associated Corporation President who visited Iran between 6-10
October 2014

164/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 24: Iran’s reply to the Panel

19-01704

165/379

S/2019/171

Annex 25: Guicopres correspondence

166/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

167/379

S/2019/171

168/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

169/379

S/2019/171

Source: The Panel
170/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 26: The Panel’s letter to Sudan

United Nations
• SIEGE
HEADQUARTERS
TEL. : +1 212 963 1055 •

REFERENCE

:

Nations Unies
NEW YORK, NY 10017
F AX : +1 212 963 2013

S/AC.49/2018/PE/OC.305

YOUR REFERENCE

28 November 2018
Excellency,
I have the honor to write to you with regard to ongoing efforts of the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to United Nations Security Council resolution 1874 (2009) to gather,
examine and analyze information regarding the implementation of the measures imposed on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) by Security Council resolutions 1718 (2006),
1874 (2009), 2087 (2013), 2094 (2013), 2270 (2016), 2321 (2016), 2356 (2017), 2371 (2017),
2375 (2017) and 2397 (2017), in particular incidents of non-compliance.
The Panel is requesting additional information and documentation from Sudan based on the
information supplied by Sudan in its 26 November 2018 letter to the 1718 Committee (see Annex 1)
and in its National Implementation Report to the Committee dated 27 June 2018 and published on 14
August 2018 (see Annex 2).
In your 26 November 2018 letter to the Committee you state that:
“The Military Industry Cooperation (sic) has never dealt with a company named “KOMID” and
has been dealing with a company named “Future Electronic Company (FEC). All deals with the latter
were signed and paid in Sudan. The Military Industry Cooperation (MIC) has never received any
shipment from North Korea. All shipments were from other countries” (see Annex 1).
In your annex to your 27 June 2018 letter (National Implementation Report) you state:
“Further to inspection and verification, the Government of the Sudan has cancelled the contract
between the Future Electronic Company and Sudan Master Technology and brought an end to the
companies’ cooperation as of 15 July 2017.”
His Excellency
Mr. Omer Dahab Fadl Mohamed
Permanent Representative of the Republic of the Sudan
to the United Nations
New York

19-01704

171/379

S/2019/171

In this regard, the Panel kindly requests the following documentation:
1) A copy of the contract(s) between the “Future Electronic Company” and “Sudan Master
Technology” aka Sudan Master Technology Engineering Corporation;
2) A copy of the contract(s) between the “Future Electronic Company (FEC)” and the “Military
Industrial Cooperation MIC Sudan” aka Military Industrial Corporation (MIC) of Sudan172;
3) A copy of the order(s)/decrees/correspondence nullifying the contract(s) with the abovementioned Sudanese and DPRK entities;
4) A list of the staff of the” Future Electronic Company” that includes their names, all known
aliases, passport numbers (all passport numbers used by each individual) and copies of their
passports (all passports used by each individual together with departure evidence of these
persons showing expulsion and final departure from the territory of Sudan173;
5) Details of the bank account(s) of Future Electronic Company in Sudan together with a list
of transfers to and from that bank account for the period 2013 – 2018, including data on
foreign account numbers to which funds were transferred;
6) All documentation associated with UN designated DPRK entities, or other entities that may
have operated as front companies on their behalf, including: Korea Mining Trading
Development Corporation (KOMID), Tanchon Commercial Bank (TCB), Future
Electronic Company, Chongryong Technology Trading Corporation and Chosun
Keumcheong Technology General Trade Corporation that have been the subject of Panel
requests to Sudan from December 2015 until November 2018 (see Annex 3);
7) Your 26 November 2018 letter states that regarding Future Electronic Corporation “Sudan
never received shipments from North Korea. All shipments came from other countries.” The
Panel notes that DPRK arms brokering activities, whether the arms originate from the DPRK
or not, is prohibited under resolutions 1874 (2009) and clarified further in paragraphs 6 and
7 of resolution 2270 (2016). The Panel kindly requests copies of all documentation for
shipments of arms-related goods prohibited by the resolutions that were brokered or
transferred to Sudan as part of contracts with Future Electronic Company (FEC) and any
other DPRK-related entity irrespective of whether such goods originated from the DPRK or
“other countries”.

__________________

The spelling of this entity in the 29 November 2018 letter is incorrect. The correct name of the Sudanese military company th at
has cooperated with the DPRK is the Military Industrial Corporation (MIC) of Sudan with the following website :
http://mic.sd/en/home/homepage. Please see Panel letters Panel of 2 January 2018 (ref. S/AC.49/2018/PE/OC.01) for additional
information on MIC.
172

According to the National Implementation Report (NIR) dated 14 August 2018 sent by Sudan to the Security
Council 1718 Committee, Sudan stated that “In the light of paragraph 3 above, the Sudanese Government
expelled the staff of the aforementioned company and prohibited them from entering the Sudan. The last of the
staff members left on 12 August 2017.”
173

172/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Please note that the Panel is investigating all of the above in an effort to better identify the
overseas DPRK-related networks that continue to violate the Security Council resolutions with regard
to the DPRK in African and Middle Eastern Member States;
Thank you for clarifying the situation with regard to Mr. Hussein Al-Ali’s attempt to offer his
services to Military Industry Corporation (MIC). His failed attempt is noted and your information on
this individual will be reflected in our next report.
Regarding questions 1-7, as the Panel intends to report on these matters in its next final report
to the Security Council, we would be most grateful for any information to be supplied within one month
of the date of this letter.
Should you or your designated representative wish to discuss this request or any follow-up
matters, please contact the Panel via Mr. Hugh Griffiths (email: xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxx.) and Mr. Olaf Andrieu (email: xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx).
Please accept, Excellency, the assurances of my highest consideration.

Hugh Griffiths
Coordinator of the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to Security Council Resolution 1874 (2009)

Annex 1: Letter from Sudan to the 1718 Committee of 26 November 2018
Annex 2: Extract from Sudan National Implementation Report
Annex 3: Letters from the Panel to Sudan of
- 13 June 2018 (ref. S/AC.49/2018/PE/OC.140)
- 2 January 2018 (ref. S/AC.49/2018/PE/OC.01)
- 17 July 2017 (ref. S/AC.49/2017/PE/OC.324)
- 11 November 2016 (ref. S/AC.49/2016/PE/OC.950)
- 29 September 2016 (ref. S/AC.49/2016/PE/OC.852) and
- 4 December 2015 (ref. S/AC.49/2015/PE/OC.815)

19-01704

173/379

S/2019/171

Annex 1: Letter from Sudan to the 1718 Committee of 26 November 2018

174/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 2: Extract from Sudan National Implementation Report

19-01704

175/379

S/2019/171

Annex 27: Sudan’s reply to the Panel

176/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

177/379

S/2019/171

178/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

179/379

S/2019/171

180/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

181/379

S/2019/171

182/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

183/379

S/2019/171

184/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Translated from Arabic
[Pages 1 and 2]
Republic of the Sudan
Permanent Mission to the United Nations
New York
Ref.: sin sin nun/56/21/1
2 January 2019
The Permanent Mission of the Sudan to the United Nations presents its compliments to the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1817 (2006) concerning the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and refers to its note S/AC.49/2018/PE/OC.305 of 28
November 2018, by which the Committee requested information regarding the interactions of the
Sudanese Military Industry Corporation (MIC) with the Future Electronic Company (FEC). The
Permanent Mission of the Sudan wishes to provide the following information:
1.

A single framework agreement was signed between the companies SMT and FEC. Two executive

contracts were then signed to provide parts for the project to develop 122mm [weapons] and aerial
bombs. The contract and its effects were terminated on 15 June 2017. A copy of the contract is
enclosed. There are no contracts between MIC and FEC.
2.

The Government of the Sudan wishes to state that all activities involving the Democratic

People’s Republic of Korea have been suspended pursuant to an order issued by the President of the
Republic of the Sudan on 31 May 2017 (see enclosure). In early June 2017 (see enclosure), MIC and
the engineering company SMT issued administrative orders freezing all activities with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and cancelled all contracts concluded with that country. A letter giving a
warning and notice of expulsion was sent to Mr. Kim Chol (see enclosure).

19-01704

185/379

S/2019/171

3.

On 29 May 2017, a national committee comprising the competent agencies in the Sudan was

established with a view to following up implementation of the Sudanese Government’s obligations
under the Security Council resolutions concerning sanctions on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.
4.

Mr. Kim Song Chol visited the Sudan for the first time in 2013 to follow up implementation of

the contracts regarding the development of 122mm [weapons]. He then visited a second time to
oversee some groups that were working to install Russian P12 and P15 radars. He visited the Sudan a
third time in 2016 under a different name and a new passport in order to request certain financial dues.
He left in May 2017 and has not entered the Sudan since; his name has been placed on a no-entry list.
5.

There have been no banking transactions, and no transfers have been processed, through bank

accounts within or outside the Sudan. The financial transactions involving FEC consisted of direct
payments made locally.
6.

SMT did not receive any shipments from ports in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.

The shipments received through regular clearance procedures consisted of components and production
parts, not of complete products.
The Permanent Mission of the Sudan to the United Nations takes this opportunity to convey to
the Committee the renewed assurances of its highest consideration.

186/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

[Pages 8 and 9]
Republic of the Sudan
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
The Under-Secretary
Ref./waw-kha’/ta’-dal/public
29 May 2018
Order establishing a committee on implementation of the obligations of the Sudan under the
Security Council resolutions concerning the sanctions imposed on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea
Given that Security Council resolutions are binding on States Members of the United Nations,
and in view of the Sudan’s position against the proliferation of nuclear weapons and weapons of mass
destruction, a committee is hereby established with a view to following up implementation of the
obligations of the Sudan under the Security Council resolutions concerning the sanctions imposed on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Its composition shall be as follows:
1.

H.E. Umar Siddiq, Director-General for International Cooperation and International Affairs –

chair.
2.

H.E. Muhammad Isa Idam, Director-General for American and European Affairs – member.

3.

H.E. Anas al-Tayyib, Director of the Department of International Law and Treaties – member.

4.

H.E. Siddiq Muhammad Abdullah, Director of the Department of American Affairs – member.

19-01704

187/379

S/2019/171

5.

H.E. Kamal Bashir, Director of the Department for International Organizations – member and

rapporteur.
6.

The representative of the Ministry of Defence – member.

7.

The representative of the Ministry of Finance – member.

8.

The representative of the Ministry of the Interior – member.

9.

The representative of the Ministry of Commerce – member.

10. The representative of the Ministry of Higher Education – member.
11. The representative of the Ministry of Transport – member.
12. The representative of the National Intelligence and Security Service– member.
13. The representative of the Central Bank of the Sudan– member.
14. The representative of the defence industry network – member.

(a) The committee shall follow up implementation of the obligations of the Sudan under the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
(b) The committee shall prepare a national annual report for submission to the Security Council.
(c) The committee shall have the right to consult whomever it deems appropriate.
(d) The committee shall submit periodic reports to the Under-Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs.

This order was issued and signed by me today, on 29 May A.D. 2018 (13 Ramadan A.H. 1439).
(Signed) Abdulghani al-Na‘im Awad al-Karim
Under-Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs

188/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 28: Panel’s vessel inspection: ship identity laundering to deceive the IMO
1. The Panel investigated a case of ship identity laundering whereby a flag of
convenience vessel previously identified by the Panel as having transported prohibited
coal shipments removed all identifiers, was provided with new documentation and
ships’ books for classification and inspection purposes and then applied for and
obtained a new, legal vessel number from the International Maritime Organization.
The ship in question is the Togo-flagged Talent Ace (IMO number: 8793873) which
was previously the Xin Sheng Hai (IMO number: 9485617). It entered the port of
Gunsan on 18 January 2018 and was subsequently detained by the Republic of Korea
pursuant to paragraph 9 of resolution 2397 (2017).
2. Inspection of the vessel revealed that a new IMO number had been inserted into the
vessel’s super-structure (figure I) and a complete set of ship documents had been
provided to allow the vessel to appear as a first-time applicant to legally obtain the
number. The Talent Ace’s engine and generator serial numbers still matched those of
the Xin Sheng Hai’s (figure II).
Figure I: New legal IMO number

Source: The Panel
Figure II: Engine serial number

Source: The Panel
3. Inspection of the ship’s bow revealed that the name “Talent Ace” was painted over
its former identity (figure III). When informed of the fraud, the International Maritime
Organization cancelled the IMO number and merged the false identity with that of the
Xin Sheng Hai.

19-01704

189/379

S/2019/171

Figure III: “Talent Ace” blacked out and painted over former names

Source: The Panel
4. The Talent Ace’s operator Wooheng (Hongkong) Shipping appears to be acting on
behalf of the operator of the Xin Sheng Hai , Liberty Shipping. 174 The Panel has
identified Liberty Shipping as the operator of other designated vessels as well as
DPRK-flagged ships, and was itself designated by the United States on 23 February
2018. 175 The Panel found that the IMO registration address for the vessel ’s owner,
Wynn East Import & Export Trading Pte. Ltd., is the same as that of Wooheng
(Hongkong) Shipping. 176 The Panel is continuing its investigation.
Figure IV: Document recovered aboard the Talent Ace showing Wooheng using
email address of Liberty Shipping, the operator of the Xin Shen Hai

__________________

Wooheng (Hongkong) Shipping Co. Ltd uses the email of Liberty Shipping ( Libertyshipping@163.com) (see figure IV). which
has been identified as the operator of other designated vessels, as well as DPRK-flagged ships.
175
Liberty Shipping was also the operator of the previously designat ed Karo Bright and the DPRK vessel Sai Nal 2
176
Registered in Singapore (ID: 201412213D) at: 2 Venture Drive, #11 -30 Vision Exchange, Singapore (608526)
174

190/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 29: The Panel’s letter to the Syrian Arab Republic

United Nations
HEADQUARTERS
• SIEGE
TEL. : +1 212 963 1055 •

:

REFERENCE

Nations Unies
NEW YORK, NY 10017
F AX : +1 212 963 2013

S/AC.49/2018/PE/OC.361

YOUR REFERENCE

3 December 2018

Excellency,
I have the honor to write to you with regard to ongoing efforts of the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to United Nations Security Council resolution 1874 (2009) to gather, examine and analyze
information regarding the implementation of the measures imposed on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea (DPRK) by Security Council resolutions 1718 (2006), 1874 (2009), 2087 (2013),
2094 (2013), 2270 (2016), 2321 (2016), 2356 (2017), 2371 (2017), 2375 (2017) and 2397 (2017), in
particular incidents of non-compliance.
The Panel is following up on its letter of 28 June 2018 (ref. S/AC.49/2018/PE/OC.172) (see
Annex) to which it has received no reply to date. In addition, the Panel has received information from
a Member State that:
•

The DPRK is continuing prohibited cooperation with the Scientific Studies Research
Centre (SSRC) and the Army Supply Bureau (ASB);

•

The DPRK national who replaced Ryu Jin as KOMID representative in the Syrian Arab
Republic is known as “Kim”. Mr. “Kim” has as his deputy a Mr. Rim Yong Hyok and
both these individuals work together with Pak Kwang Il.

In addition, the Panel wishes to follow up on its letters of 1 September 2017
(ref. S/AC.49/2017/PE/OC.378), 5 July 2017 (ref. S/AC.49/2017/PE/OC.308), 21 October 2016 (ref.
S/AC.49/2016/PE/OC.904
and
905),
9
June
2016
(ref. S/AC.49/2016/PE/OC.185) and 5 May 2016 (S/AC.49/2016/PE/OC.117) as well as your response
letter of 17 August 2017 (see Annex).
His Excellency
Mr. Bashar Ja'afari
Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic
to the United Nations
New York
19-01704

191/379

S/2019/171

The Panel wishes to reiterate its request for a full list of the activities undertaken by these
individuals and all other DPRK nationals in the Syrian Arab Republic, their contracts with
Syrian companies and institutions, together with copies of their passports, and other relevant
information as requested in our previous communications.
The Panel would welcome any other information that you might consider relevant to its work as
mandated by the Security Council. In addition, the Panel would like to assure you that any information
you may consider confidential can be handled accordingly and used solely for the information of the
Security Council and the 1718 Committee.
As the Panel intends to report on this matter in its next Final report to the Security Council,
we would be most grateful for any information to be supplied within one month of the date of
this letter.
Should you or your designated representative wish to discuss this request or any follow up matters, please contact the Panel via Mr. Hugh Griffiths (email: xxxxxxxxxxx) mailto: and Mr.
Olaf Andrieu (email: xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx).
Please accept, Excellency, the assurances of my highest consideration.

Hugh Griffiths
Coordinator of the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to Security Council Resolution 1874 (2009)

Annex:
Panel letters of 23 November 2018 (ref: S/AC.49/2018/PE/OC.172), 1 September 2017 (ref.
S/AC.49/2017/PE/OC.378), 5 July 2017 (ref. S/AC.49/2017/PE/OC.308), 21 October 2016 (ref.
S/AC.49/2016/PE/OC.904 and 905), 9 June 2016 (ref. S/AC.49/2016/PE/OC.185) and 5 May
2016 (S/AC.49/2016/PE/OC/117) and Syrian Arab Republic letter of 17 August 2017

192/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

193/379

S/2019/171

Annex 30: Copy of the passport of Syrian arms trafficker Hussein Al-Ali

194/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 31: Reply of the Syrian Arab Republic to the Panel

19-01704

195/379

S/2019/171

Annex 32: Prime Okryu Gallery website
(1) Example of Mansudae Art Studio works advertised on the website (right: Ri
Gyong Nam “Winter in thick forest”. left: An Chang Nam “Thick forest”) (top)

Source: https://www.okryugwan.net/artgallery (accessed on 3 May 2018)

(2) Contents showing the affiliation of the gallery (bottom)

Source: https://www.okryugwan.net/?lang=en (accessed on 3 May 2018)

196/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 33: Information on DPRK cyberattacks provided to the Panel by a Member
State in November 2018 (excerpt)
•

Cyberspace is used by the DPRK as an asymmetric means to carry out illicit and undercover operations
in the field of cybercrime and sanctions evasion. These operations aim at to acquire funds through a
variety of measures in order to circumvent the sanctions.

•

• The illicit activities of the DPRK rely on a particular cyber composite ecosystem. Among these well
identified illicit activities are online scams and the hacking of the global SWIFT messaging system. The
DPRK relies on the expertise of at least four groups of hackers specialized in espionage and sabotage,
who carry out, “Advanced Persistent Threats (APT)”.

19-01704

197/379

S/2019/171

Annex 34: Excerpt on DPRK cyberwarfare capabilities from “Military and Security
Developments involving the DPRK 2017”, a report to Congress pursuant to the
National Defense Authorization Act, Office of the U.S. Secretary of Defense

198/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Source: https://fas.org/irp/world/dprk/dod-2017.pdf

19-01704

199/379

S/2019/171

Annex 35: Republic of Korea National Police Agency News Release: Results of the
Joint Investigation Team of the Republic of Korea Police and Government -- Hacking
of Consumer Information of Interpark determined to have be done by DPRK
[Unofficial translation (excerpt); Original follows]
The National Police Agency (Cyber Security Bureau) and the Government Joint Investigation
Team, after an initial investigation on the recent hacking of customer information of InterPark and
the blackmail to the company, state their assessment that the hacking was conducted by the
DPRK's Reconnaissance General Bureau (RGB). 177
As evidence, the joint team pointed out to three main factors:
1) the IP addressed used for hacking emails and hacking commands (systematically used before by
the DPRK RGB)
2) the malware used in the attack (as well as decoding and methods to remove traces of the attack)
were similar to those that the DPRK used in past cyber-attacks
3) DPRK- style expressions used in black mail/cyber threat emails
This incident shows that North Korea is going beyond attacking basic infrastructure and is now trying to steal
national wealth through the criminal acquisition of foreign currency. Considering the seriousness of the issue, the
Government of the ROK is closely monitoring the changes in the cyberattack tactics of the DPRK. 178
Source:http://www.korea.kr/policy/pressReleaseView.do;jsessionid=gyhqXhbdjxKTGwcXCNCQ2BVbcCWKJf
VBdKGLGhyMR1cQG4kYq9DB!-1655938029?newsId=156144599&pageIndex=1

__________________
177

경찰청(사이버안전국)과 정부합동조사팀은 인터파크 고객정보 해킹 및 협박 사건 초동수사ㆍ조사 결과, 이번 사건이 북

정찰총국 소행인 것으로 판단하고 있다고 밝혔다.
178

이 사건은 북한이 우리의 기반시설 공격을 넘어, 국민의 재산을 탈취하려는 범죄적 외화벌이에까지 해킹기술을 이용하고 있는

것이 확인된 최초 사례로서, 정부차원에서도 그 심각성을 인식하고 북한의 사이버공격 전술 변화를 예의 주시하고 있다고 밝혔다.

200/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

201/379

S/2019/171

Source:http://www.korea.kr/policy/pressReleaseView.do;jsessionid=gyhqXhbdjxKTGwcXCNCQ2BVbcCWKJf
VBdKGLGhyMR1cQG4kYq9DB!-1655938029?newsId=156144599&pageIndex=1

202/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 36: Wanted by the FBI, PARK JIN HYOK, Conspiracy to Commit Wire Fraud;
Conspiracy to Commit Computer-Related Fraud (Computer Intrusion)

Source: https://www.fbi.gov/wanted/cyber/park-jin-hyok

19-01704

203/379

S/2019/171

Annex 37: Open source technical analysis of DPRK state-sponsored cyber activity
(FireEye, 3 October 2018)

204/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Source: URL: https://content.fireeye.com/apt/rpt-apt38

19-01704

205/379

S/2019/171

Annex 38: Depiction of connection between advanced persistent threat (APT) group
responsible for cyberattacks on Banco de Chile and Cosmos bank in India to the
Reconnaissance General Bureau

Source: https://content.fireeye.com/apt/rpt-apt38.

206/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 39: Open source report on attacks on Crypto Exchanges, January 2017 September 2018

Source: https://www.group-ib.com/media/gib-crypto-summary/

19-01704

207/379

S/2019/171

Annex 40: Information on the Panel’s investigation of DPRK diplomat formerly posted to
Malaysia and supporting documentation
1.
The Panel investigated a DPRK diplomat formerly posted to Malaysia, Kim Jong Chol (aka Ri Jong Chol),
who operated on behalf of the Korea PongHwa General Trading Company, which according to documents obtained
by the Panel is associated with Korea Kumgang Bank. 179
2.
The Panel obtained documentation showing that purchases made by PongHwa were being transferred to an
account at Kumgang Bank in the name of the Korea General Insurance Company, an alias for the designated Korea
National Insurance Company; and that payment for a shipment in 2016 was to be sent by Korea Ponghwa to the
North East Asia Bank. The bills of lading for 14 shipments to Korea PongHwa General Trading Company in 2016
and 2017 indicated the shipper as Complant International Transport (Dalian) Co., Ltd, a company mentioned in
previous Panel reports as the transhipper for attempted sales of luxury goods (i.e. S -class Mercedes automobiles) 180
(see below). The company’s affiliation to Complant/Comtrans also links it to Hong Kong Complant International
Trans, which previously owned the DPRK vessel, the Kum Sung. 181
3.
The Malaysian company with which Kim Jong Chol conducted some of his business on behalf of Korea
PongHwa General Trading Company, provided the Panel with information showing that he operated under the alias
Ri Jong Chol and was Deputy Director for another company, “Sinkwang Economic and Trading Group” (see below).
That a DPRK individual accredited as a diplomat at the DPRK Embassy in Kuala Lumpur was doing business on
behalf of at least two DPRK entities, one of which was affiliated with a DPRK financial institution, reflects patterns
previously reported by the Panel. 182 Kim/Ri’s daughter, Ri Yugyong, often served as Ri’s translator and another
DPRK individual, Yu Song Chol (aka “Mr. Brighton”), started to make payments to the company by check on behalf
of Korea Ponghwa in late 2016. The Panel notes that this practice helped t o obscure in bank transaction records
starting in late 2016 the origin of the funds, which had previously been transferred into the account by front
companies in Hong Kong and China mainland through large, well -known banks.

__________________

See S/2018/171, annex 44.
See Doc. S/2017/147, para 177, and page 127, footnote 36; and Doc. S/2012/422 paras. 84-85.
181
See Doc. S/2017/147, page 127, footnote 36.
182
The Panel has previously reported on the use of embassies of the DPRK for the country ’s financial operations.
179
180

208/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Business cards of Ri Jong Chol (aka Kim Jong Chol) and Yu Song Chol

Source: The Panel

19-01704

209/379

S/2019/171

Invitation letter by Malaysian Company to the President of Korea Ponghwa General Trading
Corp C-8 Company

Source: The Panel

210/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Bills of Lading for shipments from Malaysia to Korea Ponghwa General Trading Corp via
Complant International Transportation (Dalian) Co. Ltd

Source: The Panel

19-01704

211/379

S/2019/171

Source: The Panel

212/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Source: The Panel

19-01704

213/379

Location
**

Passport number / expiry
UN Security Council designations
where applicable
22 Feb 1958; Dip PP no. 836110034,
exp 1 Jan 2020
UN res 2270 (2016) designated him
as “Tanchon Commercial Bank
Representative in Syria” on 2 March
2016 (amended 5 Aug. 2017)
KPi.016
25 Aug. 1976 with dip PP number
836110035, expires 1 January 2020

Names

Title and activities **

Jang Bom Su (aka
Jang Pom Su, Jang
Hyon U)
장범수

Tanchon Commercial Bank (hereafter TCB) Representative. Also
operates in and travels to Lebanon under various aliases

Syria

Jon Myung Guk
(a.k.a. Cho’n
Myo’ng-kuk,
Jon Yong Sang)
전명국 (전영상)
Ryom Huibong (aka
Ryo’M Hu’I-Pong)
렴희봉

Tanchon Commercial Bank (hereafter TCB) Representative in
Syria. Also travels to and operates in Lebanon under various
aliases.

Syria

Representative of Korea Kumgang Group Bank (aka KKG bank,
금강은행 Kumgang Export and Import Bank, 金刚银行)

Dubai,
UAE

18 September 1961 PP No.:
745120026 (expires 20 January
2020)

Ri Sun Chol (Aka
Ri Song Chol)
리선철 (리성철)

Representative of Korea Kumgang Group Bank

Dubai,
UAE

28 March 1964 PP No.:836132137

Dubai,
UAE

1 January 1975 PP No.: 563220533

Korea Kumgang Group Bank

UAE

26 May 1983 PP No.: 836434467

Foreign Trade Bank Representative. The office opened at least 5
accounts at Banque International Arabe Tunisie (BIAT) in Tunisia.
Two of them are in the name of a front company, Kartos. Kim
Kyong Il has also been involved in transactions undertaken by
Daedong Credit Bank in China.

Libya

1 August 1979; PP No. 836210029

Kwak Chongchol
(Aka Kwak JongChol)
곽정철
Ro Il Gwang
노일광
Kim Kyong Il (Aka
Kim Kyo'ng-il
김경일

Transported money of DPRK laborers in the Middle East to the
DPRK
Deputy Representative of Korea Kumgang Group Bank

Res 2397 (2017) designated him as
“FTB deputy chief representative in
Libya” on 22 December (KPi.067)

S/2019/171

214/379

Annex 41: DPRK bank representatives subject to expulsion under paragraph 33 of resolution 2321 (2016)

19-01704

19-01704

Choe, Un Hyok
최은혁

Chu Hyo’k (Aka Ju
Hyok)
주혁

Unification Development Bank (or Korea Unification Development
Bank, UDB or KUDB) representative. Replaced Ri Un’So’ng.
Choe Un Hyok’s KUDB business card with his title of
“Representative of KUDB, Moscow Russia” with the same address
as the Embassy in Moscow is available in the Panel’s 2017 Final
Report, S/2017/150 p. 251.
Russia replied in a letter of 25 January 2018 ,“We will inform you
accordingly in case we receive additional information on the
whereabouts of Choe Un Hyok.” The Panel has not received any
additional information in reply to its two follow-up letters. .
Foreign Trade Bank Representative
Russia replied Chu Hyo’k is not currently residing in Russia. (see
below)

Ri U’n-so’ng (aka
Ri Eun Song; Ri Un
Song)
리은성

Korea Unification Development Bank representative
Russia replied that Ri U’n-so’ng is not currently residing in
Russia.

Han Jang Su
(aka Chang-Su Han)
한장수

Chief Representative of the Foreign Trade Bank
The Russian Federation replied, Mr. Han Jang Su is the Third
Secretary of the Commercial Counsellor’s Section of the Embassy
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to the Russian
Federation and has been officially accredited by the Russian
Ministry of Foreign Affairs. He entered the Russian Federation on
23 June 2017 and is staying in the country legally. No information
is available concerning activities that are inconsistent with his
official status.
Foreign Trade Bank Representative

Ku Ja Hyong (aka
Ku Cha-hyo'ng)
구자형

Moscow,
Russia

Russian
Federation

23 Nov. 1986; PP No. 836420186,
issued 28 Oct. 2016 (expires 28 Oct
2021)
Res 2397 (2017) designated him as
an “overseas FTB Representative”
on 22 December (KPi.065)
23 July 1969
Res 2397 (2017) designated him as
“overseas Korean Unification
Development Bank representative”
on 22 December (KPi.078)
8 Nov. 1969; PP No.: 745420176
(expires 19 Oct 2020
Designated by Resolution 2371
(2017) as “Chief Representative of
the Foreign Trade Bank”

8 September 1957; PP No.:
563220533; Another PP No.:
654210218 (expires 27 June 2019 used in July 2016)
Res 2397 (2017) designated him as
“FTB chief representative in Libya”
on 22 December 2017 (Kpi.070)
S/2019/171

215/379

Libya
(also
travelled
to Tunisia,
UAE, and
Saudi
Arabia
20152017)

19 October 1985
PP No.: 83612287 (expires March
2021)

Foreign Trade Bank Representative. In 2016, Ch’oe So’k-min was
the deputy representative at the FTB branch office in Shenyang.
He has been associated with cash transfers from that FTB office to
banks affiliated with DPRK special organizations and RGB located
overseas.
China stated, “China has closed all the representative offices of
the DPRK financial institutions in China, and all the relevant
representatives in China have left China.”
Foreign Trade Bank Representative
China stated, “China has closed all the representative offices of
the DPRK financial institutions in China, and all the relevant
representatives in China have left China.”

Shenyang
China

Ko Chol Man (aka
Ko Ch'o'l-man)
고철만

Foreign Trade Bank Representative
China stated, “China has closed all the representative offices of
the DPRK financial institutions in China, and all the relevant
representatives in China have left China.”

Shenyang,
China

Mun Kyong Hwan
(aka Mun Kyo'nghwan)
문경환

Bank of East Land Representative
China stated, “China has closed all the representative offices of
the DPRK financial institutions in China, and all the relevant
representatives in China have left China.”

Dandong,
China

Pae Won Uk (aka
Pae Wo'n-uk)
배원욱

Korea Daesong Bank Representative
China stated, “China has closed all the representative offices of
the DPRK financial institutions in China, and all the relevant
representatives in China have left China.”

Beijing,
China

Pak Bong Nam (aka
Lui Wai Ming; Pak
Pong Nam; Pak
Pong-nam)
박봉남
Pak Mun Il
박문일

Ilsim International Bank representative
China stated, “China has closed all the representative offices of
the DPRK financial institutions in China, and all the relevant
representatives in China have left China.”

Shenyang,
China

Korea Daesong Bank Representative
China stated, “China has closed all the representative offices of
the DPRK financial institutions in China, and all the relevant
representatives in China have left China.”

Yanji,
China

Kim Tong Chol
(aka: Kim Tongch'o'l) 김동철

25 July 1978
Res 2397(2017) designated him as
“overseas FTB Representative” on
22 December (KPi.064)

Shenyang,
China

19-01704

28 Jan 1966; PP No.: 381337404
(expires 26 Sept 2016)
Res 2397 (2017) designated him as
“overseas FTB representative” on 22
December (KPi.068)
30 September 1967; PP No.
472420180
Res 2397 (2017) designated him as
“overseas FTB representative” on 22
December (KPi.069)
22 August 1967; PP No. 381120660
exp. 25 March 2016
Res 2397 (2017) designated him as
“overseas Bank of East Land
representative” on 22 December
(KPi.071)
22 August 1969; PP No.: 472120208
exp 22 Feb 2017
Res 2397 (2017) designated him as
“overseas Daesong Bank
representative” on 22 December
(KPi.072)
06 May 1969
Res 2397 (2017) designated him as
“overseas Ilsim International Bank
representative” on 22 December
2017 (KPi.073)
DPRK / 1 January 1965; PP No.:
563335509 (expires 27/8/2018)
Res 2397 (2017) designated him as
“overseas official of Korea Daesong

S/2019/171

216/379

Ch’oe So’k-min
최석민

19-01704

Ri Chun Hwan (Aka
Ri Ch'un-hwan)
리춘환

Foreign Trade Bank Representative
China stated, “China has closed all the representative offices of
the DPRK financial institutions in China, and all the relevant
representatives in China have left China.”

Zhuhai,
China

Ri Chun Song (Aka
Ri Ch'un-so'ng)
리춘성

Foreign Trade Bank Representative. Opened a Euro account at
International Arab Bank of Tunisia (BAIT) on 18 July 2012 in the
name of “Secretary’s Delegate of the DPRK’s Mission to Tripoli”
(closed on 22 August 2013.
China stated, “China has closed all the representative offices of
the DPRK financial institutions in China, and all the relevant
representatives in China have left China.”
Representative for Koryo Bank and Koryo Credit Development
Bank. Reportedly established front companies to procure items and
conduct financial transactions on behalf of DPRK
China stated, “China has closed all the representative offices of
the DPRK financial institutions in China, and all the relevant
representatives in China have left China.”
Ilsim (ILSIM) International Bank Representative
China replied, “The other DPRK individuals mentioned in the
Panel's report are neither included in the sanction list of the
Security Council resolutions nor registered in China as the
representatives of the DPRK financial institutions. China cannot
verify and confirm whether they have relationship with the DPRK
financial institutions.”
Korea Kumgang Group Bank Representative. Has held several
accounts in his name at Chinese banks and is suspected of
operating a cover company.
China replied, “The other DPRK individuals mentioned in the
Panel's report are neither included in the sanction list of the
Security Council resolutions nor registered in China as the
representatives of the DPRK financial institutions. China cannot
verify and confirm whether they have relationship with the DPRK
financial institutions.”

Beijing,
China

Ri Song-hyok (Aka
Li Cheng He)
리성혁

Pang Su Nam (Aka
Pang So-Nam, Pang
Sunam)
방수남

Cha Sung Jun (Aka
Ch’a Su’ng-chun)
차승준

Bank” on 22 December 2017
(KPi.079)
21 August 1957’ PP No: 563233049
(expires 9 May 2018); PP No.:
563233049 (expires 9 May 2018)
Res 2397 (2017) designated him as
“overseas FTB representative” on 22
December (KPi.074)
30 October 1965; PP No. 654133553
(expires 11 March 2019)
Res 2397 (2017) designated him as
“overseas FTB representative” on 22
December (KPi.075)

Beijing,
China

Zhuhai,
China

Beijing,
China

19 March 1965 PP No. 654234735
(expires 19 May 2019) Res 2397
(2017) designated him as “overseas
representative for Koryo Bank and
Koryo Credit Development Bank” on
22 December (KPi.077)
1 October 1964; PP No.: 472110138

4 June 1966; PP No.: 472434355

S/2019/171

217/379

Pak Ch’O’l-Nam
박철남

Jo Chol Song (Aka
Cho Ch’o’l-So’ng)
조철성

Ho Young Il (Aka
Ho’ Yo’ng-il)
허영일

Kim Mun Chol (Aka
Kim Mun-ch’o’l)
김문철
19-01704

Representative, Cheil Credit Bank / First Credit Bank
China replied, “The other DPRK individuals mentioned in the
Panel's report are neither included in the sanction list of the
Security Council resolutions nor registered in China as the
representatives of the DPRK financial institutions. China cannot
verify and confirm whether they have relationship with the DPRK
financial institutions.”
Representative, Cheil Credit Bank / First Credit Ban. Opened 6
bank accounts in the name “Great Prince Limited
(崇王有限公司)”in banks in Hong Kong and Shenzhen, China”
China replied, “The other DPRK individuals mentioned in the
Panel's report are neither included in the sanction list of the
Security Council resolutions nor registered in China as the
representatives of the DPRK financial institutions. China cannot
verify and confirm whether they have relationship with the DPRK
financial institutions.”
Deputy Representative for the Korea Kwangson Banking
Corporation (KKBC)
Uses false entity names for the KKBC, such as “Good Field
Trading Limited (城豐貿易有限公司)” and “Golden Tiger
Investment Group (金虎(香港)國際投資集團有限公司)”, both
registered in Hong Kong.
China stated, “China has closed all the representative offices of
the DPRK financial institutions in China, and all the relevant
representatives in China have left China.”
Hana Bank Representative
In 2016, Ho Young Il was associated with a high volume of USD
transactions for the FTB.
China replied, “The other DPRK individuals mentioned in the
Panel's report are neither included in the sanction list of the
Security Council resolutions nor registered in China as the
representatives of the DPRK financial institutions. China cannot
verify and confirm whether they have relationship with the DPRK
financial institutions.”
Representative for Korea United Development Bank. Uses false
entity names including “Chongryu Technical Company” or “Kyong
Un Trading Company”
China replied “that as a designated individual he has been blocked
from entry and Chinese banks requested the freeze of his assets.

Shanghai,
China

5 November 1985; PP No.:
381335989 (expires 14 September
2016)

Beijing,
China

16 June 1971 PP No.: 745420413
(expires 19 November 2020)

Dandong,
China

25 September 1984
PP: 654320502 (expires 16
September 2019)
Res 2371(2017) designated him as
“Representative for Korea United
Development Bank” on 5 Aug
(KPi.058)

Dandong
China

DPRK/ DOB: 9 September 1968

Dandong,
China

DOB 25 March 1957
Res 2371(2017) designated him as
“Representative for Korea United
Development Bank” on 5 Aug
(KPi.060)

S/2019/171

218/379

Kim Kyong Hyok
(Aka Kim Kyo’nghyo’k)
김경혁

19-01704

Choe Chun Yong
(Aka Ch’oe Ch’unyo’ng)
최천영

Ilsim International Bank Representative

Ko Tae Hun (Aka
Kim Myong Gi)

Tanchon Commercial Bank Representative

Kang Min
강민

Daesong Bank representative who, in late 2016, held Chinese bank
accounts.
China replied, “The other DPRK individuals mentioned in the
Panel's report are neither included in the sanction list of the
Security Council resolutions nor registered in China as the
representatives of the DPRK financial institutions. China cannot
verify and confirm whether they have relationship with the DPRK
financial institutions.”
Representative, Korea Daesong Bank
As of 2015, Kim Sangho was an Office 39 official posted as a
Korea Daesong Trading Company representative in Yanji, China.
China replied, “The other DPRK individuals mentioned in the
Panel's report are neither included in the sanction list of the
Security Council resolutions nor registered in China as the
representatives of the DPRK financial institutions. China cannot
verify and confirm whether they have relationship with the DPRK
financial institutions.”
Representative, Korea Unification Development Bank. In 2015, he
was an Office 39 official posted to Hong Kong.
China replied, “The other DPRK individuals mentioned in the
Panel's report are neither included in the sanction list of the
Security Council resolutions nor registered in China as the
representatives of the DPRK financial institutions. China cannot
verify and confirm whether they have relationship with the DPRK
financial institutions.”
Deputy Representative, Korea Unification Development Bank

고태훈 (or
고대훈)
(aka 김명기)

Kim Sang Ho
김상호

Kim Jong Man (Aka
Kim Cho’ng Man)
김정만

219/379

__________________
183

See S/2017/150, p. 64

Yanji,
China

16 May 1957 PP No.: 563337601
(expires: 26 September 2018)

Zhuhai,
China

16 July 1956; PP No.: 918320780

Zhuhai,
China

9 July 1978; PP No.: 472235761
(expires 6 June 2017)

S/2019/171

Kim Hyok Chol
(Aka Kim Hyo’k-

Transited
China,
Ethiopia,
UAE,
visited
Sudan183
Beijing,
China

PP no: 654410078
Res 2371(2017) designated him as
“Representative for Ilsim
International Bank” on 5 Aug
(KPi.054)
25 May 1972; PP 563120630
(expires 20 March 2018)
UN Res 2270 (2016) designated him
as “Tanchon Commercial Bank
(TCB) official” on 2 March
(KPi.025)
07 May 1980; PP 563132918
(expires 04 February 2018)

Ri Ho Nam (aka Ri
Ho-nam)
리호남

Ms. Kim Su Gyong
김수경

China replied, “The other DPRK individuals mentioned in the
Panel's report are neither included in the sanction list of the
Security Council resolutions nor registered in China as the
representatives of the DPRK financial institutions. China cannot
verify and confirm whether they have relationship with the DPRK
financial institutions.”
Ryugyong Commercial Bank branch representative (2014 to
present)
China replied, “The other DPRK individuals mentioned in the
Panel's report are neither included in the sanction list of the
Security Council resolutions nor registered in China as the
representatives of the DPRK financial institutions. China cannot
verify and confirm whether they have relationship with the DPRK
financial institutions.”
Korea United Development Bank (KUDB) Representative. Since
2011 made multiple trips around Europe, especially in France and
Italy, with the assistance of her father, Kim Yong Nam, and
brother, Kim Su-Gwang, RGB agents who used their status as staff
members of international organizations to help her obtain visas.
Kim Su-Gwang (Kim Sou Kwang) recently departed Belarus. See:
S/2017/742 para 50 and S/2016/15, para 187.

S/2019/171

220/379

Cho’l, Hyok Chol
Kim) 김혁철

Beijing,
China

DOB: 3 January 1967; PP No.:
654120210 (expires 21 February
2019

Europe,
also
transited
UAE and
the
Russian

DOB: 16 Jan 1973; PP 745120374

Federation
184

Mun Cho'ng-Ch'o'l
문정철

Tanchon Commercial Bank Representative. Has facilitated
transactions for TCB.

Res 2094 (2013) designated him as
“Tanchon Commercial Bank (TCB)
official” on 7 March (KPi.012)

Choe Song Nam
CHOE, Song Nam
(aka CH'OE, So'ngnam)

Representative of Daesong Bank

DOB: 07 Jan 1979; Passport
563320192 expires 09 Aug 2018

Kim Chol
KIM, Chol (a.k.a.
KIM, Ch'o'l)
김철

Representative of Korea United Development Bank

DOB 27 Sep 1964

최성남

19-01704

__________________
184

The Russian Federation informed the Panel that unilateral sanctions were “not an argument for suspicion of unlawful activities on Russian territory ”.

19-01704

Paek Jong Sam
PAEK, Jong Sam
(a.k.a. PAEK, Chongsam)
백종삼

Representative of Kumgang Bank

DOB 17 Jan 1964; nationality Korea,
North

Ko Il Hwan
KO, Il Hwan (a.k.a.
KO, Il-hwan)
고일환

Representative of Korea Daesong Bank. According to a Member
State, he engaged in transactions for ship-to-ship transfers in 2018
while acting as representative of Daesong Bank in Shenyang.

DOB 28 August 1967
Passport 927220424 expires 12 Jun
2022

Ri Myong Hun
RI, Myong Hun
(a.k.a. RI, Myo'nghun)
리명훈
Kim Nam Ung
김남웅

Representative of Foreign Trade Bank

DOB 14 Mar 1969; Gender Male;
Passport 381420089 expires 11 Oct
2016

Representative for Ilsim International Bank, which is affiliated with
the DPRK military and has a close relationship with the Korea
Kwangson Banking Corporation. Ilsim International Bank has
attempted to evade United Nations sanctions.
The Russian Federation replied, Mr. Ri Jong Won arrived in Russia on
5 February 2018 as an officially accredited member of the Embassy of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to the Russian Federation.
It is not known what information was used to determine that he is the
Moscow-based deputy representative of the Foreign Trade Bank.
Moreover, according to the available information, he returned to the
DPRK on 8 October 2018.

Passport no.: 654110043
Res 2371(2017) desigmated him as
Representative for Ilsim International
Bank
DOB: 22 Apr 1971; Passport no
654320421 expires 11 Mar 2019

RI, Jong Won (a.k.a.
RI, Cho'ng-Wo'n;
a.k.a. RI, Jung Won)

Source: The Panel, Member States, UN documents

S/2019/171

221/379

Names, alias, Korean and Chinese
spelling

HQ address / phone /
fax/ SWIFT

Bank of East Land

BEL Building, JonsungDong, Pyongyang
Tel: +850 2 18111
Fax: +850 2 3814410

동방은행
aka: Haedong Bank (해동은행),
Dongbang Bank, Tongbang U’Nhaeng,
Tongbang Bank,
朝鲜）东方银行
Credit Bank of Korea
조선신용은행
aka Korea Credit Bank, International
Credit Bank, 朝鲜信用银行
Daedong Credit Bank [JV]
대동신용은행
大同信用银行
Aka Taedong Credit Bank, Dae-Dong
Credit Bank, DCB Finance Ltd,
Perigrine-Daesong Development Bank

Security Council designations and information
provided to Panel by Member States and United
Nations resolutions
Res 2087 (2013) on 22 January 2013 (KPe.013)
Info in UN Panel reports: S/2017/150; pp 76-77 and
S/2017/742, para 61.
Facilitates weapons-related transactions for, and other
support to, arms manufacturer and exporter Green Pine
Associated Corporation. Has actively worked with
Green Pine to transfer funds in a manner that
circumvents sanctions.

Munsu Street, Central
District, Pyongyang
+850 2 3818285
+850 2 3817806

Suite 401, Potonggang
Hotel, Ansan-Dong,
Pyongchon District,
Pyongyang,
(b) Ansan-dong,
Botonggang Hotel,
Pongchon, Pyongyang,
+850 2 3814866
SWIFT: DCBK KPPY

Res 2270 (2016) on 2 March 2016 (KPe.023)
Representative offices and front companies in China
according to Panel: S/2017/150, paras 225-230 and
S/2017/742, paras 51-56.
Clients include: T Specialist International (Singapore)
Ltd, OCN (Singapore) International Distribution Ptd
Ltd; Pan Systems; Dalian Daxin Electron Co Ltd,
Hongdae International, Yueda International Trading Co,
Hing Heng, Korea Sinheung Trading Co, Hana
Electronics.
Joint venture with Korea Daesong Bank; majority stake
acquired by a Chinese company. See current report,
paragraphs XX.

S/2019/171

222/379

Annex 42: Information on DPRK financial institutions with overseas representatives

19-01704

19-01704

Daesong Credit Development Bank
[JV]
대성신용개발은행
Koryo Credit Development Bank
(고려글로벌신용은행), Koryo Global
Trust Bank, Koryo-Global Credit Bank,
Korea Credit Investment Company
(조선신용투자회사)
First Eastern Bank
Foreign Trade Bank (FTB)
조선무역은행
朝鲜贸易银行
aka: Mooyokbank, Korea Trade Bank,
Mooyokbank
International Consortium Bank (ICB)
국제합영은행
Hi-Fund Bank International Consortium
Bank (ICB), Sungri Hi-Fund
International Bank, Sungri Economic
Group
Koryo Bank
고려은행
高丽银行

Rason, DPRK

Affiliated with Cetnral Bank and Unaforte (Italy, Hong
Kong). See Panel report S/2017/150 para 221.
FTB Building, Jungsong Res 2371 (2017) on 5 Aug 2017 (KPe.047)
dong, Central District,
State-owned bank which acts as the DPRK’s primary
Pyongyang
foreign exchange bank and has provided key financial
Tel: +850 2 18111
support to the Korea Kwangson Banking Corporation.
Fax: +850 2 3814467
See para X on registered office abroad.
SWIFT/BIC FTBD KP
PY
Sungri Exhibition Hall, Panel reporting:
Pyongyang

Koryo Bank Building,
Pyongyang, Democratic
People's Republic of
Korea
Yanggakdo International
Hotel, Pyongyang
Tel: +850 2 381 4100
Fax: +850 2 341 4013

Res 2356 (2017) on 2 June 2017 (KPe.045)
Associated with Office 38 and Office 39 of the KWP.
Operated by Korea Myohyang Economic Group; joint
venture partner in Koryo-Global Bank.
Res 2371 (2017) on 5 August 2017 (KPe.049)
Joint venture with Koryo Bank

223/379

S/2019/171

Koryo Credit Development Bank /
Daesong Credit Development Bank
[JV] (Aka. Koryo-Global Credit Bank,
Koryo Global Trust Bank)

Daesong Credit
Development Bank
[Joint Venture]
+850 2 381 4100
+850 2 341 4013

S/2019/171

224/379

고려신용개발은행 대성신용개발은행
(aka 고려글로벌신용은행)
Korea Daesong Bank
대성은행 / 조선 대성은행
大成银行
aka: Choson Taesong Unhaeng, Daesong
Bank, Taesong Bank
According to a Member State, in 2018
the bank has used the following false
names when processing transactions for
ship-to-ship transfers:

Segori-dong,
Gyongheung Street,
Pyongyang
Tel +850 2 818221
Fax +850 2 814576
SWIFT/BIC:
KDBKKPPY

Res 2321 (2016) on 30 November 2016 (KPe.035)
Owned and controlled by Office 39 of the Korea
Workers’ Party
According to a Member State, Ko Il Hwan engaged in
transactions on behaof of Korea Daesong Bank from
Shenyang for ship-to-ship transfers in 2018.

조선녹색산업무역 (Chosun Noksaek
Sanop Muyok, Korea Green Industry
Trading Company/Corporation 朝鲜绿色
产业贸易 ) and
조선신용투자회사(Chosun Sinyong
Tuja Hoesa, Korea Credit Investment
Company/Corporation 朝鲜信用投资公
司 or 朝鲜信用投资会社).
Korea Kwangson Banking Corporation Jungsong-dong, Sungri
Street, Central District,
조선광선은행
Pyongyang
朝鲜光鲜银行, Korea Kwangson Finance
Company, 朝鲜 蔡鲜金金朝朝, Korea
Kwangson Finance Company

Res 2370 (2016) on 2 March 2016
Provides financial services in support to Tanchon
Commercial Bank and Korea Hyoksin Trading
Corporation, a subordinate of the Korea Ryonbong
General Corporation. Tanchon has used KKBC to
facilitate funds transfers likely amounting to millions
of dollars, including transfers involving KOMIDrelated funds. For more info see PoE report
S/2017/150, p. 63.

19-01704

19-01704

Korea National Insurance Corporation
조선민족보험총회사
Korea Foreign Insurance Company, 朝鲜
民族保险总会社
Korea Joint Venture Bank
조선합영은행
Korea Joint Bank, Korea Joint Operation
Bank, Chosun Joint Operation Bank,
Habyong Bank, 朝鲜合营银行

Ryugyong Commerical Bank (RCB)
류경상업은행/류상은행
Ryusang Bank, 柳京商业银行, 柳商银行

Korea Unification (United)
Development Bank
(조선) 통일발전은행
(朝鲜)统一发展银行
aka: Myohyangsan Bank, Unification
Development Bank, T’ongil Palchon
Bank, Korea Tongil Paljon Bank, Korea
Reunification Development Bank
Hana Banking Corporation

See current report paras XX.

KJB Building,
Ryugyong 1 dong,
Pothonggang District,
Pyongyang
+850 2 381-8151, 8502-18111-381-8151
+850 2 381-4410
Changgwang Hotel, 5th
Floor; Beijing, China;
Dandong, China

KUDB Building,
Pyongyang
SWIFT/BIC:
KUDBKPPY

Two ATMs at Pyongyang Airport and one in the lobby
of Changgwang Inn.
Ryugyong Commercial Bank ATM lists an address in
the Changgwang Foreign House, Suite #05-24
Joint Venture with OCN Pyongyang Office and Koryo
Commerical Bank
Res 2321 (2016) on 30 November 2016 (KPe.033)
USA on 16 March 2016
See Panel of Experts report (S/2017/150, p 62)

ISB Building,
Partial Ownership by Central Bank. Overseas several
Pyongyang; Haebangsan Bank Card product lines for domestic use
Hotel, Jungsong-Dong,
Sungri Street, Central

S/2019/171

225/379

하나은행
aka Korea Kumsong Bank, Kumsong
Bank, Single-Minded International Bank,

KNIC Building, Central
District Pyongyang
+850 2 18111/222
Ext:3418024
+850 2 3814410

일심국제은행
日心国际银行
aka. Korea Kumsong Bank, Kumsong
Bank, Single-Minded International Bank,
日心国际银行
First Credit Bank. (JV) or Cheil Credit
Bank
제일신용은행
第一信用银行
aka: First Trust Bank Corporation, Jeil
Credit Bank, Kyongyong Credit Bank

Koryo Commercial Bank
고려상업은행
高丽商业银行
aka Korea Commercial Bank
Tanchon Commercial Bank
단천상업은행
端川商业银行
AKA: Changgwang Credit Bank,
19-01704

(창광신용은행) Korea Changgwang

a) 3-18 Pyongyang
Information Center,
Potonggang District (as
of 2016). b) i Rakrang
District, Jongbaek 1dong Tel: +850 2 4331575 (02-433-1575)
SWIFT:
KYCBKPPYXXX
Rakrang Tel: 961-3331,
961-0003
KCB Building,
Taedonggang District,
Pyongyang; ; Beijing,
China; Shenyang,
China; SWIFT/BIC
KCBKKPP1
Saemul 1-Dong
Pyongchon District,
Pyongyang

S/2019/171

226/379

Ilsim International Bank

District, Pyongyang,
Dandong, China
SWIFT/BIC
BRBKKPPIXXX
ISB Building,
Pyongyang
Pyongyang, Democratic
People's Republic of
Korea
SWIFT: ILSIKPPY

Res 2321 (2016) on 30 November (KPe.034)
Affiliated with the DPRK military and has close
relationship with Korea Kwangson Banking
Corporation (KKBC) and has attempted to evade
United Nations sanctions.
Belongs to Workers Party of Korea. It was established
in 2008 as JV venture with Singapore’s Miracle
Commerce Pte. Ltd., and its CEO William Toh (aka
Toh Hwee Howe) who has been involved in trade with
the DPRK using his other two companies, I-Tech
Intelligence Resources and Sinsar Trading Ltd.

Joint Venture with OCN and Ryugyong Commerical
Bank

Designated by UN on 24 Apr. 2009 (KPe.003)
Main DPRK financial entity for sales of conventional
arms, ballistic missiles, and goods related to the
assembly and manufacture of such weapons. Under
Second Economic Committee; financial arm of
KOMID.

19-01704

Credit Bank (조선창광신용은행);
Yongaksan Bank (용악산은행),
Lyongaksan Bank (룡악산은행)
Korea United Development
Bank (KUDB)
조선통일발전은행
(朝鲜）统一发展银行
aka: Myohyangsan Bank, Unification
Development Bank, T’ongil Palchon
Bank, Korea Tongil Paljon Bank, Korea
Reunification Development Bank
Kumgang Group Bank / Kumgang
Bank (KKG)
Korea Kumgang Bank
(조선) 금강은행
金刚银行 aka: Kumgang Export and
Import Bank

KUDB Building,
Pyongyang

Information in UN POE report: S/2017/742, p. 22
SWIFT/BIC:
KUDBKPPY

Kumgang Bank
Building, Central
District, Pyongyang
(The North East Asia
Bank building in
Pyongyang became the
KKG Bank building)

Kumgyo International Commercial
Bank

단천상업은행
端川商业银行
AKA: Changgwang Credit Bank,
(창광신용은행) Korea Changgwang

Saemul 1-Dong
Pyongchon District,
Pyongyang

Designated by UN on 24 Apr. 2009 (KPe.003)
Main DPRK financial entity for sales of conventional
arms, ballistic missiles, and goods related to the
assembly and manufacture of such weapons. Under
Second Economic Committee; financial arm of
KOMID.

227/379

S/2019/171

Credit Bank (조선창광신용은행);

Associated with Korea Ponghwa General Corporation
(under External Economic Committee of the Cabinet)
and Korea Pyongyang Trading Company

Affiliated with Korean Chongsong Mining Company
and Changgwang Shop. See Panel report S/2017/150
para 220.

금교국제상업은행

Tanchon Commercial Bank

Res 2321 (2016) on 30 November (KPe.033)

Lyongaksan Bank (룡악산은행)
Source: The Panel, Member States, UN documents

S/2019/171

228/379

Yongaksan Bank (용악산은행),

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 43: Payment process used in ship-to-ship transfers in 2018
First, foreign national brokers outside the DPRK arranged imports to be facilitated by ship -toship transfer. Once the deal was agreed, the DPRK end recipients of the imported products
transferrred funds internally to a DPRK bank with representatives operating overseas. The bank
then instructed one of its overseas representatives to use foreign bank accounts it controls
(often attached to front companies), to pay relevant suppliers for the product and shipping
costs. The balance between the DPRK bank and the foreign accounts debited was then rectified
virtually by ledger. When the actual balance of the accounts at the DPRK bank and those of its
overseas representatives diverges too substantially as a result of the regular use of the ledger
system, cash couriers address the imbalance by carrying bulk cash across the DPRK border.
The Panel notes that this method for processing payments is almost identical to the ledger
system used by Glocom for its financial transactions (S/2017/150, para. 225) as well as other
DPRK front companies.
Source: Member State

19-01704

229/379

S/2019/171

Annex 44: Official registration documents for DPRK Foreign Trade Bank Official
Representative Office in Moscow

230/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Source: Russian Federation Federal Tax Service State Registry of Accredited Branches, Representative Offices of
Foreign Legal Entities (RAFP), extracted from https://service.nalog.ru/rafp/# (The webportal can be searched
by name, INN, or even just the Russian word for DPRK – КНДР and then scrolling to the FTB entry).

19-01704

231/379

S/2019/171

Apartment 37, Building 2
31 Entuziastov Highway,
Moscow, 111123
Han Zan Su

NZA: 201500328626
INN: 9909086019
KPP: 774751001

Source: Russian Federation Federal Tax Service State Registry of Accredited Branches, Representative Offices of
Foreign Legal Entities (RAFP), extracted from https://service.nalog.ru/rafp/# (The webportal can be searched by
name, INN, or even just the Russian word for DPRK – КНДР and then scrolling to the FTB entry).
Summary of relevant information in English:
Name of Russian
Branch in English and
Russian; Tax ID No.
(INN)

Name of Branch
English & Russian;
Short Name(s) of
Foreign Branch

Location
Address
(English)

Full Names of
Associated
Individuals; Date
Accredited

KPP #; NZA
#; and Tax
Organ ID

Date of Initial
Registration

Docum
ent ID;
Date of
Docum
ent

REPRESENTATIVE
OFFICE OF THE BANK
FOR FOREIGN TRADE
DPRK

BANK FOR FOREIGN
TRADE DPRK

Apartment
37,
Building 2
31
Entuziastov
Highway,

Han Zan Su
ХАН ЗАН СУ

KPP:
774751001

2008-06-26

Doc.
ID:
90716

2015-03-31

NZA:
2015003282
6

232/379

БАНК ВНЕШНЕЙ
ТОРГОВЛИ КНДР

#
Forei
gn
Citize
ns
Worki
ng
2

Date:
201810-17
19-01704

S/2019/171
ПРЕДСТАВИТЕЛЬСТВО
БАНКА ВНЕШНЕЙ
ТОРГОВЛИ КНДР
Tax ID: 9909086019

19-01704

Moscow,
111123

Tax Organ ID:
7747

233/379

S/2019/171

Annex 45: Biodata, passport and travel of Han Hun Il (Edward Han)

Name:
DOB:
Passport #
Expiry:
A.k.a.:
Family
members

Han Hun Il
2 April 1957
836134879
9 March 2021
Edward Han
Wife: Kim Mi-Kyong (김미경)
• DOB: 1959 2.15
Son: Han Kumryong (한금룡, a.k.a. “Han Song” (한 성), aka: “Harvard
Han”
• DOB: 18 September 1984
• Worked at MKP Myanmar branch until 2013

Affiliations:•
•
•
•
•

234/379

Sungri Economic Group (승리경제연합)
Dispatched to Malaysia in 1995 to serve as Malaysia Representative of Mansudae
Overseas Projects (MOP)
Established a Mansudae branch, M.O.P. (S) Pte Ltd, in Singapore on 20 May 1994
until it was struck off the register on 30 September 2009.
In 2006 his tenure with MOP expired and he was given the status of “operative “in
the Reconnaissance General Bureau. He had previously served as representative
of RGB in Africa before 1995.
On 20 June 2006 he registered Malaysia Korea Partners (MKP) in Malaysia
jointly with Yong Kok Yeap with each of them owning half the shares (175,000
Ringgit)

19-01704

S/2019/171

Former
Address:

MKP Capital LLC Berhd
Registered address: 24-B Jalan Landak Off Jalan Pudu KL
Business address: Lot 5, Jalan Satu
Kawasan Perusahaan Cheras Jaya
43200 Balakong; Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia

Travels
Telephone:
Email
Website :

Traveled to Zambia at least twice in 2017
Tel : 603 9076 9678; Fax : 603 9075 9678
enquiries@mkpholdings.com.my
www.mkpholdings.com.my

]

Travel Information:

Source: Member States

19-01704

235/379

S/2019/171

Annex 46: Updated information on the Panel’s investigation into MKP activities in Zambia
The Zambian investigation into MKP confirmed that 13 companies incorporated in the country have
been linked to MKP Holdings (see section below entitled, Information on MKP companies in Zambia).
Information provided by Zambia showed that MKP relies on a semi-devolved corporate model outside
of Malaysia; and makes widespread use of foreign facilitators in its corporate structures to create
deniability of the control relationship between Han Hun Il and other MKP companies. In particular, an
Algerian national, Mohamed Yazid Merzouk, served as a director in most of the MKP Zambia entities,
playing a key central management role for the network alongside several Algerian nationals sharing
his last name and a small number of Zambian nationals.
Although the Panel was unable to establish the amount being paid to each individual labourer of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, documents provided by Zambia showed that only 15 per cent
of the total amount for each project was paid to the labourers for that project as a whole. MKP indicated
to the Panel that, for its earlier projects overseas, labourers from the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea were paid 300 dollars a month. Zambia provided the monetary values for a selection of
KOGEN/GENCO projects from 2013 to 2015, valued at a total of $25 million. It did not provide a
comprehensive list of the company’s activities, nor did it disclose KOGEN/ GENCO contracts post2015.
Information on MKP companies in Zambia
(For further details and a network chart, see S/2018/171, page. 72. For the most up-todate registration information, see the end of this Annex)
NHA - MKP ESTATES DEVELOPMENT
Registration number: 120050058683
Incorporated on 29 April 2005.
Registered address: 4668, Annex National Housing Authority
Ownership:
Name
Yazid Mohamed
Merzouk
Donovan Webster
Zyambo
Saviour Konie

Sex
M

Nationality
Algerian

M

Zambian

M

Zambian

Address
Villa No. 3Millenium Village, Longacres,
Lusaka
Plot 9620, Churdleigh. Lusaka
Stand 7351, Nangwenya Rd, Rhodespark,
Lusaka

National Housing
Authority
Note: The Panel also notes that NHA-MKP Estate Development Ltd was still active in May 2018, whe n a court of
appeals judge ruled on its lawsuit against the compensation board:
http://www.judiciaryzambia.com/2018/05/16/appeal-no-44-2017-nha-mkp-estate-development-ltd-v-workerscompensation-fund-control-board-may-2018-justice-makunguja/ In March 2018, a newspaper article quoted a
representative of the National Housing Authority as saying that more developments would be coming from MKP:
https://www.dailynation.info/mkp-znbs-offloads-250-housing-units/

236/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

KOREA GENERAL COMPANY FOR EXTERNAL CONSTRUCTION (KOGEN)
Incorporated 15 June 2012
Address: Plot no. 6556, Mumana Road, Olympia, Lusaka.
Nature of business: construction services.
Directors:
Name
Hang Chan Ho
Ri Kwanga Song
Ri Chun IL

Sex
M
M
M

Nationality
Korean
Korean
Korean

Address
Plot No. 6556, Mumana road, Olympia, Lusaka
Plot No. 6556, Mumana road, Olympia, Lusaka
Plot No. 6556, Mumana road, Olympia, Lusaka

The management team of the company comprises eleven (ll) DPRK nationals nicluding:
1. Mr. JIN H YOK RI - is on the Board of Directors of KOCEN. He has 10 years of experience in civil engineering.
2. KUM JUN TAE holds a degree in structural engineering from PYONGYANG UNIVERSITY. He has more than 13
years' experience in building industry
3. KIM I SONG - holds a degree in structural engineering from PYONGYANG UNiVERSITY. He has more than 13
years' experience in building industry
4. HONG JONG SON and KIM HAK CHOL — the two hold degrees and diploma in structural design and construction
from Pyongyang University
5. JANG YONG NAM and CHA SUN CHOC — the duo hold degree in construction material engineering from
Pyongyang University
6. KIM SU JON' RI RYONC HONG IN HO, KIM TAE HWAN they hold degrees in building and civil engineering from
Pyongyang University with 1 6 years' experience in building industry
The above-mentioned directors of Korean General Construction (Z) Ltd registered another company called
CHAMMAE CONSTRUCTION LIMITED whose address and directors are the same as those in Korean General
Construction (Z) Lid, with the addition of one director, Mr. Sam Maurice. The company, whose registration number
is 1201 20102839 was also incorporated on 1 5 th June 2012.
CHAMMAE CONSTRUCTION LIMITED
Incorporated 15 June 2012
Address: Plot no. 6556, Mumana Road, Olympia, Lusaka.
Registration: 1201 20102839
Directors:
Name
Hang Chan Ho

Sex
M

Nationality
Korean

Ri Kwanga Song

M

Korean

Ri Chun IL

M

Korean

Mr. Sam Maurice

M

Zambian

Address
Plot No. 6556, Mumana road, Olympia,
Lusaka
Plot No. 6556, Mumana road, Olympia,
Lusaka
Plot No. 6556, Mumana road, Olympia,
Lusaka

MKP TMS HOSPITAL LTD
Incorporated 20 th April 2006
Address: Plot No. 05, Reed Buck road, Kabulonga, Lusaka
Registration: 120060062028
Chief Executive Officer is a Mr. Han Nun.
Directors:
Name
Sex Nationality
No. of
shares
Yazid Mohamed
M
Algerian
2,750
Merzouk
19-01704

Address
Villa No.3, Millenium village, Longacres,
Lusaka
237/379

S/2019/171

Abdeldjallil Merzouk

M

Algerian

Han Yong
Ho Un Ran

F
M

Korean
Korean

1,500
500

Betty Mulongoti

F

Zambian

250

Plot No. 5591, Lusemfwa road, Kalundu,
Lusaka
Hse No. MC72, PHI Chainama, Lusaka
Plot No. 5, off Reedbuck road, Kabulonga,
Lusaka
Plot 325, Independence avenue, Lusaka

MKP MOTORS ZAMB'A LTD
Company incorporated on 22 nd August 2002. Its registered business address is 2 nd Floor Indeco House,
Cairo Road, Lusaka. Directors of the company are in the following table:
Name
Sex Nationality
Address
Han Hun IL
M
Korean
Malungushi Village, Kalundu
Siew KIN Wai
M
Malaysian
Malungushi Village, Kalundu, Lusaka
Yong KOK Yeap M
Malaysian
Malungushi Village, Kalundu, Lusaka
Philip S.C
M
Zambian
Plot No.377a?12B, Kabulonga, Lusaka
Mumba
MKP HOLDINGS LTD
Address: Plot 5591, Lusemfwa Road. Kaiundu
Registration: 12004005417
Nature of business: construction
Ownership:
Name
Yazid Mohamed
Merzouk
Yon IL

Sex
M

Nationality
Algerian

M

Korean

Address
Villa No. 3, Millenium village, Longacres,
Lusaka
Villa No. 3, Millenium village, Longacres,
Lusaka

MKP MINING CORPORATION LTD
Incorporated: 16 August 2006
Registration: 1 20060063279
Address: Plot 7393 Chainda Place, South End, Cairo Road, Lusaka
Ownership:

Name

Sex

Nationality

Yazid Mohamed
Merzouk
Dr. Stephen M
Kambani
Derrick Munsele

M

Algerian

No. of
shares
125,000

M

Zambian

125,000

M

Zambian

125,000

Charles Victor
Holland

M

Zambian

125,000

Address
Plot 5591, Lusemfwa road, Kalundu,
Lusaka
A2 Handsworth UNZA, Lusaka
Plot No. 2, Simon Mwansa Kapwepwe
Road, Avondale, Lusaka
Plot No. 4258 Mbeleshi, Northrise, Ndola
Zambia

MKP SECURITY SYSTEMS LTD
Incorporated: 7 th November 2006
Registration :1 20060000641 68
Address: Plot No. 7393, Chainda Place, "Jairo Road, Lusaka.
Ownership:

238/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Name

Sex

Nationality

Address

Zambian
Zambian

No. of
shares
100,000
100,000

Samson Sakala
Timothy
Mazembe
Ngonga Oswald
M Goodson
Bwalya

M
M
M

Zambian

100.000

Plot 16520/1080, Kamwala, South Lusaka

MKP BUILDERS ZAMBIA LTD
Address: plot 5591, Lusemfwa Road, Kalundu, Lusaka.
Directors:
Name
Sex
Nationality
No. of
Shares
Yazid Mohamed M
Algerian
99.750,000
Merzouk
Abdeldjallil
M
Algerian
5,250,000
Merzouk

Godfrey Kangwa road, Nyumba Yanga, Lusaka
Plot 12243, Woodlands, Ext, Chalala, Lusaka

Address
Villa No.3, Millennium Village, Longacres, Lusaka
Plot No. 5591, Lusemfwa Road, Kalundu, Lusaka

MKP CAPITAL ZAMBIA LTD
Address is plot 5591, Lusemfwa Road Kaiundu, Lusaka
Incorporated: 4 th February 2011.
Business: construction.
Directors:
Name

Sex

Nationality

Address

Zambian

No. of
Shares
55,000

Abdelghani
Merzouk
Abdeldjallil
Mezouk
Mohamed
Yazid Merzouk
Farid Merzouk
Timothy
Kazembe

M
M

Algerian

11000000

Plot 5591, Lusemfwa Road, Kalundu, Lusaka

M

Algerian

87250000

Plot 5591, Lusemfwa Road, Kalundu, Lusaka

M
M

Algerian
Zambian

11000000

Plot 5591, Lusemfwa Road, Kalundu, Lusaka

Plot 5591, Lusemfwa Road, Kalundu, Lusaka

MK IREHAB ZAMBIA LTD
Incorporated : 13 November 2011
Business: supplies of medical labs and pharmacy equipment
Adderss: Plot No. 5 Reed Buck Road, Kabulonga (address for MKP TMS Hospital)
Directors:
Name
Abdeldjallil
Merzouk
Mohamed
Yazid
Merzouk
Dr. Zelilah
Binti Salleh
Ghany
19-01704

Sex

Nationality

No. of
Shares

Address

M

Algerian

M

Algerian

2550000

Plot 5591, Lusemfwa Road, Kalundu, Lusaka

M

Zambian

2450000

Plot No. 5, Reed Buck Road, Kabulonga

Plot 5591, Lusemfwa Road, Kalundu, Lusaka

239/379

S/2019/171

OMEGA-MKP ZAMBIA LTD
Address: Stand No. 7241, Mukatasha road, industrial area, Lusaka.
Nature of busienss: security services
Directors:
Name
Victor
Etienne Janse
Van Rensbur
Christoffel
Ohhanes
Roelosfe
Philius
Jacobus
Christoffel
Smit
Timothy Jim
Kazembe
Christoffel
Ohhanes
Roelosfe

Sex
M

Address
Plot 7241, Mukatasha Road, Light Industrial Area, Lusaka

M

157 Ezra Road, Die Wilgers, Pretoria, South Africa

M
M

Lynwoodridge,
Pretoria, South Afica, 301, Minesota street
Faerie Glen Pretoria, South Africa

M

No. Tl Los Ageles Road, Lusaka

M

16520/1080, Kamwala

South Lusaka

Motor vehicles registered in the names of Chang H Han and Korea General Company for External Construction (Z)
Owner
Korea General Company for External
Construction
Korea General Company for External
Construction
Korea General Company for External
Construction
Korea General Company for External
Construction
Korea General Company for External
Construction
Korea General Company for External
Construction
Chan H Han
Chan H Han
Chan H Han

Registration Mark
ALK9605

Make
DAF Tipper

ALK2843

Volvo Tipper

ABF3391

Volvo

AAX5978

Toyota Dyna

ALJ1391

Toyota Regius

ACH9579ZM

Landcruiser Prado

ALE7996
ABE321
ABD1517

Toyota Noah
Toyota Camry
Toyota Lucida

Source: Member State

Updated information from Patents and Companies Registration Agency –December 2018
NHA-MKP Estates Development, #120050058683 is shown as registered and compliant.
Chammae Construction Limited, #120120102839: is shown as registered and compliant.
MKP TMS Hospital, #120060062028: is shown as registered and compliant.
MKP Motors (Zambia) Ltd, #120010047965: shown as registered, but has some issues with timely
paperwork filing….
MKP Holdings Ltd, #120040054717: shown as registered, but doesn’t seem to have filed in a while.
240/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

MKP Mining Corporation, #120060063279: shown as registered, compliant.
MKP Security Systems Zambia, #120060064168: shown as registered, compliant.
MKP Capital Zambia, #120110090060: shown as registered, compliant.
MKP Builders Zambia, #120070068265: registered, partially compliant.
MKP-Irehab, #120110095546: still registered, partially compliant.
Omega-MKP Zambia, #120100086671: changed its name to Omega Risk Solutions Zambia. Still
registered, compliant.
Source: Company Registry

19-01704

241/379

The Panel notes that while Han Hun Il’s name has been removed from the registration of one company and two other companies on
which he served have been dissolved, many MKP companies appear to remain open and active in Malaysia despite the Panel’s previous
determination that their activity was prohibited.
(This updates the previous table of “MKP companies in Malaysia as of 15 December 2017”, S/2018/171 pp. 229-232, Annex 67)

Company Name

M.K.P.
PROJECTS
SDN. BHD.

Corp
orat
e
Num
ber

1994
48-D

Status

Dissolv
ed

MKP
BUILDERS
SDN. BHD

3862
07-P

Existin
g

MKP CAPITAL
BERHAD

7383
26-V

Windin
g Up

Address

Directors

Shareholders

Start

Rm.1 1st. Floor,
Lee Rubber Bldg 145,
Jalan Tun H.S. Lee
Kuala Lumpur, Wilayah
Persekutuan

Abdul kudus bin
datuk;
Lee Kung Wah;
Chong ah Kow @
Chong Ching Che;
Yong Kok Yeap;

Abdul Kudus
Bin Datuk;
Yong Kok
Yeap;
Chong Ah Kow
@ Chong
Ching Che;
Lee Kung Wah

15-Jun90

19-01704

2-3-11 (3rd Floor)Menara
Klh Business Centre 2,
Jalan Kasipillay,
Off Jalan Sultan Azlan
Shahkuala Lumpurwilayah
Persekutuan
Lot 5, Jalan 1kawasan
Perusahaan Cheras Jayabatu
11 cheras, selangor
24-B, Jalan Landakoff Jalan
Pudu Kuala Lumpur Wilayah
Persekutuan
Lot 5, Jalan 1kawasan
Perindustrian Cheras
Jayabatu 11, Batu 9
cheras, selangor

Han Hun Il;
Fang Chee Peng;
Yong Kok Yeap;

Yong Kok Yeap, Fang
Chee Peng

6-May96

Han Hun Il;
Yong Kok Yeap;

Yong Kok
Yeap; Han Hun
Il

20 June
2006

Notes

Han Hun Il no
longer listed as
shareholder
(11 May 2018
registration
documents
listed him as
shareholder)

S/2019/171

242/379

Annex 47: MKP companies in Malaysia as of November 2018

19-01704

MKP CAPITAL
LLC BERHAD

MKP
CORPORATION
BERHAD

MKP
DYNAMIC
ENGINEERING
SDN. BHD

MKP
DYNAMIC
SDN. BHD

9808
01M

6197
41-U

7359
10
W

7799
80
A

Yong Kok
Yeap; Han Hun
Il

Existin
g

24-B Jalan Landakoff Jalan Pudu Kuala
Lumpur, Wilayah Persekutuan

Han Hun Il;
Yong Kok Yeap;

2 March
2012

Existin
g

24-B Jalan Landakoff Jalan
Pudu Kuala Lumpur,
wilayah Persekutuan Lot 5,
Jalan 1 kawasan
Perusahaan Cheras Jayabatu
11batu 9 Cherasselangor

Han Hun Il;
Karnail Singh Nijhar
Tansri Dato'dr Amar
Singh; Yong Kok Yeap;
Ramanan
Ramakrishnan, Dato';

Yong Kok
Yeap; Han Hun
Il

26 June
2003

Existin
g

2-3-11 (3rd Floor) Menara
Klh Business Centre 2 jalan
Kasipillay, Off Jalan Sultan
Azlan Shah Kuala Lumpur,
wilayah Persekutuan
Lot 5, Jalan 1 Kawasan
Perusahaan Cheras Jayabatu
11, Batu 9 Cheras Selangor

Karnail Singh Nijhar
Tansri Dato'dr Amar
Singh;
Fang Chee Peng;
Yong Kok Yeap;
Muhammad Danial
Bin Osman;

Karnail Singh
Nijhar Amar
Singh, Tansri
Dato'dr;
Yong Kok
Yeap;
Soh Pui Hoon;
Han Hun Il;
Ramanan
Ramakrishnan

31 May
2006

Existin
g

2-3-11 (3rd Floor), Menara
Klhbusiness Centre, 2, Jalan
Kasipillayoff Jalan Sultan
Azlan Shah Kuala Lumpur,
Wilayah Persekutuan
Lot 5, Jalan 1kawasan
Perusahaan Cheras Jayabatu
11 cheras selangor

Karnail Singh Nijhar
Tansri Dato'dr Amar
Singh;
Fang Chee Peng;
Yong Kok Yeap;
Ramanan
Ramakrishnan;
Muhammad Danial
Bin Osman @
Mddaud;

Yong Kok
Yeap;
Soh Pui Hoon;
Ramanan
Ramakrishnan;
Karnail Singh
Nijhar Tansri
Dato'dr Amar
Singh

7 July
2012

Previously
listed as
"winding up"
(in 13 Nov
2017
documents)

Han Hun Il was
never on the
paperwork to
begin

S/2019/171

243/379

4644
92 W

MKP SUPPLIES
SDN. BHD

1210
818
M

MKP -WUI
LOONG SYSTEM
SCAFFOLDS
SDN. BHD

Nekad Ziplem
SDN. BHD

5774
18 H

6143
59 U

Existin
g

Existin
g

2-3-11 (3rd Floor) Menara
Klh Business Centre 2 jalan
Kasipillay,
Off Jalan Sultan Azlan Shah
Kuala Lumpur, Wilayah Persekutuan

Dissolv
ed

24
-B Jalan Landakoff Jalan
Pudu Kuala Lumpur,
Wilayah Persekutua
Lot 5 Jalan 1kawasan
Perindustrian Cheras
Jayabatu 11 Batu 9 Cheras,
Selangor

Existin
g

52 a, Jalan Landak
off Jalan Pudu
Kuala Lumpur, Wilayah
Persekutuan
C/O Lot 5, Jalan 1 kawasan
Perindustrian Cheras
Jayabatu 11, Batu 9 Cheras
Selangor)

Yong Kok Yeap;
Han Hun Il;

Yong Kok
Yeap; Han Hun
Il

S/2019/171

244/379

MKP HOLDINGS
SDN. BHD

2-3-11 (3rd Floor) Menara
Klh Business Centre 2 jalan
Kasipillay,
Off Jalan Sultan Azlan Shah
Kuala Lumpur, Wilayah Persekutuan
Lot 5, Jalan 1 kaw.
Perusahaan Cheras Jayabatu
11 batu 9 Cheras Selangor

23 June
1998

Fang Chee Peng;
Yong Kok Yeap;

Yong Kok
Yeap; Fang
Chee Peng

30
Nov
2016

Kong Kam Wang;
Han Hun Il;
Yong Kok Yeap;
So Yu Shing;

Wui Loong
System
Scaffolds
Co.Ltd;
Mkp Holdings
Sdn. Bhd.

17 April
2002

Han Hun Il;
Yong Kok Yeap;

Jusoh Bin
Awang;
Yong Kok
Yeap;
Han Hun Il;
Sumairi Bin
Hashim

7-May03

Address
change (11
Nov 2017 docs
listed address
in Puchong
Selangor)

19-01704

19-01704

ELEMENT FLASH
(M) SDN. BHD.

6585
73 V

Existin
g

SOSIT SDN.
BHD.

7493
41-K

Dissolv
ed

2-3-11 (3rd Floor) Menara
Klh Business Centre 2 Jalan
Kasipillay,
Off Jalan Sultan Azlan
Shahkuala Lumpur Wilayah
Persekutuan
Lot 5 Jalan Satu kawasan
Perusahaan Cheras
Jayabalakong Selangor
2-3-11 (3rd Floor) Menara
Klh Business Centre 2 jalan
Kasipillay,
Off Jalan Sultan Azlan Shah
Kuala Lumpur, Wilayah
Persekutuan
Lot 5, Jalan 1 Kaw.
Perusahaan Cheras Jaya Batu
11, Batu 9 Cheras Selangor

Yong Kok Yeap;
Chua Boon Lain;
Tee Eng Soon;

Chua Boon
Lain; Yong Kok
Yeap; Tee Eng
Soon; Fang Chee Peng

6-Jul-04

Yong Kok Yeap; Han Hun
Il;

Yong Kok
Yeap; Han Hun
Il

3-Oct06

Han was never
on paperwork
to begin; new
Fang Chee
Peng (added
sometime after
Nov 2018)

Source: Malaysian corporate registry

S/2019/171

245/379

S/2019/171

Annex 48: Korea General Corporation for External Construction (GENCO)’s page on the
DPRK’s official online portal, Naenara, compared with MKP’s website showing same
completed projects (red boxes added to highlight construction projects claimed by both
organizations)

Source:
https://web.archive.org/web/20111116081011/http://www.naenara.com.kp/en/periodic/f_trade/in dex.php?contents
+1645+2011-01+47+3

246/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Sources: https://archive.li/82wX1 and
https://web.archive.org/web/20051119182017/http://www.kcckp.net/fr/periodic/f_trade/index.php?contents+234+
2004-04+8+24

19-01704

247/379

S/2019/171

248/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 49: MKP website showing same completed projects (red boxes added to highlight
construction projects claimed by both organizations)

Source: http://www.mkpholdings.com.my/construction.php accessed on 9 January 2019. Red
box highlights the shared claim.
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx x
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx

19-01704

249/379

S/2019/171

Source : www.mkphodings.com.my/construction.php

250/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 50: Archived page for GENCO/KOGEN (originally in French; Google-translated)
showing images of buildings which it claims to have constructed which are also listed on
the MKP website as buildings which MKP claims to have constructed.

Source:
https://web.archive.org/web/20111116081011/http:/www.naenara.com.kp/en/periodic/f_trade/index.php?contents
+1645+2011-01+47+3

19-01704

251/379

S/2019/171

Source:
https://web.archive.org/web/20070930050305/http:/www.kcckp.net/fr/periodic/f_trade/index.php?contents+234+
2004-04+8+24

252/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 51: MKP claim to a construction project which a Member State informed the Panel
was constructed by KOGEN (Mulungushi International Convention Center)

Accessed at http://www.mkpholdings.com.my/construction.php on 9 January 2019

19-01704

253/379

S/2019/171

Annex 52: List of DPRK workers working in Zambia, including Han Hun Il (RGB) and
Yazid Merzouk (Algerian national)

Source: Member State

254/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 53: Information showing that Kwang Song Ri served as the DPRK Counsellor in
China (리광선 aliases: RI, Kwang-Son, RI, Kwangson)

Source: Thomson Reuters World Check

19-01704

255/379

S/2019/171

Source: Thomson Reuters World Check

256/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 54: Open source information showing that Kwang Song Ri served as a Counsellor (
参赞) at the DPRK Embassy in Beijing under the name 李光先 (리광선 aliases: RI,
Kwang-Son, RI, Kwangson)

English translation
Embassy of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea in China
Embassy of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
(Last updated: September 22, 2013)
Office and Residence: Ritan North Road, Jianguomenwai
Chancery and Residence: Ri Tan Bei Lu, Jian Guo Men Wai
Tel: 65321186 (on duty) 65321154 (Government Office)
65325018 (Economic Office) 65324308 (Business Office)
Counsellor Li Guangxian
Mrs. Li Guangxian (Lin Chengshun)
Mr. Ri Kwang Son, Counsellor
Mrs. Rim Song Sun
Source: Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China website
http://www.mfa.gov.cn/chn//pds/fw/lbfw/zhwjgmd_lbfw/t527236.htm; archived version: https://archive.fo/CDCwJ).

19-01704

257/379

S/2019/171

Annex 55: Information showing that Kwang Song Ri served as a diplomat in Cairo, Egypt

Source: Thomson Reuters World Check

258/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Source: Thomson Reuters World Check

19-01704

259/379

S/2019/171

Annex 56: Information from a 26 January 2018 report by the Republic of Korea Ministry
of Unification on key DPRK personnel figures (2018 북한 주요인사 인물정보) which
includes DPRK diplomatic personnel worldwide.
In a publication by the Republic of Korea on key DPRK personnel, pages 809-831 contain a list of DPRK
diplomatic personnel worldwide. In the original Korean document, Kwang Song Ri’s name can be found under
“Egypt” on page 814, item number 13, third line, first name (Egypt’s entire entry listed here in the original)
Entry in Korean:
(13) 이집트(에짚트)
대 사 마동희
참 사 관 박성도
1 등서기관 리광송 최 강 최기영
Entry translated into English:
13. Egypt
a. Ambassador- Ma Dong Hee
b. Councilor- Park Sung Do
c. First Office- Ri Kwang Song, Choi Kang, Choi Gee Yong

Source: http://nkinfo.unikorea.go.kr/nkp/pblictn/pblictnList.do?originCd=OC0003#

260/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 57: UAE Company 1 Website on establishment of KOGEN UAE JV

Source: UAE Company 1 website, accessed 9 November 2018.

19-01704

261/379

S/2019/171

Annex 58: Page from UAE Company 1 brochure outlining project work

Source: UAE Company 1 website, accessed 13 December 2018.

262/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 59: Corporate information on Chammae Construction Limited

19-01704

263/379

S/2019/171

Source: Patents and Companies Registration Agency, Zambia

264/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 60: Corporate information on GENCO Nigeria

Source: Nigerian Corporate Affairs Commission, http://publicsearch.cac.gov.ng/comsearch/index.php

Source: Nigerian corporate registry

19-01704

265/379

S/2019/171

Annex 61: African Union’s InterAfrican Bureau for Animal Resources lists KOGEN GE
S.L. as its implementing partner for a project

Source: Interafrican Bureau for Animal Resources, African Union, http://www.au-ibar.org/2012-10-01-13-0842/news/450-en/programmes-and-projects/current-programmes-and-projects/fish/inventory-projects/820-africanunion-member-states-by-region

266/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 62: Funding documentation for the Rebola Municipal Stadium in Equatorial
Guinea

Source: Ministry of Treasury, Economy, and Planning, http://www.minhacienda.gob.gq/wpcontent/uploads/2018/05/LPGE_-2017.pdf

Source: Rombe Diary, GE Proyectos, http://www.diariorombe.es/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/Lista-de-ObrasPrimera-Parte.pdf
19-01704

267/379

S/2019/171

Annex 63: Registry documents for LLC “VITAL”, LLC “PRESTIZHSTROI”, and LLC
“SAKO KONTRAKSHN”

268/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

269/379

S/2019/171

Source: Unified State Register of Legal Entities, https://egrul.nalog.ru

270/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

271/379

S/2019/171

272/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Source: Unified State Register of Legal Entities, https://egrul.nalog.ru

19-01704

273/379

S/2019/171

274/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

275/379

S/2019/171

Source: Unified State Register of Legal Entities, https://egrul.nalog.ru

276/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 64: Additional information linking LLC “SAKORENMA” to LLC “VITAL”, LLC
“PRESTIZHSTROI”, and LLC “SAKO KONTRAKSHN”

Source: Federal state information system of the Federal Servic e for Labor and Employment,
https://trudvsem.ru

19-01704

277/379

S/2019/171

Source: Federal state information system of the Federal Service for Labor and Employment,
https://trudvsem.ru

278/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Source: Federal state information system of the Federal Service for Labor and Employment,
https://trudvsem.ru

19-01704

279/379

S/2019/171

Source: Federal state information system of the Federal Service for Labor and Employment,
https://trudvsem.ru

280/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 65: Registry documents for two GENCO Representative Offices in the Russian
Federation and relevant Court documents
1. Registry documents for GENCO Repressentative office in Vladivostok

19-01704

281/379

S/2019/171

282/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Source: State Register of
https://service.nalog.ru/rafp/#

19-01704

Accredited

Branches,

Representations

of

Foreign

Legal

Entities,

283/379

S/2019/171

2. Registry documents for GENCO Representative office in Khasan

284/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

285/379

S/2019/171

Source: State Register of Accredited Branches, Representations of Foreign Legal Entities,
https://service.nalog.ru/rafp/#

286/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

3. Official court documents from the Russian Federation referencing the head of a a representative office for
GENCO in Russia by the initials K.Y. These correspond to those of Ko Yongil, the registered director of GENCO ’s
representation in Vladivostok.

…

- 42402 (forty-two thousand four hundred
and two) US dollars – transfer to head of
the representative office of the Korean
General Corporation for Construction
Abroad <data removed> (DPRK) K.Y. (for
return to the rightful owners).

Source: Artemovski City Court of Primorski Krai, https://artemovsky-prm.sudrf.ru/modules.php?name=sud_delo&name_op=case&_id=148809085&_deloId=1540006&_caseType=0&
_new=0&srv_num=1

19-01704

287/379

S/2019/171

Annex 66: Company information for entities registered with the Russian translation for
GENCO (‘ZENKO’) and are owned—in whole or in part—by DPRK nationals, and have
received authorization to employ DPRK nationals
Company
name
LLC
“ZENKO”
(ООО
"ЗЕНКО")

LLC
“ZENKO15”
(ООО
"ЗЕНКО15")

LLC
“ZENKO39”
(ООО
"ЗЕНКО39")

LLC
“ZENKO21”
(ООО
"ЗЕНКО21")

288/379

Tax
identification
number
7204162965

2536133013

2308160794

2508064689

Registered
Address
24A
ulitsa
Svetlaya,
Tyumen,
Tyumenskaya
Oblast, Russia

Office 411, 1
ulitsa
Pionerskaya,
Vladivostok,
Primorski Krai,
Russia

2/1 ulitsa im
Bogdana
Khmelnitskogo,
Krasndar,
Krasnodarski
Krai, Russia

13A
ulitsa
Malinovskogo,
Nakhodka,
Primorski Krai,
Russia

Associated individuals

Contact information

Pak Gvan Min
(ПАК ГВАН МИН)
Role: director
Nationality: unknown
Tax identification number: 723020846617
Kim Gvan Ir
(КИМ ГВАН ИР)
Role: owner
Nationality: DPRK
Tax identification number: unknown
Kim Men Kho
(КИМ МЕН ХО)
Role: contact on job posting
Nationality: unknown
Tax identification number: unknown
Kim Sen Guk
(КИМ СЕН ГУК)
Role: director
Nationality: unknown
Tax identification number: 253614442780
Kim Tong O
(КИМ ТОНГ О)
Role: owner
Nationality: DPRK
Tax identification number: unknown
Pak Chen Sik
(ПАК ЧЕН СИК)
Role: contact on job posting
Nationality: unknown
Tax identification number unknown
Ryu Chkhun Ren
(РЮ ЧХУН РЁН)
Role: director
Nationality: unknown
Tax identification number: 231133389520
Chan Chin Men
(ЧАН ЧИН МЕН)
Role: co-owner
Nationality: DPRK
Tax identification number: unknown
Chen Gen Cher
(ЧЕН ГЕН ЧЕР)
Role: co-owner
Nationality: DPRK
Tax identification number: unknown
Kan Sen Kho
(КАН СЕН ХО)
Role: director
Nationality: unknown
Tax identification number: 250821723134
Kim Sen Khvan
(КИМ СЕН ХВАН)
Role: co-owner
Nationality: DPRK

Telephone numbers
+7 (345) 2757212
+7 (345) 2297166
+7 (345) 2699249
+7 (982) 9477543
Email addresses
genco-37@list.ru
4bkb@bk.ru

Telephone numbers
+7 (914) 7350156
+7 (423) 2762279
+7 (423) 2716707
Email addresses
pa.stroy@mail.ru
e.gutman@vdc.ru

Telephone numbers
+7 (861) 5866425
+7 (861) 8862992
+7 (905) 4953597
+7 (961) 5866425
+7 (918) 1383996
Email addresses
genco39@mail.ru

Telephone numbers
+7 (423) 6642332
+7 (902) 0606907
+7 (4236) 712327
Email addresses
zerou333@gmail.com

19-01704

S/2019/171

Tax identification number: unknown
Kim Cher Min
(КИМ ЧЕР МИН)
Role: co-owner
Nationality: DPRK
Tax identification number: unknown
Li Syn Ir
(ЛИ СЫН ИР)
Role: co-owner
Nationality: DPRK
Tax identification number: unknown

Source: Unified State Register of Legal Entities; SPARK; Trudvsem

19-01704

289/379

S/2019/171

Annex 67: Documents showing LLC “ZENKO”, LLC “ZENKO-15”, LLC “ZENKO-39”,
and LLC “ZENKO-21” to be owned by DPRK nationals

Source: SPARK, https://spark-interfax.ru/
290/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Source: SPARK, https://spark-interfax.ru/

19-01704

291/379

S/2019/171

Source: SPARK, https://spark-interfax.ru/
292/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Source: SPARK, https://spark-interfax.ru/

19-01704

293/379

S/2019/171

Annex 68: Authorizations to hire DPRK laborers awarded to LLC “ZENKO”, LLC
“ZENKO-15”, LLC “ZENKO-39”, and LLC “ZENKO-21” in 2018
Number of foreign
workers

Country
code

Korea,
Democratic
People’s
Republic

Source: Russian Ministry of Labor, https://rosmintrud.ru/docs/mintrud/orders/1330

Source: Russian Ministry of Labor, https://rosmintrud.ru/docs/mintrud/orders/1330

Source: Russian Ministry of Labor, https://rosmintrud.ru/docs/mintrud/orders/1330

294/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Source: Russian Ministry of Labor, https://rosmintrud.ru/docs/mintrud/orders/1330

19-01704

295/379

S/2019/171

Annex 69: Online Glocom advertisements in 2018 (Twitter and Glocom website)

Tweet from 16 December 2018. Accessed on 10 January 2019 at
https://twitter.com/GlocomSupport/status/1074529145629986818
Archived version available at:
https://web.archive.org/save/https://twitter.com/GlocomSupport/status/1074529145629986818

Tweet from 7 September 2018. Accessed at
https://twitter.com/GlocomSupport/status/1038305737338847237 on 10 January 2019.
Archived version available at
https://web.archive.org/web/20190110205253/https://twitter.com/GlocomSupport/status/10383
05737338847237

296/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Accessed at http://www.glocom-corp.com/2018/ on 13 January 2019

Tweet from 6 June 2018. Accessed at
https://twitter.com/GlocomSupport/status/1004600845034389504 on 10 January 2019.
Archived version at
https://web.archive.org/save/https://twitter.com/GlocomSupport/status/1004600845034389504

19-01704

297/379

S/2019/171

Tweet from 6 June 2018. Accessed at https://twitter.com/GlocomSupport/status/1007416970894028800 on
10 January 2019. Archived version at
https://web.archive.org/save/https://twitter.com/GlocomSupport/status/1007416970894028800

298/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

19-01704

299/379

S/2019/171

Source: @GlocomSupport twitter feed

300/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 70: Advertisement for GR-611 Secure Personal Radio”, the “GR-8600M”

Source: Pinterest https://www.pinterest.ca/pin/594404850793634523/

19-01704

301/379

S/2019/171

Annex 71: Information on shared addresses between Li Zhengang’s company, Dandong
Zhongrui Petrochemical Co., Ltd., an individual and an entity previously identified in
association to DPRK shipping activities which have violated the resolutions
On Chinese business registry filings, Dandong Zhongrui Petrochemical Co., Ltd. lists the same
registered address as a second Chinese company Dandong Jingao Trading Co., Ltd. (丹东京奥贸
易有限公司). Until 14 March 2017, a Hong Kong-registered company Jingao Dalin Trading Co., Ltd.
(京奧達林貿易有限公司) used an identical English and Chinese name to Dandong Jingao Trading Co.,
Ltd. The Hong Kong-registered company lists one and the same director and shareholder, Sun
Chengguo (孫成國; simplified 孙成国), whose name is identical to that of the legal representative of
Dandong Jingao Trading Co., Ltd.
On Hong Kong registry documents of Jingao Dalin Trading Co., Ltd, Sun Chengguo lists a residential
address at Room 916, DL1504, Youhao Building, 158 Youhao Road, Zhongshan District, Dalian, China.
Sun Chengguo’s residential address is nearly identical to that of at least one other Chinese national
whom the Panel has previously identified in association with illicit DPRK shipping operations:
PAN WEICHAO (潘衛朝) lists Room 916, DL, Youhao Building, 158 Youhao Road, Zhongshan
District, Dalian, China, on the 2016 Annual Return for Pantech Shipping Limited (泛科海運有限
公司). The Panel noted in S/2017/150 paragraph 67 footnote 74 that PAN WEICHAO acted as an
emergency contact for K-Brothers—the Marshall Islands-based operator of the Jie Shun (IMO
8518780).
In addition, this same address: Room 916, DL1504, Youhao Building, 158 Youhao Road, Zhongshan
District, Dalian, China is also the address listed for a United Nations designated entity, Chang An
Shipping & Technology Ltd ((長安海運技術有限公司) in the Hong Kong business registry
Ship ownership records indicate that Chang An Shipping & Technology Limited was the ship manager,
commercial
manager,
and
registered
owner
of
the
Hua
Fu
(IMO 90200003). The director of the company is GU BAOFU (顧寶富). Both Chang An Shipping &
Technology Limited and the Hua Fu were designated by the 1718 Committee on 30 March 2018.185
Source: Corporate Registry documents of Hong Kong and China mainland

__________________
Security Council 1718 Sanctions Committee Adds 22 Entries to Its Sanctions List , Designates 27 Vessels, UN Press Release, 30 March
2018, https://www.un.org/press/en/2018/sc13272.doc.htm
185

302/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 72: Panel findings in OCN / T Specialist case investigation since 2018 Panel final
report (S/2018/171, paras 179-188)
OCN previously stated to the Panel that it stopped shipping products to the DPRK as of late 2012,
shifting its business into China in 2013 through Wang Zhi Guo and his company, Pinnacle Offshore
Trading. OCN also said that it shipped goods to Dalian as the destination port for distribution in China
and had “no knowledge of the authenticity of the sale of goods in DPRK as included in your letter and
no knowledge of how any such goods ended up in DPRK.” However, when pressed on the business
justification for shifting its sales to China of the same goods previously sold in the DPRK (including
Singapore-distributed items made by Yamaha, Seiko, Montblanc and the like, which all have
distributors in China), OCN admitted prior knowledge that the DPRK was the ultimate destination of
their goods, stating “ T Specialist International (S) Pte Ltd would sell the goods to China via the buyer
of the goods, Longsheng Weida. The buyers in China at the Chinese customs will approve the goods
before receiving them and allowing them to be transshipped to DPRK. Before the good were sent out,
the Chinese parties will do the clearance of the goods. Our Client do not receive the receipts of the
transactions between the Chinese parties to DPRK.”
The company provided the Panel with multiple invoices for sales to Tianjin Longshengweida Import &
Export Co, Ltd and Changzhou Jesinson Trading Co., both of which appear to be international freight
forwarding companies. The Panel also launched an investigation into the role of the German company
Mülller + Partner in the provision of logistics for the above-mentioned companies, but still has not
received answers to its inquiries dating from December 2017.
With regard to the T Specialist-owned and distributed brands, Fresh F and Watari, which have been on
sale in the DPRK Bugsae / Pothonggang Ryugyong stores through at least July 2017, T Specialist stated:
“It is prudent to note that the said products were originally also intended to be shipped and sold to
Cyprus. However, these products were not saleable in Cyprus, hence, our Chinese counterparty
suggested that we sell the products in DPRK.”
OCN-Pyongyang manager simultaneously employed by OCN Singapore
OCN Singapore’s relationship with Ri Ik dates back to his first visit to Singapore in 1991, at which time
he was employed as a trading manager by the original Bugsae Shop. According to OCN, around 2004,
Ri lk was made an employee of OCN Singapore to “assist in the sale of products to the DPRK”. OCN
has not provided his full terms of reference as requested by the Panel, stating that they are under the
custody of Singapore investigative agencies. 186 OCN did however admit that Ri Ik had remained
employed throughout most of 2017, providing a copy of the revocation dated 29 January 2018 of his
Singaporean employment pass. Regarding the Panel’s request for salary information, OCN stated: “Mr.
Ri Ik did not draw a salary, and the value of his work done was used to off-set the sums that were due
and payable to our Clients.” OCN/ T Specialist Singapore stated that it had no control or interests in
OCN Pyongyang, despite the fact that it was under the full control of one of its long-term employees
and to which it sold a substantial amount of goods. The way in which OCN Pyongyang operated
relatively independently of OCN Singapore is common DPRK practice as already seen in the Panel’s
investigation of Pan Systems Singapore and Pan Systems Pyongyang.
__________________

OCN stated, “Our Clients also do not have in their power, custody and/or possession, any "contract" or "communications,
contracts, agreements and other forms of documentation with Ri'. The said documents, if any, have been under the custody of the
investigation agencies in Singapore since 6 December 2017, and our Clients do not have copies of it, and are not able to provide
you of the same.”
186

19-01704

303/379

S/2019/171

The Panel notes, however, that Ri Ik would not have been able to set up a foreign currency account in
Pyongyang without OCN Singapore’s paperwork and tacit consent. Indeed, OCN Singapore ensured
that the daily transactions of the account were fully managed by Ri Ik so that it could ensure plausible
deniability. Ri Ik used that account to transfer payments back to OCN Singapore for items sold in the
DPRK. Given the difficulty of any DPRK banks to engage in open global transactions, at least eight
Hong Kong-based front companies transferred the payments into OCN Singapore’s account in
Singapore, including the following: Pan Ocean Investments, Hongdae International, Yun King
International, Albion Commercial Ventures, Highweal Trading, Headsoon Trading, Sama Industrial, and
Heping Industrial. The Panel notes that the use of multiple front companies to pay for the purchase of
its goods and the break-down of payments into several series of smaller transactions, as done in this
case, are well-known sanctions evasion tactic.

304/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 73 Information provided to the Panel by Singapore on Wang Zhi Guo (王志国) and Li
Ik (aka Ri Ik).
A.

Wang Zhi Guo

China Passport Number:
Date of Birth:
Date of expiry:
Place of issue:

E2548653
11 July 1962
10 September 2023
Tianjin, China

Current Address and Status in Singapore
• Wang Zhiguo is a Singapore Permanent Resident. His address is 500F Marine Parade Road,
#04-23, Singapore 449289. He is currently in Singapore.
• Wang Zhiguo is a Chinese national and Singapore Permanent Resident (SPR). Wang was first
issued an Employment Pass in 1995 and obtained his SPR on 14 February 2003. His Re-Entry
Permit is valid until 19 July 2022.
Dates moved to Singapore
• Wang Zhiguo was first issued a Singapore Employment Pass in 1995.
Travel
• Wang Zhiguo is currently in Singapore.
• Our authorities have impounded Wang Zhiguo’s passport since 6 December 2018

19-01704

305/379

S/2019/171

B.

Li Ik (aka Ri Ik)

Date of Birth:
DPRK Passport No.
Expiry:

11 February 1963
745420357
11 November 2020

Current Address and Status in Singapore
• Li Ik departed Singapore on 8 June 2017 and has not returned since. Li Ik’s Employment Pass
was revoked in January 2018. Li Ik is not a Singapore Permanent Resident.
• Before his pass was revoked, his job title had been “Regional Business Development
Manager” for OCN (Singapore) Ltd
• Li Ik first obtained his Singapore Employment Pass on 12 April 2004.
• The Singaporean authorities informed the Panel that they do not have Li Ik’s employment
contracts and/or assigned tasks.. His annual salary package from 2012 to 2015 was between
S$92,462.75 to S$113,384.19.
Travel
• According to travel records, Li Ik traveled in and out of Singapore frequently over the past
five years (in some years averaging one trip per month).
• Li Ik departed Singapore on 8 June 2017 and Singapore has not received any visa application
from him to re-enter the country. All DPRK nationals require a visa to enter Singapore.
Singapore informed the Panel that it does not have knowledge of Li Ik’s whereabouts since
then.
Personal details for Mr. Li Ik provided to obtain his Singapore Employment Pass:
I. Education Certificates at all levels
1) Sep. 1969 -Aug 1973 Pyongyang Sanghung Primary School
2) Sep. 1973 - Aug 1979 Pyongyang Jangsan Senior Middle Schoo
306/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

3)
4)

Sep 1979-Aug 1981 Serve in the Korean Peoples Army
Sep 1981-Nov 1986 Kim 11 Song's University D.P.R. of Korea

2. Curriculum Vitae (CV) of working experiences from time after leaving school
1)
2)
3)
4)

Dec 1986 -Dec 1990. Manager of Daesong General Corporation D.P.R. of Korea
Jan 1991 -Apr 1992 Manager of Korea Asia Trading Company
May 1992-Jul 1994 Section Chief Manager of Korea Duty-free Company
Aug 1994 - Chief Manager of OCN (Singapore) PTE LTD Pyongyang Office

3. Home address
Potonggang-dong 27, 3-2, Potonggang District Pyongyang D.P.R. of Korea
4. Passport number: S 190220613
Date of Birth: ll-Feb-1963
Country of issue: D.P.R. of Korea
Place of issue: Ministry of Foreign Affairs D.P.R. of Korea
Date of issue: 28-Apr-2000
Expiry date: 5 years (28-Apr-2005)
5.

Religion - Atheist

Married to: Ms Ju Myong Suk
Date of Birth: 7 Dec 1963
Source: Member State

19-01704

307/379

Argentina
Argentina indicated to the Panel that searches for the firm Sonbong-Promotra JV Co. yielded no positive data in their search of
financial databases nor any additional data on any links between the firm and Argentina. Argentina also stated that no nationals
of the DPRK have been registered since 2004 as migrant workers.
Source: Member State

Australia
In its reply to the Panel ‘s letter on Sonbong Kost J.V. Company (a.k.a Samhung Kost J.V. Company, Sam Hung KOAST Joint
Venture Pyongyang, 선봉코스트합영회사 , Australia cooperated with the Panel by providing detailed information on the
company’s operational status, current officers, business activities, bank account information in an Asian countr y, ownership, and
business history. Australia also informed the Panel that it was investigating the matter and provided the Panel with its detailed
confidential initial findings. It further stated that it places the highest priority on implementing UNSC resolutions, and takes
appropriate action to respond to potential breaches of sanctions. It further clarified that pursuant to UN Security Council sanctions,
Australian law prohibits the establishment, maintenance, or operation of a joint venture or cooperative entity (however described)
with a DPRK person or entity, a person or entity acting on behalf of or at the direction of a DPRK person or entity, or an en tity
owned or controlled by a DPRK person or entity. Australia also indicated that it was assessing whether available information
suggests that any of the funds, financial assets and economic resources of Koast Group Pty Ltd are owned or controlled. direc tly
or indirectly, by designated individuals or entities; or the Government of the DPRK or the Work ers Party of Korea.
Source: Corporate registry, Member State

S/2019/171

308/379

Annex 74 Cooperative entities and joint ventures and other companies investigated by the Panel: Argentina, Australia,
Cambodia, China, Japan, Laos, Malaysia, Malta, Poland, the Russian Federation, Singapore, Thailand, Uganda, Vietnam
and Zambia

19-01704

19-01704

Cambodia
Business name (Eng)
Pyongyang (Koryo)
Restaurant / Pyongyang
Traditional Restaurant
Pyongyang Arirang
Restaurant
Pyongyang Unhasu
Restaurant

Location
400 Preah Monivong Blvd (93), Phnom Penh, Cambodia
215, 32 Jawaharlal Nehru Blvd (215), Phnom Penh, Cambodia
#10A, Street 315, Sangkat Beung Kok I,Khan Toulkork, Phnom Penh,Cambodia,
Phnom Penh 12000, Cambodia In addition to providing food services, this company is
also registered as engaged in “other financial service activities, except insurance and
pension funding activities,” in addition to various other activities that are unusual for a
restaurant to be engaged in.

Source: Open source information

China
English Name
Dae Dong Gang North
Korean Cuisine
Pyongyang Hae Dang
Hwa - Landao Branch
Pyongyang Mo Ran
Bong - Yizhuang Branch
Pyongyang Rungrado Baofusi Branch
Sin Dae Jong Kim Gang
Won Restaurant and
Performance Hall
Pyongyang Restaurant
Mo Ran Bong North
Korea Performance Hotel

Eng Address

Beijing

North Tucheng East Road, Yuan Dadu Heritage Park, No. 6

Beijing

Chaoyang Menwai Dajie 12, Kunming Mall 2 (Landao Building West)

Beijing
Beijing

Yizhuang Economic and Technological Development Zone, Ronghua Road 10,
Yicheng International Center Q102
Zhongguancun Baofusi Bridge 81 (opposite of the Institute of Computing and
Technology)

Beijing

1st Floor, Xinzhai Hotel, No.58 Maidian Street

Changchun

Intersection of Liberty Road and Linhe Street

Dalian

Xinghai Square, Area E, 46

Dalian

No.94 Xinglin Street, Zhongshan District, Dalian 116001, China

S/2019/171

309/379

Pyongyang Restaurant

City

19-01704

Dandong

Building 2 198 Donggang S Rd, Donggang Shi, Dandong Shi, Liaoning Sheng,
China, 118300

Dandong

Binjiang Middle Rd, Zhenxing Qu, Dandong Shi, Liaoning Sheng, China

Dandong

8th Latitude Rd, Zhenxing Qu, Dandong Shi, Liaoning Sheng, China, 118000

Dandong
Dandong

1-2F, Jiadi Plaza, Binjiang Middle Road
No.98 Jinjiang Street

Harbin

202 Gogol Street, Harbin, China

Hohhot

Xing'an North Road, Caoyuan City

Hohhot

Olympic Hotel, Floor 2

Kunming

Luyou Dujia Qu, Xigong Matou 2 Dong

Nanchang

1515 Nanjing East Road, Aixi Lake

Qinhuangdao

Yingbin Road 298, Haigang District, Qinhuangdao, Hebei, China

Shanghai

GuBei Road 1088 2 Floor, Shanghai, China

Shanghai

1050 Wuzhong Rd, Minhang Qu, Shanghai Shi, China, 201103

Shanghai

First Floor 357 Songlin Rd, Pudong Xinqu, Shanghai Shi, China, 200000

Shanghai

555 Caoyang Rd, Putuo Qu, Shanghai Shi, China, 200063

Shanghai

439 Caoxi N Rd, XuJiaHui, Xuhui Qu, Shanghai Shi, China, 200000

Shanghai
Shenyang

3rd Floor, Western District, Binggu Cultural Leisure Plaza, 341 Tianshan Road
No.79-81 Shiyiwei Road, Helping District, Shenyang 110003, China

S/2019/171

310/379

Pyongyang Jindal Chae
Restaurant
Pyongyang Koryo
Restaurant
Pyongyang Koryo
Restaurant
Liujing Hotel
Xin'an Dongge Hotel
Pyongyang Koryo
Restaurant
Pyongyang Mo Ran
Bong - Altay Branch
Pyongyang Seol Kyung
Restaurant
Jindal North Korean
Restaurant
Pyongyang North Korean
Restaurant
Myo Hyang San
Restaurant
Pyongyang Koryo
Restaurant -- Gu North
Road
Pyongyang Arirang
Pyongyang Koryo
Restaurant - Tongmao
Branch
Pyongyang Myo Hyang
Restaurant - Putuo
Branch
Pyongyang Oak Ryu
Restaurant
Pyongyang Restaurant
Chilbosan Hotel

19-01704

Pyongyang Dong Myo
Hyang San
Pyongyang Friendship
Dongmyung Restaurant
Pyongyang Mo Ran
Bong Hotel

Shenyang

85 Tumen Road, Shenyang, China

Shenyang

Antu St, XiTa HanGuo FengQing Jie, Heping Qu, Shenyang Shi, Liaoning Sheng,
China, 110000

Shenyang

43 Harbin Road, Shenyang, China

Pyongyang Restaurant

Shenyang

Moranbong
You Kyung Kim Dal
Chae
North Korea Pyongyang
Eun Ban Restaurant

Shenyang
Shijiazhuang
Taiyuan

106 Shifu Rd, XiTa HanGuo FengQing Jie, Heping Qu, Shenyang Shi, Liaoning
Sheng, China, 110002
93 Xita Road
ChangAn District GuangAn Main Street 16, MeiDong International 2
Floor, Shijiazhuang, China
Binhe Donglu and Xuefu Street, Shizi Southwest Corner, Luohe Park, No. 2
Parking Lot

Hongqing Hotel Hongqiao Branch

Wuxi

889 Hongqiao Road (Shenzhou Building)

Liujing Hotel

Yanji

124 Xinxing St, Yanji Shi, Yanbian Chaoxianzuzizhizhou, Jilin Sheng, China,
133000

Source: The Panel, Member State, open source research

MINISO
The Panel also investigated a possible joint venture between a Hong Kong company and a DPRK company which
operates a commodity chain in Pyongyang.187 In May 2018, the company stated that Chinese Headquarters of MINISO was
in charge of the international business partnership, and that the products sold to the DPRK were made in China. MINISO
further stated that the international agency contract to open the Pyongyang branch was agreed between MINISO International
Hong Kong Limited and “Korea Jinhwa joint corporation”188 represented by a DPRK national Nam Song Il189, but that contract
was terminated on 15 August 2017. Supporting documents were provided. While MINISO claimed that products stopped
being supplied in May 2017, the Panel obtained information that as of July 2018, the shop is still open with the original
MINISO interior, but with the label “Jinhwa”, and products of several foreign brands have been sold. The Panel requested

311/379

S/2019/171

__________________
See S/2018/171 para. 147
188
Original name shown in the documents is “朝鲜进化合作会社”
189
Chinese character:南誠一, A.k.a Nan Chengyi. DPRK Passport Number: PO 836337346. DOB 22 January 1955.
187

(Figure) MINISO brand displayed in Pyongyang branch in April 2018

Source: NK Pro
Source: The Panel, open source

Japan
Japan replied “So far [the Government of Japan] “could not confirm any information that indicates the joint ventures and
cooperative entities pointed out by the Panel exist or currently operate in Japan, or information that shows relationships between
the partner companies identified by the Panel and the North Korean joint ventures. ” Japan also stated that it went further by
prohibiting all exports to and imports from the DPRK and transactions with the DPRK.
Source: Member State

Laos
Business name (Eng.)
Representative Office of
Korea Dongyang 5 Trading
Corporation
Representative Office of SK
Architect and Construction
Pyongyang Friendship
Restaurant

Owner
Ms. SOWON
SOOB

Manager
Mr. SOWON
SOOB

Business type
Investment Analyst on road, bridge, irrigation
construction and trade

Mr. CIIIM
CHAE JOON
Ms. WANG
ANHULI

Mr. CIIIM CHAE
JOON
Ms WANG
ANHULI

Investment analyst on hydro power
Restaurant

S/2019/171

312/379

information but has yet to receive a reply from the companies (figure). The Panel recommends that the relevant Member State
comply with paragraph 18 of resolution 2375 (2017).

19-01704

19-01704

Korea K Choeng Bong
Trading Corporation
Western Restaurant
Better Life Tomorrow Lao
Ltd. Co

Mr.
CHANGSONG
KIM
Mr. BONGJO
YUN
Mr. Jaekook Sin

Mr. CHANSONG
KIM

Program design consultant

M R. BONGJO
YUN

Restaurant
Pharmaceutical

Source: Member State, open source

Malaysia
Business Name

Number

Address

MKP
BUILDERS
SDN. BHD

386207P

MKP CAPITAL
LLC BERHAD

980801M

2-3-11 (3rd Floor)Menara Klh Business
Centre 2,
Jalan Kasipillay,
Off Jalan Sultan Azlan Shahkuala
Lumpurwilayah Persekutuan
Lot 5, Jalan 1kawasan Perusahaan Cheras
Jayabatu 11 cheras, selangor
24-B Jalan Landakoff Jalan Pudu Kuala
Lumpur, Wilayah Persekutuan

MKP
DYNAMIC
ENGINEERING
SDN. BHD

735910W

2-3-11 (3rd Floor) Menara Klh Business
Centre 2 jalan Kasipillay, Off Jalan Sultan
Azlan Shah Kuala Lumpur, wilayah
Persekutuan
Lot 5, Jalan 1 Kawasan Perusahaan
Cheras Jayabatu 11, Batu 9 Cheras
Selangor

Shareholders

Start

Fang Chee
Peng;
Yong Kok
Yeap; Han
Hun Il

Yong Kok Yeap

6 May 1996

Han Hun Il;
Yong Kok
Yeap;
Karnail Singh
Nijhar Tansri
Dato'dr Amar
Singh;
Fang Chee
Peng;
Yong Kok
Yeap;
Muhammad
Danial Bin
Osman;

Yong Kok Yeap;
Han Hun Il

2 March 2012

Karnail Singh
Nijhar Amar
Singh, Tansri
Dato'dr;
Yong Kok Yeap;
Soh Pui Hoon;
Han Hun Il;
Ramanan
Ramakrishnan

31 May 2006

313/379

S/2019/171

Directors

464492W

Nekad Ziplem
SDN. BHD

614359U

2-3-11 (3rd Floor) Menara Klh Business
Centre 2 jalan Kasipillay,
Off Jalan Sultan Azlan Shah
Kuala Lumpur,
Wilayah Persekutuan
Lot 5, Jalan 1 kaw. Perusahaan Cheras
Jayabatu 11 batu 9 Cheras Selangor
52 a, Jalan Landak
off Jalan Pudu
Kuala Lumpur, Wilayah Persekutuan
C/O Lot 5, Jalan 1 kawasan Perindustrian
Cheras Jayabatu 11, Batu 9 Cheras
Selangor)

Yong Kok
Yeap;
Han Hun Il;

Yong Kok Yeap;
Han Hun Il

23 June 1998

Han Hun Il;

Jusoh Bin
Awang;
Yong Kok Yeap;
Han Hun Il;
Sumairi Bin
Hashim

7 May 2003

Yong Kok
Yeap;

Source: Corporate registry, open source information

Malta
According to open source information, Kormal Import and Export Company was founded 17 November 2011. "C 54431" is its
corporate registration number. Kormal does not appear to have a website or a public profile beyond its appearance in various
corporate registry databases. It is an "active" corporation according to Open Corporates and Malta's Registry of Companies.
According to Malta's Registry of Companies and it has filed documents as recently as 2 March 2018.
• In Malta's Registry of Companies the Director of the company is Song Hui Song, with the registered address in the DPRK.
According to the registry she is the sole shareholder. Kormal's secretary, Kuk Chol Jo, has the same registered DPRK
address as Song Hui Song. The company’s corporate registry documents list its auditor as a non-DPRK foreign national,
however it is unclear whether a Maltese auditor’s involvement would qualify this entity as a JV.
•

According to documents on Malta's Registry of Companies, Kormal has been filing documents regularly since its inception
in 2011 except for a two-year period directly after its inception until 2013. Its most recent documents are from 2 March
2018.

Source: Corporate registry and open source information

S/2019/171

314/379

MKP
HOLDINGS
SDN. BHD

19-01704

19-01704

Poland
Business
name
Wonye
Sp. Z
o.o.

Name (other
languages)

Location
in DPRK

Name of partner
company
Ms. Cecylia
Kowalska

Redshiel
d Sp. Z
o. o.

DPRK nationals involved
& other info
Mr. Jo Chol Yong (DPRK
national) is President of the
Board, shareholder;
Mr. Kang Hong Gu, Vice
President of the Board
Mr. Pak Jong Ho,
President of the Board

Partner HQ location
Ul. Marynarki Polskiej 96,
80-557 Gdańsk, Poland

Ul. Stołczyńska 100 D,
71-869 Szczecin, Poland

Source: Corporate registry, Member State, open source information

S/2019/171

315/379

S/2019/171

Russian Federation
Russian Federation communication of 8 January 2019 stated the following

316/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Source: Member State

19-01704

317/379

S/2019/171

English Translation
We wish to inform you of the following in connection with the inquiry made by the Panel of Experts of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) concerning the activity
in Russia of joint ventures involving the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Paragraph 18 of Security Council resolution 2375 (2017) prohibits the operation of new, or the
maintenance of existing, joint ventures or cooperative entities involving the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. It is our understanding that under the resolution such organizational entities are legal
persons established through the joint contribution of resources by participants from different countries,
in this case Russia and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, who jointly manage the venture,
and share its profits and risks. Legal persons structured in this manner cannot exist under Russian law.
On that basis, we do not view the activities of the representative offices of North Korean
companies as being covered by the international sanctions regime for the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, since they are independent divisions of legally operating North Korean companies, situated
in a different location and representing solely the interests of those legal persons. Under article 55 of
the Civil Code of the Russian Federation, representative offices of foreign companies in Russia do not
have the status of legal persons, because they are allocated assets by the legal persons establishing them
and engage in activity as directed by those legal persons.
Furthermore, foreign representative offices in Russia are subject to special registration rules
with the national Chamber of Commerce, may not engage in commercial activity, earn no revenue and
pay no taxes, except on operating expenses, including for real estate. Therefore, they could not be a
source of funding for the prohibited nuclear or ballistic missile programmes of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, which the Security Council has sought to halt by imposing sanctions against that
country.
In view of the foregoing, we do not consider the activity in Russia of officially registered
representative offices of North Korean companies that have not been placed on the United Nations
Security Council sanctions list by the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006) to be in violation of paragraph 18 of Security Council resolution 2375 (2017).

318/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Similarly, in the case of Russian companies having a sole founder who is a citizen of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, such companies are registered strictly as Russian limited
liability companies, rather than joint ventures or cooperative entities, making them Russian legal
persons with all the legal consequences that follow therefrom. Such companies are not considered
subject to the restrictions imposed on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea by the Security
Council under paragraph 18 of Security Council resolution 2375 (2017) or under current Russian law.
We shall keep the Panel of Experts informed as queries received from the Panel of Experts
undergo the interagency review process and additional information becomes available.
In future, the Russian Federation would appreciate it if the Panel could follow established
practice by directing its queries to the Russian Permanent Mission, rather than to the private companies.
This is particularly important given that, in most cases, the company addresses indicated in the registries
are that of their registered offices, rather than their actual physical address, and letters sent to the former
address simply do not reach the addressees.

19-01704

319/379

There are no representative offices of DPRK entities in this list.
Name and Company
Tax Id

Location
Address

Names of DPRK
Nationals and/or
DPRK companies
involved

Other Nationals
Involved
Director is Russian
national xxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxx with
tax identification
number
xxxxxxxxxxx

19-01704

ООО "ПИОНЕР"
(LLC "PIONER")
Tax ID: 2502047408

12A ulitsa
Nevskaya,
Vladivosto
k, Russia,
690018

Owner is DPRK
national Kim Khe Son
(Ким Хе Сон) with tax
identification number
254300252564.

ООО
"ПРИМАГРОСОЯ"
(LLC
"PRIMAGROSOYA")
Tax ID: 2508110960

Office 3,
38V ulitsa
Pogranichn
aya,
Nakhodka,
Russia,
692922

Jointly owned by a
Russian company, LLC
"KNYAZHEVSKOE"
(tax identification
number 2506109736)
and a DPRK entity,
Korea Kumgang
General Corporation.

ООО
"САКОРЕНМА"
(LLC
"SAKORENMA")
Tax ID: 6501104474

8 ulitsa
Polevaya,
YuzhnoSakhalinsk
,

Co-owned by the Korea
General Corporation for
External Construction
(GENCO).

Director is Russian
national xxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
for it with tax
identification
number
xxxxxxxxxx
Co-owner and
director is Russian
national xxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
with tax

Additional info

Type of
Company

Registered to the
same address as the
DPRK Consulate
General in
Vladivostok.

Renting and
operating of real
estate;
construction;
operation of
restaurants and
bars in railway
cars and on
ships
Growing of
cereals (except
rice),
leguminous
crops and oil
seeds

Construction

S/2019/171

320/379

The Russian Federation provided the Panel with a list of companies which, after investigation, it found we re closed as of January
2019. Those companies have not been included in the list below regardless of their current status in the corporate registery or
whether they were in operation at some point in 2018. The list below does not include entities which cor porate registration
documents have listed as dissolved in 2018 including those that were in operation at some time in 2018. In the course of 2018,
four companies changed their registration to being only Russian-owned.

19-01704

Sakhalinsk
aya oblast,
Russia

ООО "ПОНХВА"
(LLC "PONKHVA")
Tax ID: 7701356953

Room 10,
Structure
3, 14 pl.
Spartakovs
kaya,
Moscow,
Russia,
105082

ООО "КОРУС БИОМЕД КО.ЛТД" (LLC
"KORUS BIO-MED
KO. LTD")
Tax ID: 7720737111

28 ulitsa
Moldagulo
voi,
Moscow,
Russia,
111538

identification
number
xxxxxxxxxxxx.

Construction

Non-specialized
wholesale trade

S/2019/171

321/379

Director is Russian
national xxxxxxxx
Owner is DPRK
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
national Zo Son Sim (Зо xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
Сон Сим), for whom a
xxxxxxxxxxx
tax identification
with tax
number is not specified. identification
number
xxxxxxxxxx.
Co-owners:
xxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
This company is
zzzzzzzzzzz
engaged in ‘unspecified
xxxxxxxx
wholesale trade’ and is
xxxxxxxxxxxxxx
co-owned by a DPRK
xxxxxxxxxxxx
company, Pugang
xxxxxxxxxxxxxx
Pharmaceutical
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Company, and three
xxxxxxxxx Their
Russian nationals.
tax identification
xxxxxxx are,
respectively,
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxx
Note: xxxxxxxx is

S/2019/171

322/379

also the company’s
director.

The company was
previously named
LLC “Cholsan”.
ООО
"ЗАБАЙКАЛИНВЕС
ТСТРОЙ" (LLC
"ZABAIKALINVEST
STROI")
Tax ID: 0326028065

32 proezd
Energostro
itelei,
Chita,
Russia,
672022

Owner is DPRK Li Yn
Sok (Ли Ын Сок) with
tax identification
number 753626113575.

19-01704

ООО "СК"РАЙ"
(LLC Construction
Company "RAI")
Tax ID: 1328002427

43 shosse
Aleksandr
ovskoe,
Saransk,
Russia,
430006

Co-owner is DPRK
national Kim Tkhe En
(Ким Тхэ Ен), for
whom a tax
identification number is
not specified.

ООО с
иностранными
инвестициями СП

94 ulitsa
Russkaya,
Vladivosto
k, Russia

This company is a joint
venture between the
DPRK Ministry of
Forestry and a Russian

Director is Russian
national xxxxxxxx
Xxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxx with
tax identification
number
xxxxxxxxxxxx.

Director is Russian
national xxxxxxxxx
Xxxxxxx
Xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Xxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxx)
with tax
identification
number is
xxxxxxxxxxxx.
Director is Russian
national xxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxx

The same directorowner team control
LLC “Chkholsan”
(ООО
"ЧХОЛСАН"; Tax
ID 7536112799)
and LLC
Construction
Company “RAI”
(ООО СК "РАЙ";
Tax ID
7536132178)

Construction

Construction

Silviculture

19-01704

"ТИСРИМОБ" (LLC
JV "TISRIMOB")
Tax ID: 2539069310

company, LLC "TIS",
whose tax identification
number is 2528004046.

xxxxxxxxxxxx with
tax identification
number
xxxxxxxxxx.

Owner is DPRK
national Kim Khe Son
(Ким Хе Сон), for
whom a tax
identification number is
not specified.

ООО "ПХЕНЬЯНМОРАНБОН" (LLC"
PKENYANMORANBON")
Tax ID: 2703086887

Room
1009, 15
prospekt
Pervostroit
elei,
Komsomol
sk-NaAmure,
Russia,
681003

This company's name is
a russification of
Pyongyang-Moranbong.
It is jointly owned by a
DPRK company
ostensibly called
Korean Trading
Company "Eighth of
March" and a Russian
company, LLC
“FOLANG”. The
Russian company’s tax

Director is Russian
national xxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
(xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxx), with
tax identification
number
xxxxxxxxxx.

Restaurants and
mobile food
service
activities

Restaurants and
mobile food
service
activities
S/2019/171

323/379

ООО "ОРЮН" (LLC
"ORYUN")
Tax ID: 2540176852

10 ulitsa
Krylova,
Vladivosto
k, Russia,
690014

Director is Russian
national xxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxx) with
tax identification
number
xxxxxxxxxx.

A DPRK restaurant
named Kymgansan
(Russian:
КымГанСан)
operates at the
address registered
to this company
(https://www.vl.ru/
kymgynsan).Open
source information
claims that its
workers are DPRK
nationals, from the
chef to the
waitresses to the
restaurant owners
(https://www.newsv
l.ru/vlad/2017/09/2
2/163230/).

S/2019/171

324/379

identification number is
2726008652.

ООО "МЁХЯН"
(LLC "MEKHYAN")
Tax ID: 4101167437

Apt. 58, 2
ulitsa
Tushkanov
a,
Petropavlo
vskKamchatsk
i, Russia,
683031

19-01704

ООО "АК-СТРОЙ"
(LLC "AK-STROI")
Tax ID: 4205255751

Room 6,
Structure
6A, ulitsa
Krasnoarm
eiskaya,
Kemerovo,
Russia,
650021

ООО "КАНСОНТЕКСТИЛЬ" (LLC
"KANSONTEKSTIL")
Tax ID: 5018186644

Office 9,
Floor 3, 34
prospekt
Zavodskoi,
Golitsyno,
raion
Odintsovsk
i, oblast
Moskovsk
aya,

Owner is DPRK
national Li San Cher
(Ли Сан Чер) with the
tax identification
number 410126524634.
Co-owner is DPRK
national Kim Sen Bok
(Ким Сен Бок) with tax
identification number
420555220832.
This construction
company is also coowned by a Russian
company, LLC
"ELEKTRONMAGAZIN", with tax
identification number
4205194474.

Owner is DPRK
national Sim Li Khyan
(Сим Ли Хян) with tax
identification number
502730623502.

Director is Russian
national xxxxxxx
Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
Xxxxxxxxxxxxx
Xxxxxxxxx)
with tax
identification
number
xxxxxxxxxx.

Director is Russian
national xxxxxx
Xxxxxxxxxxxxxx
Xxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxx)
with tax
identification
number
xxxxxxxxxx.

Director is Kim Son
Khi (Ким Сон Хи)
of an unspecified
nationality with tax
identification
number
xxxxxxxxxx.

‘MEKHYAN’ is the
Russian rendering
of Myohyang.

Restaurants and
mobile food
service
activities

Plastering

Manufacture of
outerwear

19-01704

Russia,
143041

ООО "СК "ДЭСОН"
(LLC Construction
Company "DESON")
Tax ID: 5027185855

8 ulitsa
Initsiativna
Co-owner is DPRK
ya,
national Kim Li Sen
Lyubertsy,
(Ким Ли Сен).
Russia,
140000

ООО СП
"РОСАЮМА" (LLC
"ROSAYUMA")
Tax ID: 6501253740

104 ulitsa
Tikhaya,
YuzhnoSakhalinsk
, Russia,
693005

ООО СП "ФИТОН"
(LLC JV "FITON")
Tax ID: 7536033674

7 ulitsa
Ugdanskay
a, Chita,

Site preparation

Director is Russian
national xxxxxxx
Xxxxxxxxxxxxxx
Xxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxx with
tax identification
number
xxxxxxxxxx.

Manufacture of
computers and
peripheral
equipment

Director is Russian
national xxxxxxxxx
Xxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxx with tax
identification
number
xxxxxxxxxx.

Sawmilling and
planing of wood

Director is Russian
national xxxxx
Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
x

Pharmaceutical
company

S/2019/171

325/379

ООО "ЭМА" (LLC
"EMA")
Tax ID: 6501196130

57 ulitsa
Kryukova
D.N.,
YuzhnoSakhalinsk
, Russia,
693020

Jointly owned by a
DPRK entity, Korea
Aprokgang Technical
Development
Corporation and a
Russian company, LLC
Private Security
Company “FINEKOROSA-2” with the tax
identification number
6501160630.
Jointly owned by the
Russian company, LLC
“YUVESTA
KOMPANI” with the
tax identification
number 6501151347
and a DPRK entity,
Korea Paekma Trading
Corporation.
This company is
formally registered as a
joint venture. Its DPRK
shareholder’s name,

Co-owner and
director is Russian
national xxxxxx
Xxxxxxxxxx
Xxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxx with tax
identification
number
xxxxxxxxxx.

ООО "ЧХОЛСАН"
(LLC
"CHKHOLSAN")
Tax ID: 7536112799

32 proezd
Energostro
itelei,
Chita,
Russia,
672022

translated from Russian,
is roughly ‘Management
for the Manufacturing
of Cortex Preparations’
(Russian:
УПРАВЛЕНИЕ ПО
ПРОИЗВОДСТВУ
КОРЕПРЕПАРАТОВ
МИНИСТЕРСТВА
ЗДРАВООХРАНЕНИЯ
КНДР).

Owner is DPRK Li Yn
Sok (Ли Ын Сок) with
tax identification
number 753626113575.

S/2019/171

326/379

Russia,
672000

Xxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxx) with
tax identification
number
xxxxxxxxxx.
The Russian
shareholders are the
Zabaikalskaya
Kraya Department
of State Property
and Land Issues
(tax identification
number
xxxxxxxxxx) and
Russian national
xxxxxxxxxxx
Xxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxx)
with tax
identification
number
xxxxxxxxxx.
Director is Russian
national xxxxxxxxx
Xxxxxxxxxxxxxx
Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxx with
tax identification
number
xxxxxxxxxx.

Construction

19-01704

19-01704

ООО СК "РАЙ" (LLC
Construction
Company "RAI")
Tax ID: 7536132178

Room 4,
132 ulitsa
Chkalova,
Chita,
Russia,
672039

Owner is DPRK Li Yn
Sok (Ли Ын Сок) with
tax identification
number 753626113575.

ООО "РКК ФАРТ"
(LLC "RKK FART"
Tax ID: 3808221510

17
Aleksandra
Nevskogo
ulitsa,
Irkutsk,
Russia,
664047

Owner is DPRK
national Lee Chong
Nam (Ли Чен Нам), for
whom a tax
identification number is
not specified.

Director is Russian
national xxxxxxxxx
Xxxxxxxxxxxxxx
Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxx) with
tax identification
number
xxxxxxxxxx.
Director is Russian
national xxxxxxxxx
Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
x
Xxxxxxxx
Xxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxx with
tax identification
number
xxxxxxxxxx.

Construction

According to open
source reporting,
RKK Fart" LLC "
owns Korean
restaurant
"Pyongyang" at the
same address in
Irkutsk.

Restaurants and
mobile food
service
activities

On 21 January 2019, the Russian Federation requested the Panel not to publish information about companies still bei ng
investigated on the basis of the requests from the Panel, as this could violate the confidentiality of the ongoing investigat ions and
adversely affect their outcome.

S/2019/171

327/379

Location in
DPRK/Russia

Name of Partner Company
where applicable

Koryo Restaurant

Ресторан
«Корё»

Moscow

-

Pyongyang Restaurant

Ресторан
«Пхеньян»

Partner HQ /Restaurant
location
Ordzhonikidze Ulitsa, 11, bld.. 9, Moscow, Russia, 115419

Vladivostok

-

Ulitsa Verkhneportovaya,
68 В, Vladivostok, Primorsky
kray, Russia, 690003

Pyongyang Restaurant

Ресторан
«Пхеньян»

Irkutsk

ООО «РКК ФАРТ» (LLC
“RKK FART”),
Учредитель (owner) – Ли
Чен Нам (see Annex 1 and
3)

17 Aleksandra Nevskogo ul.,
Irkutsk, Irkutskaya oblast,
Russia, 664047

Rungrado Restaurant

Ресторан
«Рынрадо»

Moscow

-

Koryo Restaurant

Ресторан
«Корё»

Vladivostok

-

Rus'-Moran Restaurant

Ресторан
«РусьМоран»

Blagoveshchensk

-

Source: Official State Registration Data according to SPARK system, http://www.spark-interfax.ru/en;
Unified State Register of Legal Entities, https://egrul.nalog.ru

29/1 Lomonosovsky Prospekt,
Moscow, Russia, 119192
20 А Prospekt Ocean, District
"Center," Vladivostok,
Primorsky kray, Russia,
690091
Ulitsa Lenina, 108А,
Blagoveshchensk, Amurskaya
oblast, Russia, 675000

S/2019/171

328/379

Name (Eng)

Name
(Korean
and/or
original
script)

19-01704

S/2019/171

Singapore
Singapore informed the Panel that a Singapore company, Lucky Greenbird Pte. Ltd ’s joint
venture with Ryugyong Corporation “Taesong BAT” JV, the JV was terminated on 1 January
2018 and provided the termination notice to the Panel. 190 Singapore further stated, “Our checks
have not uncovered any evidence that its funds, financial assets, and economic resources are
owned or controlled by designated individuals or entities, the DPRK Government, the Worker's
Party of Korea, individuals or entities acting on behalf or at their direction, and/or entities owned
or controlled by them. If we find any evidence that Lucky Greenbird Pte Ltd, or any other enti ty,
has contravened the UNSCRs and/or our laws, we will not hesitate to take the necessary action.
As stated in our National Implementation Report for UNSCR 2397, there are no DPRK nationals
with work passes in Singapore. Singapore has revoked the work passes of all DPRK nationals
earning income in Singapore and will not grant new work passes to DPRK nationals.
Source: open source, Member State

Thailand
With regard to Star Joint Venture Company (aka Star JV a.k.a. Northeast Asia Telephone and
Telecommunications Co., Ltd. (NEAT &T)) it informed the Panel that Loxley Pacific Co., Ltd.
changed its name into Loxpac (Thailand) Co., Ltd. in 2013, that it had withdrawn its investment
in Loxpac (Thailand) Co., Ltd. in 2015 and that it had connection with NEAT&T. I t stated that
Loxpac (Thailand) Co., Ltd ceased all of its business in the DPRK, including its operation via
NEAT&T, since January 2018.
Source: Member State, open source

Name

Name
(Korean or
in original
script)

Pyongyang Okryu
Restaurant

ร้ านเพียงยอง
อ็อคริ ว

Name
of
Partner
Company
where
applicable
-

Partner
HQ/Restaurant
location
Between
Sukhumvit Soi
25-27, next to
Radisson Blu
hotel, Ekkamai
Rd., Bangkok,
Thailand

__________________

The termination notice dated 22 November 2017, a copy of which was provided to t he Panel, cited paragraph 18 of Security
Council resolution 2375 (2017) adopted on 11 September 2017.
190

19-01704

329/379

S/2019/171

Pyongyang
Haemaji
Restaurant
Mokran Korean
Restaurant

-

-

Magnolias
Pattaya
Boutique
Resort

83,
Soi
26
Sukumvit,
Khlongtoi,
Bangkok 10110,
Thailand
4/6 M.9
Maprachan
Reservoir,
Tambon
Pong,
Amphoe
Banglamung,
20150 Chonburi,
Thailand

Uganda
The Ugandan Government replied on 6 July 2018 to the Panel’s request for further information on
MKP’s operations in Uganda. It acknowledged having formed a joint venture between the National
Housing and Construction Company (NHCC) and MKP Builders SDN BHD, called NH-MKP Builders
Limited. As part of one project, the NHCC paid out $3,627,762 as an advanced payment to MKP
Builders. Uganda claims this business relationship ceased at the beginning of 2014, when it became
clear that MKP Builders SDN BHD was unable to complete the construction contract. The Ugandan
Government has since been involved in a series of ongoing lawsuits with MKP and its insurance
companies to recover the payment, and insists that it cannot dissolve MKP Builders SDN BHD or MKP
Capital Berhad while litigation continues.
Uganda’s reply also included information about Vidas Engineering Services Limited, which it
acknowledged having contracted to for several government-funded projects. However, it firmly denied
any relationship between the firm and MKP, citing Vidas’ company incorporation documents. Uganda
and Vidas did not provide an explanation for the appearance of the firm’s mailing address, registered
office address, email address and trading name on the corporate registry documents for MKP Capital
and MKP Builders in Uganda. The Panel notes that in order to mask DPRK connections, DPRK
companies commonly use foreign national facilitators to avoid putting its own nationals on
incorporation paperwork, leverages business contacts to facilitate the establishment of in-country
presences, and embeds within foreign firms. Uganda did not respond to the Panel’s inquiries pertaining
to its recent promotion of foreign investment opportunities in a high-value MKP Holdings project at the
Moroto Marble Mine.

330/379

19-01704

19-01704

No

Business
name
(Eng.)

Other names

1.

NH MKP
Builders
Ltd

MKP Builders
SDN

2.

MKP
Builders
San BHD

Vidas
Engineering
Services Co.
Limited

3.

MKP
Capital
Bernard Co.
Limited

Vidas
Engineering
Services Co.
Limited

Name of
partner
company
(where
applicable)
Ugandan
National
Housing &
Construction
Company Ltd.
Uganda’s
Ministry of
Water and
Environment ;
National
Housing and
Construction
Company
(NHCC)
National
Housing and
Construction
Company
(NHCC)

DPRK & Uganda nationals involved & other info

Choi Da Hwan (identified as Korean), Ms Jane Bilek Langoya,
Mhanmed A. Benomran (likely an alternate spelling of Muhamed A.
Banomaran) and Henry Majoh Mukisa.
Yong Kyong Kin, Ms Jane Lukonga Bilan and Mr. Muhamed A.
Banomaran, listed as Directors.

Yong Kyong and Edward Han are both listed as directors and
shareholders, with nationalities as Korean. Henry Mukisa and Asa
Mugenyi (both Ugandans), are also listed as directors and
shareholders.

Source: Corporate registry, open source

S/2019/171

331/379

S/2019/171

Vietnam
Koryo restaurant / formerly
Ryu Gyong Restaurant
(Nhà Hàng Ryu Gyong Triều Tiên;
조선 류경 식당)

Koryo restaurant

Binh
Nhuong
restaurant

(Pyongyang)

Ho Chi Minh City
Registered As
CôNg Ty Tnhh ThưƠNg Mại Phan
Minh Fmc-V.N.

30 Le Quy Don, Ward 7, District 3,
Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam

Hanoi

No.61 Trung Hoa City, Trung Yen
Urban Area, Phuong Trung Hoa,
Cau Giang Paper, Hanoi

Hanoi

Previous Address: No.7, Lot 13b,
Trung Hoa City, Trung Yen Urban
Area, Phuong Trung Hoa, Cau
Giang Paper, Hanoi
No. 28, Nguyen Thi Dinh Street,
Tung Hoa Commune, Cau Giay
District, Ha Noi

Source: Member State, Corporate registry and open source

Zambia
See Annex 46 on MKP companies in Zambia. Zambia replied to the Panel that it had undertaken
a full investigation into the companies listed by the Panel and that it had confirmed that several
DPRK and Malaysian nationals were acting as directors in MKP Holdings, and that one of the
recommendations from Zambia’s investigation of the network was that authorities consider
repatriating DPRK nationals working in the country, in accordance with resolution 2397 (2017),
including a list of 13 DPRK nationals. It is unclear to the Panel whether this covers all of DPRK
nationals working in Zambia. 191
Source : Corporate registry, Member State

__________________
Yazid Merzouk informed the Panel that as of January 2018, there were s even DPRK nationals employed in MKP TMS Hospital alone,
with appropriate work permits duly issued by the Zambian Immigration authorities.
191

332/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 75 Information on economic activities being undertaken by ООО "ПИОНЕР"
(LLC "PIONER"), a JV owned by a DPRK national registered to the same address as the
DPRK consulate in Vladivostok, Russian Federation

Source: Official State Registration Data according to SPARK system, http://www.spark-interfax.ru/en

19-01704

333/379

S/2019/171

Name changes

Source: Official State Registration Data according to SPARK system, http://www.spark-interfax.ru/en

334/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Registry document for "ПИОНЕР" (LLC "PIONER") dated 13 August 2018

19-01704

335/379

S/2019/171

336/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Source: Unified State Register of Legal Entities, https://egrul.nalog.ru

19-01704

337/379

S/2019/171

Map data showing LLC PIONER address and DPRK Embassy in Vladivostock address
The below screenshot from the corporate registry document places PIONER’s location as the same as the DPRK
consulate in Vladivostok, shown on screenshots from Yandex maps. In all instances, the divide between the
consulate and the surrounding buildings is either noted on the map or visible from satellite imagery.
PIONER screenshot with location map from SPARK:

Source: SPARK, http://spark-interfax.ru
Screenshot from Yandex maps for 12A ulitsa Nevskaya, Vladivostok:

Source: Yandex maps, https://yandex.com/maps/

338/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Address of the DPRK consulate in Vladivostok

General Consulate of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea
Address: City of Vladivostok, ulitsa
Nevskaya, House 12 A

Source: Representation of the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Vladivostok, https://vladivostok.mid.ru/

19-01704

339/379

S/2019/171

Annex 76: Documents showing GENCO’s partial ownership of LLC “SAKORENMA”

Oblast Sakhalinskaya
City of Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk
Ulitsa Polevaya
8

340/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Surname: Son
Name: Chan Din
Tax ID: 650109975889

General Corporation for
Construction Abroad
“ZENKO” of the DPRK

19-01704

341/379

S/2019/171

Surname: Son
Name: Chan Din
Tax ID: 650109975889

Source: Unified State Register of Legal Entities, https://egrul.nalog.ru

342/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Registry documents of LLC “SAKORENMA”, partially owned by DPRK company GENCO (Korea
General Company for External Construction)

Source: OKVED / SPARK

19-01704

343/379

S/2019/171

Document showing nationality for Director of Sakorenma

Source: Unified State Register of Legal Entities, https://egrul.nalog.ru

344/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 77: Documents Information on LLC “SAKORENMA” name change

LLC “Joint Russian-Korean
Enterprise Sako Renma”

Source: SPARK, https://spark-interfax.ru/

19-01704

345/379

S/2019/171

Annex 78: Government contracts awarded to LLC “SAKORENMA”

Source: Unified Information System in the Sphere of Procurement, http://zakupki.gov.ru/

346/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Source: Unified Information System in the Sphere of Procurement, http://zakupki.gov.ru/

19-01704

347/379

S/2019/171

Source: Unified Information System in the Sphere of Procurement, http://zakupki.gov.ru/

348/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

2018 Government contracts awarded to Russian JV owned by the DPRK company, GENCO (Google
translated into English)
(Each contract has an embedded link to the official procurement website of the Russian Federation on which the
contracts are listed)

Source: https://www.rusprofile.ru/gz/2893948

19-01704

349/379

S/2019/171

Information on Government contracts from a Russian official business registry aggregator

Government
contracts: 39

Source: https://www.kartoteka.ru/card/6503378623b837e00e8ff4b9bc1f9b27/#path_M ain_Html

350/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 79: Bank details for LLC “SAKORENMA”

Limited Liability Corporation “Joint
Russian-Korean Enterprise SaKo
Renma”, Legal Address: 693000,
Russian Federation, Sakhalinskaya
Oblast, Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk,
Polevaya, 8; Telephone: 7 (4242)
776-539, fax: 7 (4242) 771-949, EMail: sakorenma@yandex.ru; Tax
ID/KPP: 6501104474/650101001;
Bank details: BIK: 040813713;
Checking account:
40702810908560002335;
Correspondent account:
30101810708130000713.

Source: Municipal Contract No. 027-003-18, accessed via Unified Information System in the Sphere of
Procurement, http://zakupki.gov.ru/

19-01704

351/379

S/2019/171

Annex 80: Yongbyon 5MW (e) Reactor and Light Water Reactor

352/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 81: Yongbyon Steam Plant

19-01704

353/379

S/2019/171

Annex 82: Punggye-ri Nuclear Test Site

354/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 83: Pyongsan Uranium Mine and Concentration Plant

19-01704

355/379

S/2019/171

Annex 84: Ballistic missile infrastructure and parade imagery
1.
The Panel identified a then newly-constructed concrete launch pad 192 used for the 29 August intermediate
range Hwasong-12 launch at Pyongyang Sunan International Airport (see figure I) It was built sometime after the
last available Planet Lab image of 12 August 2017 (left). Planet Lab imagery dated 2 September shows vegetation
burnt as a result of the 29 August launch (centre).
Figure I

Source: Images courtesy of Planet Labs, Inc
Figure II: Images showing the newly constructed launch pad at Pyongyang Sunan International Airport on
29 August 2017

Source: Korea Cemtral News Agency

__________________
192

Location of the launch pad: (39°15'40.96"N 125°40'32.79"E)

356/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

2.
A Member State confirmed the imagery analysis of the Panel concerning the partial dismantlement of Sohae
(Tongchang-ri) satellite rocket launch site 193 and of the vertical missile-engine test stand 194 (figure III).
Dismantlement may be reversed as only light or moveable parts, such as the metal superstructure, were dismantled.
Figure III

__________________
193

194

Location of the rocket launch pad: 39°39'36.22"N 124°42'19.27"E;
Location of the engine test stand: 39°39'11.32"N 124°42'51.30"E;

19-01704

357/379

S/2019/171

3.

The Panel monitored developments at the Hoejung-ni Missile Operating base and the railway station 195
Figure IV

__________________
195

Location of the underground facility: 41°21'56.17"N 126°55'42.32"E and rail station, 41°23'6.65"N 126°54'28.58"E

358/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

4.
A new type of short-range ballistic missile 196 was unveiled at the military parade of 8 February 2018
celebrating the seventieth anniversary of the founding of the Korean People ’s Army. Furthermore, the parading
of four Hwasong-15 missiles mounted on transporter erector launchers demonstrated the intercontinental strike
capability and the mobility of the weapon system (see figure V) as well as the three ICBM Hwasong-14. The 12
ballistic missile systems, consisting of six Pukguksong-2 and six Hwasong-12, were also displayed.
Figure V: New type of short-range ballistic missile (top left and right); Hwasong-15 (bottom)

Source: Korean Central Television screengrab, courtesy of Martyn Williams.

__________________
196

On 15 April 2017, military parade of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.

19-01704

359/379

S/2019/171

5.
A Member State informed the Panel that the Pukguksong-2 casing is built from a new composite casing
which was exhibited during a military parade and during a test launch of Pukguksong-2, as well as during the
23 August 2017 visit of Chairman Kim Jong Un to the Chemical Material Institu te (CMI) at Hamhung 197 :
Figure VI

Source: Member State - KCNA

__________________

Located at 39°57'27.01" N 127°33'22.88"E, in new building, 250 m to the east of the older CMI structures. The materials are
wound from composite fibers .
197

360/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Annex 85: The Panel’s assessment of humanitarian consequences of UN Security Council
sanctions for the civilian population of the DPRK
1.
Impartial humanitarian operations are a critical lifeline for millions of civilians in the Democratic People ’s
Republic of Korea. Severe humanitarian needs persist including high levels of food insecurity and malnutrition,
and lack of access to essential health services, clean water and sanitation. More than 40 per cent of the population
(10.3 million people) is undernourished 198 and one in five children is stunted. 199 Over nine million people have
limited access to essential health services. 200 A severe shortage of basic drugs persists. Over one-third of household
drinking water is contaminated. One in ten children suffers from diarrhea. 201
2.
According to paragraph 25 of resolution 2397 (2017), sanctions measures are “not intended to have adverse
humanitarian consequences for the civilian population of the DPRK ” or “to affect negatively the work of
international and non-governmental organizations carrying out assistance and relief activities in the DPRK for the
benefit of the civilian population of the DPRK”. To assess the situation, the Panel gathered information fro m various
sources including close to 20 non-governmental organizations and all UN agencies operating in the country on how
humanitarian operations have been affected by the process for applying for humanitarian exemptions, the sectoral
sanctions and the lack of a viable banking channel (annexes 86 and 87). The Panel notes that the implementation
of sectoral sanctions in particular has had an impact on the activities of international humanitarian agencies working
to address chronic humanitarian needs in the country.
3.
Pursuant to paragraph 25 of resolution 2397 (2017), the Committee has broad authority to grant exemptions
on a case-by-case basis, inter alia, to facilitate humanitarian assistance in the DPRK. To strengthen the mechanism
for humanitarian exemptions, in August 2018 the Committee adopted Implementation Assistance Notice (IAN) No.
7: “Guidelines for Obtaining Exemptions to Deliver Humanitarian Assistance to the DPRK”, offering
recommendations to Member States and international and non-governmental organizations regarding the exemption
request procedures. While the Committee received and reviewed exemption requests for humani tarian assistance
before the adoption of the IAN No. 7, its adoption was a welcome step towards streamlining and expediting the
processing of exemption requests, and raising expectations that this would significantly improve the Committee ’s
review and approval process for exemption requests.
4.
Based on an initial assessment of the practice for the first five months since the adoption of the IAN No. 7,
humanitarian agencies have experienced various challenges. Among other s, the process requires a very generous
lead time in planning shipments of humanitarian goods, including locating suppliers and financial agents willing
to bid or contract for the provision of goods and services before an exemption is obtained. Any changes to planned
suppliers, shipping routes, item specifications, or quantities between those indicated in the approved exemption
request and at the time of the actual shipment may render the exemption invalid. The long lead time perceived to
be necessary for the exemption approval process could also make it difficult for humanitarian agencies to respond
effectively to contingencies such as a natural disaster or an outbr eak of disease.
5.
The Committee has received 25 humanitarian exemption requests during the reporting period. Two requests
were withdrawn, 16 requests were approved, while seven requests remain under consideration by the Committee. 202
6.
Expediting the review and approval by the Committee of exemption requests for humanitarian programs,
starting with requests currently before the Committee, will help to alleviate the suffering of hundreds of thousands
of civilians. Furthermore, the Committee should consider ways to allow more flexibility with regard to the
requirement of exemption requests being submitted every six months, which causes ad ditional delays and prolongs
the already lengthy six to eight months’ lead time required for offshore procurement.
__________________

2018 Needs and Priorities Plan
2017 DPR Korea Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) Findings Report; https://www.unicef.org/pressreleases/better-indicators-children-dpr-korea-challenges-persist-new-data-situation-children
200
2018 Needs and Priorities Plan
https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/DPRK%20NP%202018%20110418%20FINAL.pdf
201
2017 DPR Korea Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) Findings Report; https://www.unicef.org/pressreleases/better-indicators-children-dpr-korea-challenges-persist-new-data-situation-children
202 Information about the exemptions approved by the Committee are posted on the website:
https://www.un.org/sc/suborg/en/sanctions/1718/exemptions-measures/humanitarian-exemption-requests.
198
199

19-01704

361/379

S/2019/171

Sectoral sanctions
7.
The sectoral sanctions imposed pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution 2397 (2017) include prohibition of the
transfer to the DPRK of “all industrial machinery (HS codes 84 and 85), transportation vehicles (HS codes 86
through 89), and iron, steel, and other metals (HS codes 72 through 83)”, also affecting a number of humanitariansensitive items (see annex 87). This paragraph does not include any direct mention of humanitarian exceptions,
other than civilian passenger aircraft spare parts. The Committee must, therefore, consider requests for
humanitarian exemptions to these sanctions, based on paragraph 25 of resolution 2397 (2017), which allows the
Committee to “on a case-by-case basis, exempt any activity from the measures imposed by these resolut ions.”
8.
Paragraph 7 of resolution 2397 (2017) covers several goods which are vital to agriculture or public health
programs, including a variety of agricultural machinery and medical equipment ( annex 87). Prohibited goods
include machinery and parts for food processing factories; pumps, filters, pipes, and drilling equipment necessary
to address critical humanitarian needs, such as providing clean water to prevent diarrhea, one of the main killers of
children in the DPRK, and food security to reduce high ma lnutrition rates.
9.
It should be noted that obtaining exemption requests from the Committee is but one stage of the process of
importing relief items into the DPRK. For example, non-governmental organizations’ submissions can be subject
to delays with Member States before they reach the Committee. Non-governmental organizations have little
visibility and no control over when the Member State submits their request to the Committee. The continued risk
adverse approach taken by suppliers and some transit countr ies’ authorities also continues to cause delays to the
delivery of life-saving humanitarian assistance.
Breakdown of the Banking Channel
10. Paragraph 33 of resolution 2270 (2016) prohibits the establishment or maintenance of correspondent accounts
with DPRK financial institutions unless approved by the Committee. In August 2016, the Committee approved an
exemption for Russia-based Bank Sputnik CJSC to maintain a correspondent relationship with the DPRK ’s Foreign
Trade Bank (FTB) in order to facilitate transactions for United Nations agencies in the country. 203 Given that most
of the operational transactions occur outside the DPRK when procuring materials and paying expatriate staff
salaries, only 10 per cent of program funds are used within the country to cover on-site operational expenses such
as fuel and local staff salaries. 204
11. The Committee’s action of 11 August 2016 205 enabled a mechanism whereby the UN Secretariat in New York
could transfer U.S. Dollars to Commerzbank AG in Germany, which would convert the Dollars to Euros and remit
payment in Rubles to Bank Sputnik in the Russian Federation. Bank Sputnik would then hold the payment in the
FTB correspondent account, and – lacking an electronic payment clearing system with the FTB – remit cash to
Pyongyang for deposit and use by United Nations agencies. However, since September 2017, when Commerzbank
cancelled its participation in DPRK-related transactions no alternative arrangements have been found, effectively
closing the humanitarian banking channel. 206 This collapse of the banking channel resulted in a shortage of cash
in-country, and will make it difficult for United Nations agencies to implement activities. United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations have increasingly had to rely on sta ff carrying large amounts of cash on their
person when traveling to the DPRK. 207

__________________
203 See: https://www.un.org/sc/suborg/en/correspondent-account-approvals.
204 Letter from the UN Country team to the Panel on the I mpact of Sanctions on Humanitarian Operations in DPRK,

14 December 2018.
205 Information about the correspondent accounts approved by the Committee are posted on the website:
https://www.un.org/securitycouncil/content/correspondent-account-approvals
206 Section 208(d) of the DPRK Policy and Sanctions Enhancement Act of 2016 (22 USC 9228) delegates authority to the
executive branch to facilitate a humanitarian banking channel to the DPRK; however, it does not appear that this authority
has been used. Additionally, the U.S. government cannot compel a financial institution to service any particular market as
banks make their own compliance and risk-related decisions.
207 Letter from the UN Country team to the Panel of Experts on the I mpact of Sanctions on Humanitarian Operations in
DPRK, 14 December 2018.
362/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

12. The challenges to aid agencies posed by UN financial sanctions have been compounded by de -risking – the
phenomenon by which financial institutions and other private -sector actors categorically reject all transactions tied
to a high-risk jurisdiction. This has been spurred by the threat of secondary sanctions by various Member States.
Disaggregating the specific impact of UN financial sanctions on humanitarian organizations operating in the DPRK
from that of unilateral sanctions measures and regulations can be difficult.

19-01704

363/379

S/2019/171

Annex 86: Examples of impact of sanctions on the implementation of humanitarian
activities in the DPRK
Sector

UN agency
or NGO or
both
Both

Items impacted

1

Water and
Sanitation

2

Water and
Sanitation

UN

This included
some essential
supplies
required for
four gravity-fed
water systems
(which were
part of a larger
procurement).

3

Water and
Sanitation

NGO

4

Health

5

Health

364/379

Status

Impact of delay/denial
For the WASH sector as a whole, from the
planned 367,618 people to receive clean
water in 2018, at least 229,235 people,
including an estimated 16,000 under-five
children will not receive clean drinking
water due to delays resulting from need to
obtain exemptions and funding shortfalls.
This places children at risk of diarrhoea,
one of the main killers of children, which
is caused by consumption of unsafe
drinking water, poor hygiene practices and
inadequate health services.
Significant delay in agency being able to
complete four gravity-fed water systems,
placing 61,284 people, including an
estimated 4,300 under-five children, at risk
of diarrheal death associated with drinking
contaminated water.

Spare parts for
mobile drilling
rig, drill bits (6”
and 8”), sludge
pump, and
others.

Exemption
request approved
by the
Committee with
significant delay
on 18 January
2019. The
exemption
request was
submitted to the
Committee on
31 August 2018.
Exemption
request
submitted to
Member State
17 May 2018;
still pending.

UN

Emergency
Reproductive
Health kits 6A
& 12

Exemption
request pending
submission to
the Committee.

UN

Heaters for
immunization
clinics

Exemption
request
submitted to the
Committee on
24 January 2019.
Under
consideration.

Delay in implementation of emergency
response project, as a result 150,000
pregnant women who are due to deliver
during the project period will not have
access to safe delivery, and about 22,000
of the pregnancies who are likely to face
complications during delivery will not
have access to blood transfusions if
required. These may result in a negative
impact on the maternal mortality ratio that
now stands at 58 per 100,000 live births.
Fast tracking exemptions to facilitate the
humanitarian response to DPRK’s harsh
winter impact is critical. Delays may
inadvertently contribute to children
undressing for immunization in
temperatures that go as low as minus 20
degrees Celsius. Moreover, vaccines are

Unable to complete installation of 35 wells
with handpumps, to provide communities
with access to safe water. The majority of
these wells were due to supply rural
kindergartens, schools and health centres
with clean water.

19-01704

S/2019/171

rendered ineffective when they freeze due
to the lack of heaters.
6

Health

UN

9 units of
ambulance
vehicles. Spare
parts of vehicles
used to
distribute TB
and malaria
supplies, and to
conduct
monitoring and
supervision
visits

Exemption
request approved
with significant
delay on 18
January 2019.
The exemption
request was
submitted to the
Committee on
31 August 2018.

9 units of ambulance vehicles. Spare parts
are required to ensure regular maintenance
of the five vehicles previously allocated to
MoPH for the implementation of the
tuberculosis (TB) and malaria programs.
These vehicles have been used exclusively
for the distribution by MoPH of TB and
malaria program supplies from central to
lower level health facilities, and for
supervision and monitoring of activities in
the field. Without these vehicles there will
be serious challenges to implement the
programs.
DPRK is one of the 30 TB high burden
countries in the world. In 2017, there were
a total of 100,553 TB cases (5,211 children
under 15, i.e. 5% of all cases).
Only 14 % of TB cases are tested for drug
resistance due to lack of diagnostic
resources in-country. Multi-drug-resistant
(MDR) TB is a very severe type of TB
with substantial risk to transform curable
TB into incurable (with increased mortality
and massive public transmission of the
disease by non-cured patients) and the
affordable TB treatment into unaffordable
in resource-limited settings. The likelihood
of ongoing MDR transmission is very
high.

7

Health

19-01704

UN

Refrigerators

Exemption
request approved
by the
Committee with
significant delay
on 19 October
2018. The
exemption
request was
submitted to the
Committee on
31 August 2018.

The delays caused by the exemption
process is resulting in additional financial
burdens for agencies.
For example, purchase orders cannot be
issued before the Committee’s approval
and sometimes grants may expire before
such approval is granted.
In May 2018, an agency placed an offshore
procurement through its supply division
for refrigerators using grants expiring in
December 2018. The exemption for these
items was received on 19 October 2018.
By this time the cost had increased from
$2,400 per unit to $2,994 per unit, and the
agency had to reduce the number of
refrigerators purchased for its health
program from 20 to 16.

365/379

S/2019/171

8

Health

UN

Medical
equipment for
maternal and
neonatal
emergencies

Exemption
request approved
by the
Committee with
significant delay
on 19 October
2018. The
exemption
request was
submitted to the
Committee on
31 August 2018.

Non-availability of program supplies
resulting in delays for the referral of
emergency cases to health facilities. This
will result in increased mortality.
Because requests for exemptions can only
be submitted once every 6 months,
offshore procurement can only be initiated
then and not before. Considering that lead
time for offshore procurement is 6-8
months, it can take up to 9 to fully equip
the maternity wards.

9

Health

NGO

Assistive and
mobility
devices
(wheelchairs,
crutches,
walking stick,
walker, hearing
aid and glasses)

Exemption
request approved
by the
Committee on
30 January 2019.
The exemption
request was
submitted to a
Member State
on 12 October
2018 and to the
Committee with
significant delay
on 3 January
2019.

People living with disabilities identified as
requiring assistive and mobility devices
have been waiting more than 10 months
for these items.

10

Food
security
and
agriculture

UN

Irrigation
equipment

Exemption
request pending
submission to
the Committee.

As agricultural activities are time-bound,
the implementation will be delayed by at
least one cropping season with impacts on
the food security and food diversity of the
affected population, raising the risk of
increased rates of undernutrition,
especially amongst the most vulnerable
people.

11

Food
security
and
agriculture

UN

Agricultural
equipment (2WT, corn
thresher, mini
rice mill)

Exemption
request pending
submission to
the Committee.

As agricultural activities are time-bound,
the implementation will be delayed by at
least one cropping season. This will affect
the ability to achieve the increase in food
production which is needed to address
need for food security and food diversity.
Without access to suitable amounts and

366/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

12

Food
security
and
agriculture

UN

Sea buckthorn
processing
equipment

Exemption
request pending
submission to
the Committee.

13

Food
security
and
agriculture

NGO

• Plastic round
arc type
greenhouses

Exemption
request
submitted to
Member State in
May 2018; still
pending.

• Potato
storage
systems
• Ventilation
system

diversity of food, vulnerable people are at
increased risk of malnutrition.
As agricultural activities are time-bound,
the implementation will be delayed by at
least one cropping season. This will affect
the ability to achieve the increase in food
production which is needed to address
need for food security and food diversity.
Without access to suitable amounts and
diversity of food, vulnerable people are at
increased risk of malnutrition.
This will result in an inability to produce
vegetable seeds during the winter period to
be used during the 2019 early vegetable
production in 2019 season. This will result
in farmers being unable to produce
thousands of kilograms of vegetables
which are vital for people’s food security
and dietary diversity to prevent higher
rates of malnutrition.
Lack of appropriate storage for seed
potatoes, or for vegetable, legume and
grass seeds.

• Diesel
generator

Lack of electricity means unable to run the
seed machinery that has been installed.
14

Food
security
and
agriculture

NGO

Six bio-digester
sets

Exemption
request
submitted to
Member State in
May 2018; still
pending.

15

Food
security
and
agriculture

NGO

Iron bar,
Gabion wire
(3t), Electrical
Welder and
others

Exemption
request
submitted to
Member State in
May 2018; still
pending.

16

Food
security
and
agriculture

NGO

Veterinarian kits

Exemption
request approved
by Committee
on 29 January
2019. The

19-01704

Unable to complete energy production
project without bio-digester.
The biogas digesters properly treat animal
and human waste generated in the
facilities. A benefit of the digesters is the
production of methane-rich biogas, which
is to be used for cooking especially during
the winter. They are used to produce food
for people and animals; negative impacts
on the health of livestock will have serious
consequences on the nutritional status of
the most vulnerable people, further
limiting their dietary intake and diversity.
Unable to complete project that would
protect 2,140 square meters of agricultural
land against flooding. During past five
years, 95 people died, 4,054 houses were
destroyed, 450 buildings demolished,
20.000 ha arable land damaged due to
flooding in these areas. Without these
activities the lives of thousands of people
are at risk, as well as their ability to
produce sufficient food due to the negative
impacts of floods on agricultural land.
Due to delays in receiving the kits,
veterinarians will lack essential medicine
and equipment for spring 2019, which is a
particularly sensitive period for goats’
health (parasites, diarrhea…)
367/379

S/2019/171

exemption
request was
initially
submitted to a
Member State
on 20 October
2018 and was
submitted to the
Committee with
significant delay
on 15 January
2019.

Livestock morbidity and mortality has
severe impacts on the nutritional status of
vulnerable people, especially children.
Without this source of essential protein
they risk increased levels of malnutrition
and other health concerns.

17

Food
security
and
agriculture

NGO

Distribution and
consumption
equipment,
including
bowls, cups,
tricycles,
stainless steel
churns, hygiene
tools, water
tanks

Exemption
request approved
by Committee
on 29 January
2019. The
exemption
request was
initially
submitted to a
Member State
on 20 October
2018 and was
submitted to the
Committee with
significant delay
on 15 January
2019.

Without this equipment, children will not
have access to yoghurt and other milk
products that is essential for their dietary
diversity. The lack of dietary diversity in
DPRK, including lack of protein and
essential vitamins and minerals,
contributes to high rates of malnutrition.
Projects such as this that provide children
with supplementary foods are essential to
prevent more children becoming
malnourished.

18

Food
security
and
agriculture

NGO

Greenhouses
and gardening
equipment,
including tunnel
greenhouses,
gardening tools,
sprayers, seeds

Exemption
request
submitted to a
Member State
on 20 October
2018; still
pending.

19

Food
security
and
agriculture

NGO

Equipment and
tools for the
micro-scale
project for
people living
with
disabilities.

Exemption
request approved
by the
Committee on
30 January 2019.
The exemption
request was
submitted to
Member State
on 12 October
2018 and to the
Committee with
significant delay
on 3 January
2019.

Without these items, kindergartens will not
be able to grow and harvest vegetables,
which are essential to provide children
with an adequate diet during the lean
season. Young children rely on food
provided at kindergarten; without this they
risk not receiving adequate nutrition and
face the risk of malnutrition due to lack of
adequate, nutritious food.
The activity is delayed by more than nine
months.

368/379

Self-help group of people living with
disabilities are waiting to start their
livelihood activities.

19-01704

S/2019/171

20

21

22

Nutrition

Disaster
Risk
Reduction

Disaster
Risk
Reduction

NGO

NGO

Exemption
request approved
by the
Committee on
24 July 2018.
The exemption
request was
initially
submitted to a
Member State
on 20 April 2018
and submitted to
the Committee
on 12 June 2018.

Materials delivered end of November
2018, a delay of six months.

Exemption
request approved
by the
Committee on
30 January 2019.
The exemption
request was
submitted to
Member State
on 12 October
2018 and to the
Committee with
significant delay
on 3 January
2019.

The activity is delayed by more than nine
months.

Milk processing activities will not begin
until 2019, with impacts on the nutrition
status of affected children who rely on the
supplementary milk to increase their
dietary diversity and prevent malnutrition.

Community is not well equipped to
mitigate impacts of future disasters as do
not have access to community safe shelter

Request for
The proposed canal embankment
exemption
rehabilitation would mitigate the impact of
submitted to
future natural hazards (flood) and save the
Member State
life of persons with disabilities and
on 12 October
community. Without this project,
2018;
vulnerable people are at risk of future
application is
floods.
under review.
Source: Letter from the UN Country team to the Panel of Experts on the Impact of Sanctions on Humanitarian
Operations in DPRK, 14 December 2018; updated on 31 January 2019.

19-01704

NGO

Milk processing
equipment
including
pasteurizer,
cream separator,
butter machine,
storage tank,
lactoscan, lab
equipment,
stainless steel
tools and
churns,
detergent,
gloves and
clothes.
Raw material
(cement, doors,
iron rod,
sanitary ware,
poly propylene
pipe, Hollow
iron rod for
hand rail, water
tap and window
etc.) for the
refurbishment
of community
building (safe
shelter)
Raw material
(cement and
gabions) for the
rehabilitation of
canal
embankment

369/379

S/2019/171

Annex 87: Humanitarian-sensitive items prohibited under sectoral sanctions in resolution
2397 (2017)
Category

HS Code

Comment

Hand-tools for agriculture
(shovels, hoes, spades, etc…) 208

HS 8201

Blades for agricultural,
horticultural or forestry machines

HS 820840

Dryers for agricultural products

HS 841931

Agricultural spraying machines

HS 842449

Irrigation equipment

HS 842482

Agricultural machinery for soil
preparation (ploughs, seeders,
etc…)

HS 8432

Harvesting and threshing
machinery

HS 8433

Presses, crushers for fruit juices
etc…

HS 8435

Miscellaneous agricultural
equipment

HS 8436

Machines for cleaning and sorting
grains and legumes

HS 8437

Misc. machines for industrial
processing of food and drink

HS 8438, excluding
HS 843840 (brewery
machinery)

This category includes machinery and spare parts
for NGO-supported food processing factories.

Tractors & spare tractor parts

HS 8701 for tractors,
multiple categories
for spare parts

Tractors and spare parts are not only needed for
general agricultural support activities, but also
for food security efforts at medical clinics and
schools.

Agricultural trailers, farm wagons,
and carts

HS 8716, multiple
subheadings

Prefabricated greenhouses, animal
sheds

HS 940690

Several NGOs have supported the use of
greenhouses in the DPRK for private crop
cultivation and for food security/nutritional
enhancement at medical facilities and schools
serving vulnerable populations.

__________________
208 Agriculture helps with diversifying diet and thus contributes to alleviating food insecurity, high malnutrition and stunting rates.

370/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

Category

HS Code

Comment

Nail clippers

HS 821420

Sterilizers for medical use

HS 841920

Portable sprayers

HS 842441

Used for malaria control.

UV lamps for disinfection

HS 853939

Used for infection control.

Ambulances

HS 8703, not
separately
categorized from
other vehicles

Needed by many medical care centers due to very
poor transportation networks and infrastructure.

Carriages for disabled persons

HS 8713

Several NGOs have worked to provide support
for persons with disabilities in the DPRK.

Medical appliances, including
ultrasound and cardiograph
machines, syringes, needles,
catheters, dental and ophthalmic
equipment, etc…

HS 9018

Essential to the delivery of medical care.

Mechano-therapy appliances, such
as artificial respiration machines

HS 9019

Orthopedic appliances for persons
with disabilities

HS 9021

Several NGOs have worked to provide support
for persons with disabilities in the DPRK.

X-ray machines

HS 9022

Essential for TB diagnosis and general medical
support. Accessories supporting digitization of
images is essential to affordability/sustainability.

Medical, surgical, dental, or
veterinary furniture (ie operating
tables, hospital beds)

HS 9402

Critical to providing basic care for patients.

Category

HS Code

Metal water tanks

HS 7309, HS 7310,
HS 7611

Pumps for liquids, including
pumps for household water
systems

HS 8413

Water heaters

HS 841911 (gas),
841919 (solar), HS
851610 (electric)

19-01704

A U.S. NGO shipment of hygiene kits to DPRK
medical facilities was seized at customs in transit
due to the presence of nail clippers in the kits; it
was released after six weeks.

Comment

Necessary for providing clean water to
households, clinics, etc…, as well as for
agricultural purposes.

371/379

S/2019/171

Machinery for filtering or
purifying water

HS 842121, HS
842199 (for parts)

Lack of clean water is a major contributing factor
to persistent high rates of diarrhea and
malnutrition among vulnerable populations.

Machinery for water well drilling

HS 843049

Critical to long-term sustainable clean-water
interventions.

Category

HS Code

Metal tubes, pipes, pipe fittings,
etc…

HS 7303-7307 (iron
and steel); separate
HS codes for copper,
aluminum, lead etc...

Used for the provision of clean water.

Roofing, siding, flooring, roof
drainage equipment

Included in HS
730890 (sheet metal)
and HS 761090
(aluminum)

After Typhoon Lionrock hit the DPRK in 2016,
several NGOs responded by providing roofing
materials to help rebuild schools, clinics, etc…

Screws, bolts, nails, staples, etc…

HS 7317-7318

These are common items which are often
components of humanitarian-sensitive goods, or
part of the packaging thereof

Stoves, ranges, grates, cookers,
barbecues, etc…

HS 7321, HS 851660

Clean cook stoves provide significant health and
environmental benefits, compared to cooking
over open fires.

Iron, steel, or aluminum wire

HS 732620, HS 7605

Has numerous agricultural applications.

Aluminum foil

HS 7607

Has medical/laboratory uses.

Refrigerating and Freezing
Equipment

HS 8418, as well as
other categories for
refrigerated trucks.

Refrigeration and refrigerated trucks are essential
for the storage and transportation of certain
health-related goods such as vaccines, diagnostic
reagents, etc....

Generators

HS 8502

Generators are important as a primary or back-up
power supply to medical clinics, etc… which
require a steady energy supply.

Electric transformers and
inductors

HS 8504

Necessary for the steady supply of electricity to
medical and laboratory equipment, as well as for
agricultural functions.

Electric storage batteries

HS 8507

Necessary component to storing energy from
solar panels and other off-grid energy sources,
and used in many humanitarian applications.

Centrifuges and centrifugal dryers

HS 8421

Items in this category are used for medical
laboratory diagnostics (including for TB and
MDR-TB) as well as water purification. This
category also includes biosafety cabinets and
HEPA filters, which have important medical
applications.

372/379

Comment

19-01704

S/2019/171

Electrical apparatus (ie switches,
relays, fuses, surge protectors)

HS 8536

Necessary for the steady supply of electricity to
medical and laboratory equipment.

Solar panels

HS 854140

Important source for off-grid or backup energy
supply, including in medical clinics etc...

Insulated wires, cables

HS 8544

Necessary for the steady supply of electricity to
medical and laboratory equipment.

Microscopes

HS 9011-9012

Important for medical laboratory diagnostics.

Miscellaneous office supplies
(printers and print cartridges, flash
drives, barcode scanners, staplers,
scissors, binders, paper clips,
etc…)

Multiple HS
categories

Humanitarian agencies have previously supplied
local partners with basic office supplies and
equipment to assist with administration, data
collection, and patient record-keeping.

Sources: Humanitarian organizations
Note on methodology: The above tables identify humanitarian goods which are prohibited for export to the DPRK
under paragraph 7 of resolution 2397 (2017) including those strictly humanitarian in nature, as well as those serving
a broader array of purposes including humanitarian (such as electrical equipment necessary for hospitals and
clinics). The tables are not intended to be comprehensive.
While these items align with certain categories of goods with the Harmonized System (HS) c odes administered by
the World Customs Organization, which are referenced in Resolution 2397, there is not always a straightforward
correlation between the lay categorization of certain goods and the HS code system. In some cases, even the most
specific (six digit) HS codes may still be so broad as to lump humanitarian -sensitive goods together with other
types of goods. For example, machinery for water well drilling is included in t he same general category as all
“boring and sinking machinery.” In other cases, a certain category of humanitarian-sensitive good – spare parts for
tractors, for example – may be spread across multiple HS categories.
Additionally, although resolution 2397 (2017) only refers to goods categorized under HS chapters 72 -89, a number
of humanitarian-sensitive goods that are categorized outside of this range nonetheless contain prohibited
components. For example, X-ray machines are categorized under HS 9022, but also incorporate various types of
metal and electronic components which could be categorized under HS chapters 72-89. In October 2018, the
Committee provided an exemption allowing UNICEF to ship X -ray machines into the DPRK, implying that the
Committee would otherwise consider shipment of such devices as prohibited.
Finally, it is noteworthy that some of the IT and communications equipment prohibited for export to the DPRK by
paragraph 7 of resolution 2397 (2017) may also have humanitarian uses, including su ch as USB flash drives,
portable media players, mobile phones, radios, etc.

19-01704

373/379

S/2019/171

Annex 88: Member States yet to submit implementation reports pursuant to paragraph 17
of resolution 2397 (2017)
Africa
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

14.
15.
16.
17.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.

44.

374/379

Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Congo
Côte d'Ivoire (UNSC nonpermanent member 20182019)
Democratic Republic of the
Congo
Djibouti
Kingdom of Eswatini
Ethiopia (UNSC nonpermanent member 20172018)
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Sao Tome and Principe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa (UNSC nonpermanent member 20192020)
South Sudan

Americas
50. Antigua and Barbuda
51. Bahamas
52. Barbados
53. Belize
54. Bolivia (UNSC nonpermanent member 20172018)
55. Brazil
56. Costa Rica
57. Cuba
58. Dominica
59. Ecuador
60. El Salvador
61. Grenada
62. Guyana
63. Haiti
64. Honduras
65. Jamaica
66. Nicaragua
67. Paraguay
68. Peru (UNSC non-permanent
member 2018-2019)
69. Saint Kitts and Nevis
70. Saint Lucia
71. Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines
72. Suriname
73. Trinidad and Tobago
74. Uruguay
75. Venezuela
Asia
76. Afghanistan
77. Bahrain
78. Bangladesh
79. Bhutan
80. Brunei Darussalam
81. Cambodia
82. Indonesia (UNSC nonpermanent member 20192020)
83. Iran
84. Jordan
85. Kazakhstan (UNSC nonpermanent member 20172018)
86. Kuwait (UNSC nonpermanent member 20182019)
87. Kyrgyzstan

94. Saudi Arabia
95. Syria
96. Timor-Leste
97. Turkmenistan
98. Uzbekistan
99. Yemen
Europe
100. Andorra
101. Azerbaijan
102. Bosnia and Herzegovina
103. Croatia
104. Iceland
105. Ireland
106. Luxembourg
107. Republic of Moldova
108. San Marino
109. Slovenia
110. The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia
Oceania
111. Australia
112. Fiji
113. Kiribati
114. Marshall Islands
115. Micronesia
116. Nauru
117. Palau
118. Papua New Guinea
119. Samoa
120. Solomon Islands
121. Tonga
122. Tuvalu
123. Vanuatu

19-01704

S/2019/171

45.
46.
47.
48.
49.

Tanzania
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe

88. Lebanon
89. Malaysia
90. Maldives
91. Myanmar
92. Nepal
93. Oman

Source: The Panel

19-01704

375/379

S/2019/171

Annex 89: Recommendations
To the Security Council:
1.
The Panel recommends that future Security Council resolutions stipulate the unit of
measurement to be used by Member States in their reporting to the Committee.
2.
The Panel recommends that the Security Council, when drafting future financial
sanctions measures, take account of DPRK cyberattacks to circumvent the resolutions by
illegally generating revenue for the DPRK.
3.
The United Nations Secretary-General should request the Secretariat to carry out an
assessment of the humanitarian impact of sanctions in the DPRK.

To the 1718 Committee:
4.
The Panel recommends that the Committee designate the following vessels for illicit
transfers of petroleum products in violation of paragraph 5 of resolution 2397 (2017):
Myong Ryu 1 (IMO number: 8532413), DPRK flag
Song Won (IMO number: 8613360), DPRK flag
Jin Yang 36 (金洋 36), flag unknown
Xing Ming Yang 888 (IMO number 8410847), Sierra Leone
5.
The Panel reiterates its recommendation for the designation of Han Hun Il (Edward Han)
and also recommends the designation of Yong Kok Yeap and Yazid Merzouk of MKP Malaysia
and MKP Zambia.
6.
The Panel reiterates its previous recommendations for the designation of Pan Systems 209
to be accompanied by the names of all of its front companies (including Glocom, International
Golden Services, International Global System) as aliases, for involvement in the financing and
sales of arms and related materiel.

7.
The Panel reiterates its previous recommendation to designate: Ri Ik (Li Ik), Wang Zhi
Guo and Ri Ho Nam
8.
Information about cyberattacks conducted by RGB as a means to evade financial
sanctions and to gain foreign currency should be added to the RGB’s entry on the 1718
Sanctions List.

__________________
209

See S/2017/742, para. 62 and S/2018/171, page 77 (Recommendation 1).

376/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

9.
The Panel recommends tha the Committee clarify the definition of joint ventures and
cooperative entities contained within paragraph 18 of resolution 2375 (2017).
10. The Panel recommends that the Committee include the provision in paragraph 11 of
resolution 2375 (2017) to the vessel designation criteria and incorporate it into the existing lists
of designated vessels as appropriate.
11. The Panel recommends that the Committee amend the delisting procedure to allow
Member States to request delisting on behalf of a vessel owner (for the Panel’s proposal for
amended procedure for delisting for vessels, see annex 20).
12. In order to allow more effective due diligence by flag States, other Member States and the
maritime-related industries, the Committee should consider consolidating the designated
vessels in one document. Information provided on the vessels should include the measures
obligated under the relevant resolutions such as asset freeze, denial of port entry, and
cancellation of registration or vessel services. Incidents of deregistration reported to the
Committee should also be reflected to prevent inadvertent re-registration.
13. The Panel recommends that discussions in the Committee on humanitarian exemption
requests be time-bound and that focus groups within the Committee meet on a regular basis to
examine humanitarian issues with a view to expediting the processing of such requests.
14. In order to alleviate unnecessary burdens on Member States, United Nations agencies and
humanitarian organizations, the Committee should publish a whitelist of certain non-sensitive
items used in humanitarian operations that fall under the broad categories of items subject to
the sectoral sanctions in paragraph 7 of resolution 2397 (2017) requiring an exemption for
humanitarian shipment into the DPRK.
15. The Committee should continue to seek feedback from Member States, United Nations
agencies and humanitarian organizations applying for exemptions under the terms of the IAN
No. 7 guidelines and work to streamline and simplify the application process to the extent
possible, including by providing greater flexibility regarding the technical specifications of
planned shipments, the parties involved, and the frequency of requests/submissions.

To Member States:
16.

Flag States should inform the Committee and the Panel of vessels that they deregister.

17. Flag States should monitor the AIS of their vessels and those illegally sailing under their
flag to better ensure implementation of the resolutions.
18. Members States should consider introducing a regulatory requirement for P&I insurance
and re-insurance companies to include AIS screening and an “AIS switch off” clause in their
contracts for at-risk vessels operating in the relevant regions.
19. Member States should consider introducing a regulatory requirement for petroleum
product trading, refining and producing companies to include end-use delivery verification
measures and AIS screening clause as well as an “AIS switch-off” clause in their contracts.

19-01704

377/379

S/2019/171

20. Member States of the International Maritime Organization (IMO) should consider
measures to improve information-sharing and maritime regulation enforcement by flag States
and other interested parties.
21. Member States should consider introducing legislation to ensure that global and regional
banks operating in their jurisdiction introduce AIS screening and vessel due diligence risk
assessment clauses into letters of credit, loans and other financial instruments for global and
regional commodity traders and brokers trading in oil and petroleum products in higher risk
Free on Board (FoB) markets in the affected areas.
22. Member States and relevant international organizations should ensure that the global and
regional commodity trading companies and tanker fleets operating under their jurisdictions
and in those at-risk segments of the Free on Board (FoB) market and/or engaging in ship-toship transfer in the affected international waters adopt contractual language that includes an
effective end use delivery verification mechanism.
23. Member States and relevant international organizations should ensure that the global and
regional commodity trading companies and tanker fleets operating under their jurisdictions
and those segments of the affected Free on Board (FoB) markets assess the AIS history of all
vessels they intend to supply with products banned under the resolutions.
24. Member States should ensure that the provisions on financial sanctions in the resolution s
take account of DPRK cyberattacks to circumvent the resolutions by illegally generating
revenue for the DPRK.
25. Member States should enhance their ability to facilitate robust information exchange on
the DPRK’s cyberattacks with other governments and with their own financial institutions, to
detect and prevent attempts by the DPRK to employ its cyber capabilities for sanctions evasion.
26. Given the pervasive use of accounts in the names of family members to evade sanctions,
the Panel recommends that governments provide their financial institutions with a list not only
of accredited diplomats, but of their family members to ensure that diplomats do not establish
additional bank accounts in their names.
27. The Panel recommends that Member States issue guidance for a single bank to be
identified as the only bank that can hold accounts for the DPRK embassy and diplomats and
that all others are advised not to hold accounts for DPRK diplomats or their family members.
28. The Panel recommends that Member States advise their financial institutions not to open
accounts for DPRK diplomats not accredited to their country and to share infor mation on the
financial activities of DPRK diplomats with other Member States where records show there
has been financial activity to avoid cross-border circumvention of sanctions.
29. Member States should advise their financial institutions that only closing bank accounts
(as opposed to freezing) does not meet the requirements of the resolutions, which stipulate that
they must freeze all assets controlled by designated individuals or entities, those operating on
their behalf, as well as of any members of the DPRK Government that are engaged in violating
or evading of any of the provisions of the resolutions.
30. Member States should offer technical assistance to other Member States to help them
strengthen their legal frameworks and related mechanisms to implement the financial
provisions in the resolutions, as appropriate and in line with Article 49 of the UN Charter.

378/379

19-01704

S/2019/171

31. As part of their implementation of paragraph 18 of resolution 2375 (2017), Member States
should request their corporate registries to extract the details of all companies with DPRK
national director or shareholders (which de facto violates the ban).
32. Given that joint ventures have violated other provisions of the resolution in addition to
paragraph 18 of resolution 2375 (2017), the names of those directors and shareholders should
be shared with investigation agencies, financial intelligence units and financial institutions.
33. The Panel recommends that Member States clarify with their national agencies that
insurance providers are financial institutions and therefore subject to all of the relevant
financial provisions in the resolutions, including the need to freeze assets under the resolutions.

19-01704

379/379
