th
MEETING:

19 MARCH

1978

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2075)

Adoption

of the agenda

. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Pay

. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . ..

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2606);
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/l 2607);
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of Security Council
resolution 425 (1978) (S/1261 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composerl of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normaIly published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2075th

MEETING

Held in New York on Sunday,
President: Mr. Ivor RICHARD (United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2075)
1, Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12606);
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12607);
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council resolution 425 (1978)
(S/1261 1)
The meeting was called to order at 9.35 p.m.
Adop lion of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/12606);
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/12607);
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 425 (1978) (S/12611)
1. The PRESIDENT: I invite those representatives who,
with the consent of the Council, have been participating in
this debate so far to resume the places reserved for them at
the Council table or at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. iWni (Lebanon),
Mr. fferzog (Israel) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation

19 March 1978, at 8.30 p.m.
Organization)
took places at the Council table and
Mr. Abdel
Meguid
(Egypt),
Mr. Al-Sahhaf
(Iraq),
Mr. Nuseibeh
(Jordan),
Mr. Kikhia
(Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya),
Mr. Puntsagnorov (Mongolia), Mr. Akhund
(Pakistan), Mr. Al-Obaidly (Qatar), Mr. Medani (Sudan),
Mr. Al-Hussamy (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Cu Dinh Ba
(Viet Nam) and Mr. Al-Haddad (Yemen) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have before
them in document S/1261 1 the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Security Council resolution 425 (1978) and the text of a draft resolution ic
document S/12612.
3. In my capacity as representative of the UNITED
KINGDOM,
I should now like to introduce the draft
resolution formally to the Council. It is a simple draft
resolution in two paragraphs.
[The speaker read out the draft resolution.]
I think the text is self-explanatory
require any elaboration from me.

and certainly does not

4. No one-neither a member of the Council nor otherwise-has asked to be allowed to make a statement before
the Council moves to the voting procedure. There are,
however, a number of delegations that have asked to be
allowed to make explanations of vote before the vote. I
take it that the Council is now ready to proceed to the vote
on the draft resolution contained in document S/12612. I
shah therefore now call on those representatives who wish
to explain their vote.
5. Mr. LA1 Ya-Ii (China) (interpretation from Chinese): In
our statement made at the Security Council meeting this
morning, the Chinese delegation stated the position of the
Chinese Government on the dispatch of the United Nations
force, and we are not going to repeat it here. Basing
ourselves 0~1 our consistent position, we will not participate
in the voting on the draft resolution submitted by the
United Kingdom, contained in document S/12612. We of
course cannot undertake to pay any expenses for sending
the interim force.
6. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The view of the
Soviet deIegation on the report of the Secretary-General is,
naturally, determined by the position taken. by us at this 1

delegation in its explanation of vote on resolution
425 (1978)(207&h
meeting], we abstained from voting on
that resolution. For the same reasons, my delegation was
unable to vote in favour of the draft resolution in
document S/12612.

morning’s Council meeting; accordingly, we feel there is no
need to repeat our views on the various aspects of the
operation of the United Nations force. We would only
stress once again that due account should be given to our
stated views, both from the viewpoint of protecting the
victims of aggression and from that of observing the
principles of the Charter that determine the procedures for
the use of United Nations peace-keeping forces to maintain
international peace and security. In addition, the report
contains a number of provisions relating to the arrangements for the establishment and the functioning of the
United Nations force, The Soviet delegation has made
reservations on similar provisions on several occasions in the
past.

13. The report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 425 (1978) contains certain provisions
which my delegation could not support. In particular, it
does not take account of Israel’s responsibility, as the
aggressor, and its material responsibility deriving from the
decision to establish a United Nations peace-keeping force
in Lebanon. Furthermore, the force would be given certain
specific functions, such as police duties.

7. Hence the Soviet delegation cannot support the draft
resolution which would approve the report of the Secretary-General. However, in view of the request made by the
Government of Lebanon, the Soviet delegation will not
impede adoption of the draft resolution; we shall abstain
from voting on it.

14. However, in determining its attitude towards draft
resolution S/12612, the Czechoslovak delegation took into
account the request made by the Government of Lebanon-a country with which Czechoslovakia has longstanding ties of co-operation and friendship-and therefore
abstained from voting on the draft.

8. The Soviet delegation proceeds from the premise that
the Secretary-General, following the practice established in
the past in this connexion, will obtain Security Council
consent in respect of such specific matters relating to the
operations as, for example, the choice of the countries
which will provide contingents to the force.

15. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): First, 1 wish to thank the
Secretary-General and his staff sincerely and profoundly for
preparing the report so speedily in the present difficult
circumstances.
16. My delegation voted for the approval of the report
with a view to ensuring the speediest dispatch of United
Nations forces in order to secure the cessation of hostilities
and the withdrawal of Israeli forces. It is the understanding
of the Government of Kuwait that the deployment of
United Nations forces will promote the restoration of
Lebanese sovereignty and that the presence of those forces
is conditional on the agreement and consent of the
Government of Lebanon. It is also the understanding of the
delegation of Kuwait that the deployment of these forces
will enhance the chances for the attaimnent by the people
of Palestine of their national rights.

9. As for the aspects of the report that relate to the
financing of this peace-keeping operation, the Soviet
delegation feels it necessary to stress once again that the
costs to be incurred in connexion with the consequences of
Israeli aggression against Lebanon, including the cost of
dispatching troops to Southern Lebanon, should be defrayed by the aggressor-Israel,
IO. The PRESIDENT:
I now put the draft resolution
contained in document S/12612 to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

17. Finally, Mr. President, I should like to express our
profound thanks to you personally for the brilliant manner
in which you conducted the proceedings of the Council in
these difficult circumstances,

In favour: Bolivia, Canada, France, Gabon, Germany,
Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius, Nigeria,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Venezuela.

18. Mr. LEONARD (United States of America): I shodd
like first of all to make two technical but not unimportant
points.

Against: None.
Abstaining:
Republics.

Czechoslovakia,

Union of Soviet Socialist

19. First, it is the understanding of my delegation that the
Secretary-General may act under the authority of paragraph 1 a of General Assembly resolution 32/214 to make
such commitments as are required to expedite initiation of
the mission authorized by resolution 425 (1978), bearing in
mind also the provisions of paragraph 3 of resolution
321214.

The draft resolution was adopted by 12 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions. 1
One member (Chinu) did not participate in the voting.
11. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those representatives wishing to speak in explanation of vote after the
vote.

20. Secondly, my delegation wishes to draw particular
attention to paragraph 11 of the report of the SecretaryGeneral which provides, inter alia, that the costs of the
Force shall be considered as expenses of the Organization
to be borne by Members in accordance with Article 17,
paragraph 2, of the Charter,

12. Mr. HULINSK~ (Czechoslovakia) (interpretation from
Russian): For the reasons stated by the Czechoslovak
1 See resolution 426

(1978).

2

21. In approving the Secretary-General’s report on the
United Nations Force in Lebanon, the Council has today
demonstrated that it can act effectively and rapidly to fulfil
its responsibilities for the maintenance of international
peace. The United States warmly welcomes the action just
taken. We recognize that establishment of the interim force
and endorsement of its terms of reference are only the first
steps in the difficult task ahead, Restoring peace and
security and assisting the Government of Lebanon to return
its effective authority to the area will require the support
and co-operation of all concerned. The Force must, in
addition, have the confidence and backing of this Council
at all times.

Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO), to deploy UNTSO observers with a view to confirming the
cessation of military action in the area.
3 1, In order to provide for an immediate presence of the
new Force in the area, 1 have instructed General Siilaswo
to co-ordinate with the Commanders of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) and the United
r Nations Emergency Force (UNEF) the temporary transfer
! of reinforced companies from the Austrian contingent in
r UNDOF and the Swedish contingent in UNEF to serve,
temporarily, as the advance guard of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
I have contacted the
Governments concerned with a view to having their
agreement to the proposed temporary transfer.

22. The Secretary-General has greatly assisted the Council
by the rapid preparation of his report on the implementation of resolution 425 (1978). We are certain that he will
now move equally swiftly to ensure that the resolution
which we just adopted will be promptly put into effect.

32. I have today made initial contacts with a number of
Governments with a view to ascertaining their willingness to
provide contingents for the new Force. I hope to be able to
consult the Council on this matter in the very near future.

23, To assist the Secretary-General at this critical juncture
1 am authorized to state that the United States, if requested
by the Secretary-General, is prepared to assist in airlifting
national contingents to the area of conflict so that they can
be introduced as quickly as possible.

33. As we are about to engage in this new operation, I feel
obliged to point out the extreme complexity and difficulty
of the task confronting the United Nations Force in
Southern Lebanon. It will have to ensure the peacef,d
character of the area of operation and, to that end, control
movement into and out of the zone. it will have to
co-operate with the Lebanese authorities, including the
army and police, in the process of restoring Lebanese
sovereignty.

24. I wish again to express my delegation’s firm support
for the Council’s action, which we view as another in a
series of steps towards a comprehensive, just and peaceful
settlement in the Middle East.
25. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France)
(interpretation
from
Frerzch): The delegation of France shares the view that the
Secretary-General can and must act in this matter in
accordance with paragraph 1 a of General Assembly resolution 32/214.

34. A number of basic prerequisites have not yet been
clarified. These include the modalities of the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from Southern Lebanon. I shall do my best to
clarify these and other matters both here at Headquarters
and through the contacts that I have instructed .General
Siilasvno to initiate in the area.

26. Moreover, the French delegation stresses the significance of paragraph 11 of the Secretary-General’s report,
which lays down the conditions for the financing of the
costs of the Force by the Members of the Organization.

35. The nature of United Nations peace-keeping operations, as ordered by the Security Council, requires the full
co-operation of all those concerned for their effectiveness. I
take this opportunity
to appeal once again for such
co-operation. These operations also require the full and
constant support of the Council itself. This will certainly be
particularly true of the operation on which we have just
embarked. I shall, of course, keep the Council fully
informed of developments relating to the Force and shall
not hesitate to seek its support whenever necessary.

27. Finally, Mr. President, my delegation wishes to associate itself with the members of the Council who have paid
a highly deserved tribute to you for the outstanding manner
in which you have guided our work throughout these
meetings.
28. The PRESIDENT: The Secretary-General wishes to
make a statement, and I now call on him.

36. Mr. BARTON (Canada): First, I should like to join
others in paying a tribute to the Secretary-General and his
staff for their good work in submitting the excellent report
which has been the subject of our work this evening.
Secondly, 1 should like to acknowledge the important
contribution of the Lebanese Government. This must have
been a very difficult and painfu1 task for it. Finally, 1
should like to pay due homage to you, Mr. President, as
others have done, for your wonderful work here in guiding
the Council during these recent very difficult days.

29. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Now that the Council
has approved my report on the implementation of resolution 425 (1978), I shall proceed to put into effect the plan
of action outlined in paragraph 9 of that document. I shall
instruct Lieutenant-General Siilasvuo, Chief Co-ordinator of
the United Nations Peace-keeping Missions in the Middle
East, immediately to initiate meetings on the withdrawal of
Israeli forces and the establishment of a United Nations
areaof operation.

37. The Secretary-General has just amplified his report
with some explanatory comments, which I must say I
found very helpful. It tnay be recalled that in my statement
yesterday [2073rd meeting] I drew attention to the

30. As I informed the Council this morning, following its
adoption of resolution 425 (1978) I have instructed
Major-General Erskine, the Chief of Staff of the United
3

importance we attached to the mandate of the Force and to
its being allowed to fulfil its functions. The comments that
the Secretary-General has just made reassure me in this
respect; I think that they will ensure that the Force
Commander will have the comprehensive and adequate
directions that he needs in order to be able fully to carry
out his responsibilities as envisaged in the resolution.
38. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Lebanon has
asked to be ahowed to speak, and I now call on him.
39. Mr. TUtiN1 (Lebanon): This has been a very long day,
but I did not want it to end without my addressing to the
Secretary-General my heartiest thanks for his personal
concern, for the tremendous efforts deployed by him
personally and by his assistants and other staff, and also for
the challenging task of peace-keeping that he has accepted.
I thank him in particular for having stated expressly here
that the Lebanese army and police forces would be called
upon to perform their roles.
40. I want to make one point clear for the record. The
word “parties” is used in the report of the Secretary
GeneraI. This is of course his report, and we all wish him to
retain the fullest freedom of movement. There are indeed
parties to the initial phase, namely, the withdrawal phase,
which we hope will be carried out immediately. Once the
withdrawal has been completed, however, it is our understanding that on Lebanese territory there is only one party
concerned, namely, the Lebanese Government, its authority
and its forces, the Lebanese Army and the Lebanese local
authorities,
41, I wish once again to thank the Secretary-General and
you, Mr. President. As I said, like the Secretary-General we
all view this as a challenge. My Government considers that
responsibilities have been placed before it which it has, in
the past, been criticized for not having exercised. I hope
that we shall prove that independence is for us more than
an empty word.

42. The PRESIDENT: There arc no more speakers, I s,,,
delighted to note, but I should like to say one or two v,ords
in my capacity as representative of the UNITED KING.
DOM.
43. No one approaches the end of this debate with greater
relief than I. The Security Council has met every day,
sometimes twice a day, since a week ago last Monday, and
while the office of the presidency of the Council affords its
temporary occupant a unique opportunity of listening to
and evaluating many different styles of diplomatic oratory,
it is a somewhat restricting position.
There
are
many
~110
CritiCiZe
the United Nations,
There are many who criticize the Security Council, assert.
mg that it falls short of discharging its responsibilities for
securing as best it can in an imperfect world internatlnilsl
peace and security. I do not think those criticisms canbe
justified this week-end. I think the Council has acted
swiftly to adopt two resolutions designed to bring abouta
cessation of hostilities in Lebanon, to maintain the cease.
fire and to bring about a resumption of the authority of he
Government of Lebanon. It is the cont’ident expectationof
the Council that those resolutions will be fully imple.
mented by all parties and that all parties will co-operate
fully with the Secretary-General and the Commander of the
new Force to that end.
4.

45. The Council has not been able to achieve these
resolutions alone. The speed and the efficiency of the
Secretary-General and his staff in producing the report
command our admiration. The patience and the anxiety of
those who have borne the burden of the negotiations have
brought us successfully to this end. Finally, there are all
those members of the Secretariat, particularly the staff of
the Security Council, without whose devotion and ability
we not only could not have produced these resolutions but
could not have functioned at all. On behalf of the Council,
I should like to thank them and everyone else who has
assisted in our work very much indeed.

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

ij

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obiained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
IJnies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les ajiences
depositaires
du mondo entier. Informex-vous
aup&
de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
k : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Gen&e.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

Las public&ones
de las Naciones
Unidas
e&n
buidoras
en todas partes do1 mundo.
Consulto
Unidas, Seccicin de Ventas, Nucva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en vcnta en librerias
y casas distria su librero o dirijasc
a: Nnciones

in other

currencies)

78-70005-February

1980--2,200
