S/PV.7612

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7612th meeting

Wednesday, 27 January 2016, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosselli. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Stehelin
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015) (S/2016/60)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-01946 (E)
*1601946*

S/PV.7612

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014)
and 2258 (2015) (S/2016/60)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Stephen O’Brien, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator; and Ms. Ertharin Cousin, Executive
Director of the United Nations World Food Programme.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/60, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014) and 2258 (2015).
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: For over five long years, the Syrian
people have endured one of the most savage and brutal
conflicts of the twenty-first century. The facts speak
for themselves: over 250,000 people killed; well over
a million injured; 6.5 million displaced within Syria;
almost 4.6 million refugees; and much of the remaining
population — some 13.5 million people — in dire need
of humanitarian assistance. We must never forget that
behind each of these figures are the individual and
personal stories of girls, boys, women and men whose
lives have been uprooted, whose dreams for the future
have been shattered, and who have witnessed and been
subjected to unspeakable fear and suffering.
This week, political talks are scheduled to begin,
led by Special Envoy De Mistura. I offer him once again
the full support of the humanitarian community in his
vital endeavour. We must all get behind his tireless
efforts to find a political solution to this shameful
tragedy. This political process offers a genuine window
of opportunity for the international community to come
together and find solutions that reduce suffering and

2/7

27/01/2016

bring an end to the conflict. I cannot stress enough that
we must not let this opportunity pass.
Since the adoption of resolution 2139 (2014) two
years ago, the Secretary-General has reported month
after month on the parties’ disregard for international
humanitarian and human rights law, their repeated
non-compliance with the Council’s demands on
protection of civilians and humanitarian access, and the
humanitarian catastrophe that has ensued. This month’s
report (S/2016/60) is equally as depressing as those
before it, highlighting how the human and social cost
of this conflict continues to spiral out of control. This
vicious cycle of death and destruction carries the grave
risk of being seen as having become, in many ways,
the new normal in Syria as the search for a political
solution continues. But the death, suffering and wanton
destruction and disregard for the law should never
be seen as normal. This tragedy is man-made. It is
hideous but it is avoidable. And we — the Security
Council — must come together to stop it.
Every time we think we have reached the nadir
of human suffering in this crisis, it continues to sink
deeper and deeper before our eyes. The recent pictures
of emaciated, starving children in the besieged town of
Madaya seemingly shocked the collective conscience
of the world. The humanitarian missions to Madaya
and the similarly besieged areas of Zabadani, Fu’ah
and Kafraya, undertaken by the United Nations, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent (SARC) over the past two
weeks have delivered desperately needed food, medical
and other aid sufficient for one month for over 60,000
people in total.
The original list of those requiring urgent medical
evacuation was 19. All of those people have been
evacuated. In fact, a total of 37 people out of 400
requiring medical attention have been evacuated. We
urgently need to get more medical supplies and teams
into Madaya. The last time SARC was able to enter
with supplies and teams was 15 January. Many of those
remaining need treatment where they are, rather than
evacuation. Simple treatments and supplies can provide
the care required. We do not know if there are others
who require evacuation. That is why it is vital we be
able to get independent medical teams in to assess the
most appropriate medical care for the sick and injured.
Humanitarian conditions in these areas remain
severe and critical, particularly the health of civilians

16-01946

27/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East

in Madaya. Negotiations continue to allow the free safe
passage — let me repeat, safe passage — of others in
both locations whose lives are at serious risk. These
negotiations with all parties must conclude urgently
to avoid more senseless death and suffering. In the
meantime, health supplies in Madaya are dwindling
fast, and recent United Nations and SARC requests
to the Syrian authorities for medical teams to enter
Madaya must be approved without delay or hindrance.
We also need similar, immediate safe access to Fu’ah
and Kafraya as conditions there also continue to
deteriorate sharply.
And why do we negotiate? Why do we request
safe access from all parties, but principally the Syrian
Government? We do so because although the Council
has adopted a resolution to allow for safe, unimpeded
access, that access does not always exist for the brave
women and men on the ground trying to deliver
assistance into these areas. Some simply say to me:
“The United Nations should break the sieges”, but
that would be reckless. It would ential sending convoy
drivers and humanitarian workers into the line of fire.
To be frank, the situation in Madaya is only the tip
of the iceberg. More and more people are living in areas
that are under siege or are harder to reach than ever
before. We are continually monitoring the situation on
the ground throughout Syria, and based on the latest
information we estimate that some 4.6 million people
are in hard-to-reach areas, subject to various forms of
restrictions on the movement of people and goods that
severely limit their access to services and humanitarian
assistance. Of that number, we estimate that some
486,700 people are currently living in besieged
areas — 274,200 people besieged by the Government
of Syria; 200,000 by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL); and 12,500 by non-State armed groups
and the Al-Nusra Front.
The continued use of siege and starvation as
a weapon of war is reprehensible. The SecretaryGeneral has said that such tactics can constitute a
war crime. They must stop immediately. The primary
responsibility lies with the party that maintains the
siege and routinely and systematically denies people
the basic necessities of life. However, other parties that
conduct military activities in or from populated areas,
using civilians as shields and endangering their safety,
also bear their share of responsibility for the immense
suffering in besieged areas. And those with influence

S/PV.7612

on the parties can demand it stops. I ask them to do so.
Now.
The indiscriminate use of weapons on civilians,
residential areas, aid supply routes and civilian
infrastructure protected under international law
continues, outrageously, with total impunity. Over the
past few weeks alone, hundreds of civilians have been
killed or injured in direct or indiscriminate attacks by all
parties, due to the continued use of explosive weapons
in populated areas, including through barrel bombs and
other aerial weapons, shelling and car bombs.
For example, on 12 January, reports indicate that
airstrikes on Ma’arat al-Numan city, in rural Idlib,
killed 33 people, while airstrikes on Sarmada town, in
northern Idlib, reportedly killed 29 persons on the same
day. In Madimayet, rural Damascus, at least 5 people
were killed and 25 more injured when two mortars
landed in the city centre on 23 January. Meanwhile,
a recent ISIL offensive on besieged Deir ez-Zour city
has reportedly resulted in the death of large numbers
of civilians, and we also remain extremely concerned
about unverified reports of deaths related to severe
malnutrition in the city.
Attacks on hospitals and schools continue unabated,
with grave repercussions for all civilians, including the
2 million children out of school. In 2015, according to
UNICEF, some 35 schools were attacked, with one in
four schools closed, damaged or destroyed. Meanwhile,
Physicians for Human Rights documented at least 112
attacks on medical facilities — an average of one every
three days — as well as the deaths of 107 medical
personnel last year.
We have asked the Council repeatedly to demand
that the parties to the conflict facilitate unhindered,
unconditional and sustained access across Syria, but that
is simply not happening. Active conflict and insecurity
are limiting factors, but all parties to the conflict
continue to deliberately delay or obstruct the delivery of
aid. While we continue to do everything in our power to
press the parties and influential stakeholders to reach
people in need across Syria, restrictions on aid delivery
remain a routine and systematic occurrence.
Despite our persistent and unrelenting efforts, our
ability to access hard-to-reach and besieged locations
remains severely hampered by the pitiful approval rate
for inter-agency convoys by the Syrian authorities.
In 2015, just over 10 per cent of the 113 requests for
inter-agency convoys resulted in the delivery of much-

16-019463/7

S/PV.7612

The situation in the Middle East

needed humanitarian and life-saving assistance. A
further 10 per cent were approved in principle but could
not proceed due to a lack of final approval, insecurity
or lack of agreement on safe passage. The United
Nations placed some 3 per cent of requests on hold due
to insecurity, and almost 75 per cent of requests went
unanswered by the Government of Syria. Such inaction
is simply unacceptable for a State Member of the United
Nations and a signatory to the United Nations Charter.
The impact on the ground is tangible: in 2013, we
reached some 2.9 million people through the inter-agency
convoy mechanism, but this past year only 620,000.
On 11 January, the United Nations requested approval
from the Government of Syria to conduct inter-agency
convoys to 46 besieged and hard-to-reach areas during
the first quarter of 2016. As of 27 January, 16 days later,
we have not received all of the necessary approvals for
any of these requests. If all these convoys, which remain
one of the most effective and efficient ways to reach
people across conflict lines, could proceed, we could
reach an estimated 1.7 million people in need today
who are being subjected to unnecessary and avoidable
suffering owing to the parties’ indifference to fulfilling
their basic international legal obligations.
We are in a race against time. More and more
people are slipping out of our reach every day as the
conflict intensifies and battle lines tighten. In 2015, the
United Nations delivered humanitarian assistance to
less than 10 per cent of people in hard-to-reach areas
and only around 1 per cent in besieged areas. From
our side, the United Nations remains committed to
the safe delivery of neutral, impartial and independent
humanitarian aid to all people directly affected by the
fighting, based on need and vulnerability — never on
political considerations. We stand ready to scale up
assistance as soon as security conditions and more
sustainable access allow. Resources are also vital, and
I encourage all Member States to pledge generously at
the upcoming London Conference on 4 February for
the desperate people inside Syria and for those who
have fled into the neighbouring countries. The United
Nations and its partners will be able to do our job the
best way possible only when we are fully resourced.
At the same time, the Council and Member States
with influence must take further steps to ensure
that the parties comply with their obligations under
international law and the demands of the Council
contained in resolution 2139 (2014). Specifically, this
will require urgent measures now to ensure that the

4/7

27/01/2016

parties, first, stop targeting civilians, as well as civilian
infrastructure, including medical facilities, schools
and other infrastructure and services which people
depend upon for their survival, including targeted or
indiscriminate attacks, as well as the use of explosive
weapons or landmines in populated areas, at all times.
Secondly, the parties must also facilitate full,
unhindered, unconditional and sustained access to all
people in need, including in besieged and hard-to-reach
areas, for all types of assistance, including medical
and surgical supplies. This must include, for example,
immediate approval of the outstanding requests
for inter-agency cross-line convoys by the Syrian
authorities. Non-State armed groups and listed terrorist
groups must also facilitate the deliveries that they are
preventing.
Thirdly, the parties must allow freedom of
movement for civilians of all ages to enter and exit
besieged and hard-to-reach areas in safety and dignity,
and permit the immediate medical evacuation of sick
and wounded patients to a safe place for treatment.
Even with the worsening situation and continued
access challenges, humanitarian workers in Syria
continue to stay and deliver aid, often at great personal
risk. Humanitarian organizations — both United
Nations and non-United Nations — are dedicating
unprecedented resources and efforts to reach Syrians in
need. Together, we delivered aid to millions of people
in 2015, including food assistance to nearly 6 million
people per month and health assistance to almost
16 million, and we provided 6.7 million people with
water, sanitation and hygiene support, and 4.8 million
with basic household items.
I salute the efforts of the thousands of — mostly
Syrian — staff and volunteers of the United Nations;
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent; the non-governmental
organizations (NGOs); the first responders; and the
staff of hospitals and clinics throughout the country,
who carry out their duties day after day in the face
of political pressure and, in some cases, violence and
intimidation from the parties to the conflict.
I remind the Council that each day the United
Nations and its partners are served by humanitarian
heroes: women and men who are willing to risk their
lives leading convoys into conflict zones to reach the
people who are so desperately in need. We should all
be inspired by their example, and we should all salute
them. The failure in Syria is a political failure, most

16-01946

27/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East

definitely not a failure on the part of these brave women
and men and the humanitarian organizations that they
represent.
I especially pay tribute to the 82 colleagues who
have lost their lives in the line of duty, including an
international NGO staff member from GOAL, killed by
an improvised explosive device in Idlib just two days
ago.
Let me be clear: the continued suffering of the
people in Syria cannot be blamed on the humanitarian
organizations and staff; it is the failure of both the parties
and the international community that has allowed this
conflict to continue for far too long. And try as we may,
humanitarian action cannot be a substitute for political
action. The only solution is through a political dialogue
that reduces and ultimately ends the violence. The key
stakeholders in the Syria crisis must do what has never
been done up to this point and put people before politics.
On the eve of further political talks, it is my
hope, and the hope of all humanitarians, that the key
stakeholders will finally take the bold, unselfish and
courageous decisions necessary to put an end to this
ruinous war and the unimaginable suffering it has
brought to the Syrian people.
Over the last five years, the Council has
demonstrated that when there is political will and a
unity of purpose, it is capable of reaching agreement
and taking decisive action to deal with the challenges
of the conflict in Syria. The Council has taken action
on chemical weapons in Syria; it has authorized crossborder humanitarian assistance; and it has taken action
recently to launch a political process.
But for the millions of people trapped under siege,
malnourished and lacking basic supplies, the Council
has simply not done enough. We have left those people
with no hope. They believe that the world has forgotten
them.
As this conflict approaches its sixth year, now is
the time for those Council members with influence
on the parties to put their differences aside and come
together, at the most senior political levels, to find
ways to improve access to the millions of Syrians who
remain trapped in besieged and hard-to-reach areas.
The Syrian people cannot wait any longer.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Cousin.

S/PV.7612

Ms. Cousin: Mr. President, I wish to thank you for
this opportunity.
Ten months ago, in this very Chamber, I reported
to the Council the World Food Programme’s (WFP)
grave concern at the deepening humanitarian
crisis inside Syria (see S/PV.7433). I discussed the
increasing hardship and deprivation facing people in
besieged areas, leading not only to despair but also to
malnutrition, starvation and death.
I called for the Council’s support for redoubling
efforts enabling the entire international humanitarian
system to access people in cut-off and hard-to-reach
areas. Today I not only reiterate the call for help; I implore
the Council for its assistance. The most powerful tool
at the disposal of the United Nations for the prevention
and protection of civilians — enshrined in international
humanitarian law — is strong, qualitative consensus.
Because the reality is more severe, the situation
today is also more severe than when I addressed the
Council 10 months ago. More than 4.6 million people,
as my colleague noted, are trapped in besieged or hardto-reach areas, and our food-security analysis suggests
that 2.5 million are severely food-insecure inside these
areas. Every day we receive alarming reports of a lack
of food and water and of acute malnutrition and death.
Food security requires not only food but also access to
water, sanitation and essential medical treatment. Let
us not allow populations in other locations to suffer the
same fate as Madaya if they are not already suffering.
As I am speaking to the Council now, we estimate that
there are 18 besieged areas and close to half a million
people cut off from food and other crucial humanitarian
assistance. In many of them, people are running out, or
may already have run out, of food. We simply do not
know. It is just a matter of time before the brutal images
we have witnessed these past few weeks hit our screens
again. UNICEF and the Ministry of Health have been
conducting assessments across the country, and severe
cases of acute malnutrition are surfacing in horrendous
numbers.
More than half of these places have been besieged
for a shocking three years. Some of their populations
can be found in parts of rural Damascus where the
WFP has not been able to provide food assistance for
three years and where we know the price of food is
more than double, and sometimes even triple, what it is
in Damascus. Moadamiyah borders Damascus city and
was one of the most contested locations at the beginning
of the crisis. In 2014, a reconciliation agreement was

16-019465/7

S/PV.7612

The situation in the Middle East

reached between the Government and armed groups
that allowed the first inter-agency convoy to enter
Moadamiyah in July of that year. After the agreement
was reached, people were able to leave and enter the city
through a single checkpoint, carrying small amounts of
food for their daily needs. However, unfortunately, the
checkpoint was closed in December 2015, and 44,000
people are now besieged inside the city. Directly
after the siege was lifted, people rushed to the small
shops to buy the food items that were available, and
that accelerated the price increases. Many items, such
as wheat flour, beans, pasta, lentils, oil and meat, are
now available only in very limited quantities. Fruits
are unavailable, in fact non-existent. What is most
heartbreaking is that this location is a mere 15-minute
drive from the WFP’s Damascus office, and yet we
cannot help.
In Darayya city, where farming has stopped
because of the heavy incidence of landmines, we
have recorded similar sharp price increases. Most
people consume just one meal a day. Together with
the international community, the WFP has continued
to appeal for access to these and other besieged and
hard-to-reach locations. The Council heard from my
colleague about the success, or lack of it, we have had
with our inter-agency requests. To date, more than
60 per cent of the requests that the WFP has made have
simply not received an answer. The meagre number
of positive responses we did get were then tied up in
bureaucratic procedures that resulted in zero access to
these besieged areas throughout 2015. We had recent
breakthroughs just this month. They have enabled us to
reach a mere 24 per cent of the besieged locations, with
one-off support in Idlib governorate, where opposition
groups have been blocking assistance to some 12,500
vulnerable Syrians.
I should also note that half the besieged
population — an estimated 200,000 people — are
trapped inside Deir ez-Zor, which the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) took control of in July
2014. Deir ez-Zor has largely been inaccessible to
humanitarian assistance since May of last year. ISIL
currently controls most areas of the governorate, while
the airport, along with five of the city’s neighbourhoods,
is under the control of the Syrian Government. It has
been reported that ISIL targets the besieged locations
on an almost daily basis, resulting in civilian fatalities
and injuries. ISIL maintains extremely tight control
over these cities, with little prospects for negotiation.
6/7

27/01/2016

The Damascus highway, the primary road for
taking supplies to Deir ez-Zor city, remains closed
due to the ongoing conflict, which means that the
airport is the only corridor through which to bring in
commodities, including food from outside. The WFP
has been authorized to airlift into Deir ez-Zor. However,
owing to a combination of reasons — the extensive
damage that has been done to the runway, a lack of
air-space security for our planes and the inability of
our staff and partners to distribute — we have been
powerless to assist those in need in Deir ez-Zor. At the
moment, small commercial airplanes carrying small
quantities of food are able to land, but this situation
has resulted in the highest price increases in the whole
country. The purchasing power of households has
consequently dropped to alarming levels, with people’s
access to food limited as their financial wherewithal
for buying food in the markets has been almost erased.
In fact, a month’s supply of basic food items costs some
LS240,000, 10 times what it would be in Damascus.
The truth is, the requirement in resolutions 2165
(2014) and 2139 (2014) that assistance not be impeded or
hindered has yet to be fully realized. Despite some local
successes, we do not have the access necessary to reach
the hungry and those in need. The fact is, our persistent
efforts to make gains in besieged and hard-to-reach
areas are still thwarted by many obstacles. The physical
and logistical challenges often pale in comparison to
the numerous checkpoints our vehicles and staff must
pass through, the presence of security forces in our
warehouses, the burdensome administrative procedures
surrounding the loading and sealing of our trucks and
the lengthy bilateral negotiations necessary to get
facilitation letters signed off on — not to mention the
presence of radical armed groups such as ISIL.
The time for fully and collectively implementing
the Council’s resolutions is long overdue. Access must
not be arbitrary, ad hoc or one-time. Effective access
must not require unreasonable approvals. It must be
reasonably safe, regular, transparent and accountable.
The Council can rest assured that the World Food
Programme and its partners will continue to do their
utmost to overcome these barriers and hurdles and
provide lifesaving assistance. We will continue with
our steadfast efforts, exhausting every means at our
disposal, reaching every child, woman and man in
Syria where we can. Yet we cannot and do not perform
alone. Of course, we work with others from the United
16-01946

27/01/2016

The situation in the Middle East

Nations country teams and our 40 non-governmental
organization partners.
Let me be very clear: to prevent imminent
starvation, we need the support and action of every
Council member and every Member State. Preventing
mass starvation requires more than a four-town
agreement. Preventing a humanitarian crisis requires
that humanitarian organizations have unimpeded and
sustained access in order to deliver immediate relief,
including food, to all those in need in Syria. Preventing
a humanitarian crisis requires humanitarian pauses and
unconditional, monitored ceasefires to enable food and
other urgent assistance to be delivered to civilians and
to support the necessary vaccination and other health
campaigns. Preventing a humanitarian crisis — and a
food nutrition security crisis — requires a halt to attacks
on civilian infrastructure. Preventing a humanitarian
crisis requires ensuring freedom of movement for all

S/PV.7612

civilians and the immediate lifting of all sieges by all
parties. That is the only way to end hunger and treat
malnutrition, child by child, adult by adult, town by
town.
Paulo Coelho has said that the world is changed by
our example, not by our opinion. Our responsibility is
to ensure that the decisions and choices made in this
Chamber become reality on the ground. That is the only
way we can save and protect people and enable Syria’s
next generation to heal.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Executive Director of the World Food Programme for
her briefing.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

16-019467/7
