S/2015/517

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 July 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus
I. Introduction
1.
The present report on the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP) covers developments from 16 December 2014 to 20 June 2015 and
brings up to date, since the issuance of my report dated 9 January 2015 ( S/2015/17),
the record of activities carried out by UNFICYP pursuant to Security Council
resolution 186 (1964) and subsequent Council resolutions, most recently resolution
2197 (2015).
2.
As at 31 May 2015, the strength of the military component stood at 859 for al l
ranks and the strength of the police component stood at 63 (see annex).

II. Significant political developments
3.
After an almost seven-month hiatus, negotiations were officially relaunched on
15 May 2015 with the facilitation of my Special Adviser on Cyprus, Espen Barth
Eide, during a meeting between the Greek Cypriot leader, Nicos Anastasiades, and
Mustafa Akıncı, who assumed the leadership of the Turkish Cypriot community on
30 April. At the meeting, Mr. Anastasiades provided Mr. Akıncı with the coordinates
of 28 minefields laid by the National Guard in the north of the island before and
during 1974, to which I referred in my previous report. Mr. Akıncı announced that,
from the following day, there would no longer be a requirement to fill in
administrative forms at crossing points.
4.
The positive momentum surrounding the resumption of the talks was further
enhanced on 23 May, when the two leaders took a walk together in old town
Nicosia, north and south and crossing through the buffer zone, durin g which they
emphasized their common vision for a united Cyprus and their joint commitment to
reaching a solution.
5.
On 28 May, the leaders announced further confidence-building measures that
would bring the two communities closer together, including wor king towards the
opening of more crossing points, starting at Lefka -Aplici/Lefke-Aplıç and
Deryneia/Derynia. They also agreed to take practical steps towards interconnecting
electricity grids and instructed the Technical Committee on Economic and
Commercial Matters to propose solutions to the important issue of mobile telephone
15-11194 (E)

100715

*1511194*

S/2015/517

interoperability. Since the resumption of the talks, the sides have agreed to establish
a committee on culture and a committee on gender equality.
6.
During my telephone calls to both leaders in May, I welcomed the relaunch of
the talks and encouraged both leaders to grasp the current opportunity with
determination to secure a comprehensive settlement.

III. Activities of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
7.
UNFICYP is intended first and foremost to prevent a recurrence of fighting
and to contribute to the maintenance of law and order and a return to normal
conditions. Its mandate requires reconciling security considerations and the
maintenance of the military status quo with allowing Cypriots who live and work in
the buffer zone to pursue civilian activities and enjoy full and productive lives. Such
an approach, when successful, builds confidence between communities and
contributes to the overall effort by the United Nations in support of the peace
process.

A.

Prevention of a recurrence of fighting and maintenance of the
military status quo
8.
During the reporting period, UNFICYP continued to maintain the integrity and
stability of the buffer zone, minor military violations committed by both sides
notwithstanding. Thanks to regular patrolling and its observation, reporting and
liaison infrastructure, UNFICYP continued to avert attempts by both forces to effect
low-level changes to the military status quo. However, the non-recognition by the
opposing forces of the aide-memoire of 1989, the lack of a common understanding
of the exact delineation of ceasefire lines and challenges to the authority of
UNFICYP in the buffer zone continue to be of concern.
9.
Building on the positive climate of the current and previous reporting periods,
relations between UNFICYP and the two opposing forces continued to improve.
More direct and effective lines of communication and regular meetings with the
respective commanders at UNFICYP headquarters and at the sector level have
helped to build trust and allowed for the closure of some long -standing issues.
10. During the previous reporting period, the Turkish forces removed
approximately 30 soldiers from eight positions in old town Nic osia, where the
opposing forces are in closest proximity to each other. The reduction was made
possible through the installation of 28 closed-circuit television cameras. Although
one of the cameras has since been removed, during the current reporting perio d
there was no further reduction in military personnel at the 19 positions where the
cameras remained, and two additional cameras have been installed in the Louroujina
pocket in sector 4. Without a corresponding reduction, the cameras confer a military
advantage and, as such, constitute a breach of the status quo.
11. Military positions established by both forces inside the buffer zone that violate
the status quo remain in place, as is the case in Strovilia. Discussions with the
Turkish forces on restrictions imposed on routine UNFICYP patrols in Strovilia
since June 2014 resulted in the restrictions being lifted during the reporting period.

2/12

15-11194

S/2015/517

The United Nations continues to hold the Government of Turkey responsible for the
status quo in Varosha.

B.

Demining activity
12. On 30 December, mines were displaced into the buffer zone from north of the
ceasefire line owing to heavy rain. The area, which is near Mammari in sector 1, is
regularly patrolled by UNFICYP and farmed by civilians. Following an ini tial risk
assessment by the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) in February 2015,
a team of Cambodian deminers from the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) initiated mine-clearance operations on 26 May, as it had done a year
earlier, also through inter-mission cooperation. As at 19 June, 4,275m², or
approximately 15 per cent of the hazardous area, had been cleared, with components
of two anti-tank mines and one anti-personnel mine identified and destroyed. To
avoid a similar incident in the future, UNFICYP liaised closely with the Turkish
Cypriot authorities and secured their commitment to clear the area north of the
ceasefire line in the coming months.
13. On 4 June, I met Mr. Akıncı, who asked for assistance in addressing the
challenge of the 28 minefields. In response, and with a view to facilitating future
demining, UNFICYP and UNMAS, with excellent cooperation from both sides,
worked to refine the data provided and map out the minefields, which are suspected of
containing both anti-tank and anti-personnel mines. A survey to assess the scope of
the contamination and the requirements for subsequent clearance started on 18 June.
14. The above-mentioned positive developments notwithstanding, no progress was
registered on the issue of access to the four known remaining minefields in the
buffer zone, of which three are under the control of the National Guard and one is
under the control of the Turkish forces, despite requests by UNFICYP . Efforts
continue at all levels to encourage both sides to advance a more comprehensive
approach to demining both inside and outside the buffer zone.

C.

Restoration of normal conditions and humanitarian functions
15. Relations between UNFICYP police and the police services of both sides
remained cooperative and constructive, with daily communications enhancing
cooperation and addressing operational matters within the buffer zone.
16. As part of mandated tasks to contribute to the maintenance of law and order,
UNFICYP police continued to assist and facilitate investigations into criminal
matters occurring within the buffer zone. This was the case in particular in the
mixed village of Pyla inside the buffer zone, where an increase in criminal activities
on the part of members of both communities was reported with regard to illegal
casinos, the number of which rose from three to four during the reporting period.
Efforts by UNFICYP to secure a practical solution to address criminal activities in
Pyla are ongoing.
17. In parallel to the liaison on the ground, UNFICYP continued to facilitate the
work of the Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters. On 20 May, the
Technical Committee organized a seminar on domestic violence prevention, which
took place at the Ledra Palace Hotel in the buffer zone and whic h was well attended

15-11194

3/12

S/2015/517

by participants from both sides. The Joint Communications Room continued to
provide a forum for information exchange on criminal matters with intercommunal
elements, including investigations of crimes and humanitarian cases.
18. During the reporting period, UNFICYP continued to face challenges to its
authority in the buffer zone and its personnel continued to be exposed to aggressive
behaviour from individuals engaged in unauthorized activities in the buffer zone.
UNFICYP urged the competent authorities promptly to address outstanding cases of
assault against UNFICYP personnel and property. On a positive note, and after
persistent efforts by UNFICYP, three hunters were convicted for entering the buffer
zone with weapons and assaulting a United Nations police officer. Likewise,
restrictions imposed on locally employed United Nations personnel entering the
north were lifted on 15 February.
19. In line with its mandate to contribute to a return to normal conditions,
UNFICYP continued to urge the authorities, local community leaders and civilians
to cooperate with the mission by providing relevant information on civilian projects
in the buffer zone in accordance with established procedures. In Pyla, small
unauthorized civilian construction projects initiated by the Turkish Cypriot
community led to heightened tensions during the reporting period. In one such
instance, UNFICYP negotiated a mutually acceptable solution to transform the
project into a bicommunal initiative that benefited both comm unities. The university
in Pyla continues to operate without the authorization of UNFICYP .
20. From December 2014 to May 2015, 868,694 official crossings of the buffer
zone were recorded. UNFICYP continues to play an important role with regard to
all interactions at, around or through crossing points. Following the announcement
by the leaders on 28 May, UNFICYP has been supporting the work of the Technical
Committee on Crossings on the opening of crossing points at Lefka -Aplici/LefkeAplıç and Deryneia/Derynia, while facilitating discussions on possible additional
crossing points to be opened in the future. UNFICYP police continued to provide
escorts for convoys with civilians and humanitarian supplies at the
Limnitis/Yeşilırmak crossing point, in accordance with the agreement reached by
the leaders in October 2010.
21. UNFICYP continued to manage farming and other civilian activities in the
buffer zone, issuing more than 944 permits for civilian activities and approving
22 out of 24 civilian construction projects. In support of civilian activities in the
buffer zone, UNFICYP facilitated the maintenance of essential infrastructure for
public utilities and services to both communities and encouraged the communities
living inside the buffer zone to adopt joint approaches to issues, such as respect for
the environment and cleaning.
22. UNFICYP continued to facilitate contacts between the two Nicosia
municipalities to promote enhanced cooperation in old town Nicosia, where the
buffer zone is at its most narrow. The mission facilitated six meetings of the Nicosia
municipalities to develop joint projects on environmental, social and health issues
of common concern. A joint walk along the Green Line on 10 March, which was
facilitated by UNFICYP, allowed the two mayors of Nicosia to discuss ways of
addressing day-to-day issues arising from the buffer zone.
23. Beyond the buffer zone, UNFICYP continued to provide humanitarian
assistance, including through weekly deliveries to 345 Greek Cypriots and 109

4/12

15-11194

S/2015/517

Maronites residing in the north and by facilitating the post-mortem transfer of six
Greek Cypriots for burial in northern villages. Logistical support and visits to the
Greek Cypriot schools in the Karpas Peninsula continued. Although requests for
Greek-speaking doctors to attend to the health needs of elderly Greek Cypriots and
Maronites in the north were still to be addressed, Greek-language medical services
were provided during the reporting period.
24. UNFICYP remained in contact with local authorities to ensure access for
Turkish Cypriots living in the south to health, welfare and educational services.
Although there were no new developments regarding the establishment of a Turkish language school in Limassol, a full-time Turkish Cypriot teacher has been engaged
at a high school in Limassol at which Turkish-language education is being offered
as an option in the curriculum. Two full-time Turkish Cypriot teachers have also
been assigned to a primary school attended by Turkish-speaking pupils.
25. During the reporting period, UNFICYP also assisted in addressing the legal
and humanitarian issues faced by Cypriots detained in the area controlled by the
other community through visits to the detention facilities where they were held. To
enhance confidence in the judicial proceedings, UNFICYP attended one court
hearing involving a Greek Cypriot in the north and four court hearings involving
Turkish Cypriots in the south.
26. UNFICYP continued its efforts to foster bicommunal cooperation and
reconciliation, including by supporting 70 civil society events in cooperation with
international and local partners, at which nearly 5,000 individuals from both
communities engaged in sporting, cultural, educational or other activities. One such
event was a bicommunal football tournament organized in Pyla on 18 April with
support from UNFICYP, which provided a much welcome opportunity for the two
communities to come together and which is expected to be replicated in the future.
Seven meetings between Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot political party
representatives were held under the auspices of the Embassy of Slovakia at the
Ledra Palace Hotel in the buffer zone, providing a forum for ongo ing political
dialogue. On 27 May, the political parties issued a joint statement in which they
committed themselves actively to support and promote greater public participation
in the resumed peace process.
27. Positive developments were also registered with regard to the reunification of
Cypriot football, which is supported by both leaders. In late March, the Cyprus
Turkish Football Association announced its intention to submit an application for
membership to the Cyprus Football Association and, as a pr eliminary step, approved
the harmonization of its charter with Fédération internationale de football
association and Union of European Football Associations standards on 8 May .
28. Further progress was made during the reporting period in opening for worsh ip
religious sites in the north that had been inaccessible since 1974. UNFICYP
facilitated 35 religious services and commemorative events involving more than
9,000 individuals that were conducted in the buffer zone or required crossings to the
other side. Services were held for the first time at the Panayia monastery in Mandres
and in the churches of Ayios Georgios Xalonon in Kato Zhodia, Ayios Georgios in
Karavas and Ayia Eirini in Kyrenia. Separately, on 12 April UNFICYP facilitated
the crossing of some 200 pilgrims from the north to the Hala Sultan Tekke mosque
in Larnaca in the south.

15-11194

5/12

S/2015/517

29. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) continued to work with
the Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage on the protection of cultural heritage
on both sides of the island. The restoration of six cultural heritage sites was
completed during the reporting period. The restoration of Othello Tower in
Famagusta was completed at the end of June, while significant progress has also
been made in the restoration of Apostolos Andreas monastery in the Karpas
Peninsula. Separately, and in support of a political settlement, UNDP continued to
facilitate the Cyprus dialogue forum, bringing together 94 organizations from both
communities, including political parties, business and industry organizations, trade
unions, non-governmental organizations and wider civil society. The forum, which
provides a platform for citizens to be heard with regard to the peace process, was
formally launched through adoption of a declaration on 12 March in the presence of
Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot negotiators.
30. The Cyprus Chamber of Commerce and Industry and the Turkish Cypriot
Chamber of Commerce continued to provide a model for cooperation and to
advocate actively for the solution of the question of Cyprus. During the reporting
period, the Chambers worked on a number of initiatives, such as the launch of an
intercommunal internship programme and a bicommunal business incubation centre.
At the third meeting of the Nicosia Economic Forum, which was held in Athens on
5 February and which brought together the two chambers of Cyprus with the Union
of Chambers and Commodity Exchanges of Turkey and the Union of Hellenic
Chambers of Commerce and Industry of Greece, the importance of a solut ion in
Cyprus and the possible contribution of the chambers to that outcome was stressed.

IV. Committee on Missing Persons
31. On 28 May, following their second official meeting, Mr. Anastasiades and
Mr. Akıncı issued a joint statement in which they stressed the importance of the
issue of missing persons and appealed for anyone with information to approach the
Committee on Missing Persons. As at 16 June 2015, the Committee’s bicommunal
teams of archaeologists had exhumed the remains of 967 missing per sons on both
sides of the island. To date, the remains of 583 individuals have been identified and
returned to their respective families, including 34 during the reporting period. Since
the beginning of 2015, the Turkish forces have given Committee excavat ion teams
access to two additional military areas, one following a written request sent by the
Committee, and the other following the accidental discovery of human remains
during construction work.

V. Financial and administrative aspects
32. As indicated in my previous report, the General Assembly, by its resolution
69/296, appropriated the amount of $52.54 million gross for the maintenance of
UNFICYP for the period from 1 July 2015 to 30 June 2016, inclusive of the
voluntary contribution of one third of the net cost of the Force, equivalent to
$17.61 million, from the Government of Cyprus and the voluntary contribution of
$6.5 million from the Government of Greece.
33. As at 24 June 2015, the total outstanding assessed contributions to the special
account for UNFICYP for the period from 16 June 1993 to 24 June 2015 amounted

6/12

15-11194

S/2015/517

to $16.95 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions for all peacekeeping
operations as at the same date amounted to $1.9 billion.
34. As at 24 June 2015, amounts owed to contributors for troop costs totalled
$1.08 million. The reimbursements of troop and contingent -owned equipment costs
have been made for the period up to 30 April 2015 and 31 March 2015 respectively,
in accordance with the quarterly schedule.

VI. Observations
35. I note the positive momentum surrounding the resumption of the talks, as well
as the energy and dedication displayed by both sides. I welcome the commitment
expressed by the leaders to work tirelessly to reach a comprehensive settlement o f
the question of Cyprus as soon as possible. I encourage both leaders to grasp the
current unique opportunity to create a peaceful common future for the island. I
intend to submit a detailed report on my good offices mission in the fall of 2015.
36. I also welcome the commitment by the leaders to seek early agreement on
confidence-building measures, and I urge them to take decisive and pragmatic steps
towards tangibly implementing those measures in good faith and without delay. The
agreement of the leaders to measures such as the interconnection of electricity grids
and mobile telephone interoperability will, when those measures materialize, have a
significant positive impact on the daily lives of people in both communities.
37. I further welcome the decision of the two leaders to establish a committee on
culture and a committee on gender equality, the purpose of the latter being, inter
alia, to bring a more equal understanding of the perspectives of both women and
men into the peace process. The decision of the leaders to open additional crossing
points is a particularly welcome development and one that increasingly has been
called for by the communities at the grass-roots level. I encourage the sides to agree
on further suitable locations for crossing points. Likewise, I commend the decision
of the Turkish Cypriot leader, Mr. Akıncı, to facilitate crossings by removing the
requirement to complete administrative forms at crossing points. UNFICYP will
continue to lend its facilitation assistance and to help to coordinate works to realize
new crossing points.
38. The progress made in demining is tangible. I commend the decision of the
Greek Cypriot leader, Mr. Anastasiades, to provide information on the 28 National
Guard minefields currently in the north. As I informed Mr. Akıncı, I am committed
to providing all possible assistance to facilitate the clearance of what remains of
those 28 minefields. For its part, UNFICYP, with support from UNIFIL and
UNMAS, is clearing the affected area inside the buffer zo ne so that patrols and
farming activities can resume. I thank Cambodia, under the framework of inter mission cooperation, for agreeing to the temporary redeployment of its mineclearance team from UNIFIL to UNFICYP, and I thank the Security Council for its
ongoing support to this operation. I also welcome the cooperation of the Turkish
Cypriots in committing to clear the Turkish forces’ minefield adjacent to the
ceasefire line near Mammari.
39. With the opening of new crossing points, which will require mi ne clearance
around the ceasefire lines, a comprehensive approach to demining is now required. I
call upon both leaders to intensify their efforts to that end, to facilitate, without

15-11194

7/12

S/2015/517

delay, access to all remaining mined areas inside and outside the buffer zone, in line
with Security Council resolution 2197 (2015), and to achieve, finally, a mine -free
Cyprus.
40. UNFICYP continued to promote civilian use of the buffer zone, provided that
it did not affect security and stability. Such activities, undertaken in accordance with
UNFICYP procedures, promote trust between the communities, particularly projects
that are jointly agreed. In that light, I once again call upon the respective authorities
to act decisively towards all who engage in activities not authori zed by UNFICYP,
thus showing respect for the Force’s authority in the buffer zone, supporting it in the
implementation of its mandate and avoiding unnecessary tension at this time. I
welcome the lifting of restrictions on the freedom of movement of locally employed
United Nations personnel to the north.
41. The security and environmental challenges in old town Nicosia, and in
particular in the militarized area within the Venetian walls, where the buffer zone is
at its most narrow, need to be addressed. I reiterate my call for both sides and their
respective leaderships, the mayors and municipalities of Nicosia and those in charge
of the Nicosia Master Plan to adopt a holistic approach to the urban infrastructure of
the old town through joint projects that could attract investment and thereby
transform the wider area. Together with the opening of new crossing points and a
reduction in military personnel, such an approach could contribute to a greater sense
of security and a return to normal conditions along the Green Line, as well as
promoting public confidence between the communities.
42. The advances made in reuniting Cypriot football are also encouraging and
convey a powerful and positive message to the public on both sides. I appreciate the
leadership of the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot football associations for their
commitment and I encourage them to complete the process, with continued support
from Mr. Anastasiades and Mr. Akıncı.
43. I commend once again business leaders for their vision, and I en courage
enhanced support by all concerned for their efforts to promote private sector
initiatives that could have a positive effect on the continued regrettably low level of
trade crossing the buffer zone, despite a reported 3.1 per cent increase in its va lue in
2014.
44. In previous reports, I have called upon both community leaders to exert efforts
to create a climate conducive to achieving greater economic and social parity
between the two sides and to widen and deepen economic, social, cultural, sportin g
or similar ties and contacts, including with a view to encouraging trade. Such
contacts promote trust between the communities and help to address the Turkish
Cypriots’ concerns of isolation. I am pleased to note that early steps in this direction
are being taken by the leaders, and I urge them to continue to address these issues.
Likewise, I encourage the sides to fully engage civil society in the ongoing process,
with a view to fostering grass-roots support for a solution.
45. The dialogue among the leaders of the religious communities continues to
make good progress by fostering understanding and overcoming mistrust. I strongly
encourage both sides to support the dialogue, including by enabling further access
for worship to the more than 500 churches and other places of worship in the north
and the some 100 mosques in the south.

8/12

15-11194

S/2015/517

46. In the background to the above-mentioned welcome developments, the
situation along the ceasefire lines remained calm and stable. At the same time,
minor incidents and challenges, which passed largely unnoticed by the wider public,
remained a regular occurrence. Frequent unauthorized civilian activity in the buffer
zone, resulting in part from a perception of greater security, also further complicated
the overall security situation in the buffer zone. In that context, the Force’s regular
patrolling and liaison with the opposing forces and the respective authorities
continued to play an important role in preventing an escalation of tensions.
47. In the current positive climate, and in the light of the commitment of the two
sides to build trust between the communities, it is more important than ever that the
opposing forces respond positively to the Force Commander’s efforts to strengthen
relations and engage actively with UNFICYP on military confidence-building
measures. I call again upon both sides to formally accept the aide -memoire of 1989,
bringing an end to the contestation of the United Nations delineation of the ceasefire
lines.
48. Although the lifting of restrictions on the freedom of movement of UNFICYP
is a welcome development, Strovilia, along with other positions established inside
the buffer zone, remains the location of a permanent violation of the status quo.
Likewise, while closed-circuit television cameras can help to monitor criminal
activity in the buffer zone, such installations constitute a military advantage and a
violation of the status quo if unaccompanied by a reduction in military personnel. I
therefore strongly encourage further reductions in the military presence along the
ceasefire line, including in the 21 locations equipped with the cameras.
49. It is also incumbent upon the sides, without further delay, to find a practical
and mutually acceptable solution to addressing the illegal activities in Pyla, which
are a growing source of concern for the communities residing in the village. The
absence of an agreement to date on a way forward has become a source of tension
between the sides, including at the political level. I once ag ain call upon both sides
to work with UNFICYP to find workable and safe policing solutions to criminal
activities in Pyla.
50. The United Nations remains committed to supporting the critical humanitarian
work being done on behalf of the families of victims through the Committee on
Missing Persons. While I welcome the results achieved by the Committee during the
reporting period, I also note that, 50 years after their disappearance, half of all
missing persons have yet to be located and more than 70 per cent have yet to be
identified. It is critical that the work of the Committee suffers no further delays. The
aforementioned statistics and the advancing age of the relatives of the missing
persons highlight the need to expedite the process, including through an accelerated
granting of access to military areas by the Turkish forces, as has been the case
during the reporting period.
51. UNFICYP continues to play an important role on the island by exercising
authority in the buffer zone and contributing to keeping the peace and resolving
various issues that affect the daily lives of individuals in both communities. Its
ability to play this role, however, depends by and large on the commitment of the
two sides to refrain from challenging its authority and legitimac y in the buffer zone.
In calling upon both sides to continue to cooperate with UNFICYP in good faith, I
recommend that the mandate of the mission be extended for a period of six months,
until 31 January 2016.

15-11194

9/12

S/2015/517

52. UNFICYP continues to maintain close collaboration with my mission of good
offices and other United Nations actors on the island. In line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, most recently resolution 2197 (2015), the mission
remains engaged in contingency planning in relation to a settle ment. The planning
will continue to be guided by developments in the negotiations and the views of the
parties on the possible role of the United Nations in that regard.
53. At the same time, I will continually keep the operations of UNFICYP under
close review, taking into account developments on the ground and the views of the
parties, and will report to the Security Council with recommendations, as
appropriate, for further adjustments to the UNFICYP mandate, force levels and
concept of operations as soon as warranted.
54. UNFICYP may be expected to play a critical support role in the coming period
in helping to implement further confidence-building measures that may be agreed
by the leaders, for example, in facilitating and overseeing demining efforts in
accordance with International Mine Action Standards and in effectively monitoring,
securing and ensuring the integrity of any new crossings through the buffer zone. In
particular, the mission’s capacity to respond effectively may be tested and may need
to be reviewed.
55. I once again express my gratitude to the 34 countries that have now
contributed since 1964 either troops or police or both to the mission, and I pay
tribute to the 186 peacekeepers who lost their lives over that period in support of
peace in Cyprus. It is incumbent upon all parties to work in a determined manner
towards a comprehensive settlement, to which all Cypriots aspire and which would
obviate the continuing need for a peacekeeping presence.
56. I would like to express my appreciation to my Special Representative and Head
of UNFICYP, Lisa M. Buttenheim, including for her commitment and dedication in
serving as my Deputy Special Adviser. I also would like to thank the UNFICYP Force
Commander, Major General Kristin Lund, for her service in the past year. UNFICYP
continues to lead the way in increasing the numbers of female personnel across the
military, police and civilian components. Finally, I extend my thanks to all the men
and women serving in UNFICYP for the efficiency and commitment with which they
have discharged the responsibilities entrusted to them by the Security Council. I also
express my appreciation to my Special Adviser, Mr. Eide.

10/12

15-11194

S/2015/517

Annex
Countries providing military and police personnel to the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (as at
31 May 2015)
Country

Military personnel

Argentina a

294

Austria

4

Canada

1

Norway

2
b

84

Slovakia c

200

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

274

Hungary

Total

Country

859

Police personnel

Australia

15

Bosnia and Herzegovina

8

China

2

India

8

Ireland

12

Lithuania

1

Montenegro

4

Romania

2

Serbia

2

Slovakia

2

Ukraine

7

Total

63

a

The Argentine contingent includes soldiers from Brazil (1), Chile (14) and Paraguay (14).
The Hungarian contingent includes soldiers from Serbia (7).
c
The Slovakian contingent includes soldiers from Serbia (39) and Ukraine (2).

b

15-11194

11/12

S/2015/517

12/12

15-11194
