UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/49
3 October 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3584th meeting of the Security Council, held on 3 October 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Croatia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council expresses its concern at the humanitarian
situation in and around the Republic of Croatia, including the situation of
refugees from the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"The Security Council is particularly concerned at the withdrawal of
refugee status from and the consequent ending of assistance to many
refugees from the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina at present in the
Republic of Croatia. The decisions of the Government of Croatia in this
regard may lead to the involuntary return of tens of thousands of people to
an area that is neither safe nor prepared to receive them. The Council
stresses the importance of the principle of non-refoulement set out in the
1951 Geneva Convention on the Status of Refugees, to which Croatia is a
party. The Council urges the Government of Croatia to continue to provide
asylum to all refugees regardless of their origin.
"The Security Council is also seriously concerned at the situation of
the refugees from the Republic of Croatia wishing to return, as well as of
those ethnic Serbs who have chosen to remain in the Republic of Croatia.
It reiterates its demands, contained inter alia in its resolution
1009 (1995), that the Government of Croatia respect fully the rights of the
local Serb population including their right to remain or return in safety,
investigate all reports of human rights violations and take appropriate
measures to put an end to such acts. The Council calls upon the Government
of Croatia to lift any time-limits placed on the return of refugees to
Croatia to reclaim their property. The Council also calls on the
Government to cooperate with international humanitarian organizations in
the creation of conditions conducive for the repatriation of refugees in
safety and dignity.
"The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter."

----95-29566 (E)

031095
