A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/154
7 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 95
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/605)]

49/154.

Policies and programmes involving youth

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/135 of 16 December 1977 and 36/17 of
9 November 1981, by which it adopted guidelines for the improvement of the
channels of communication between the United Nations and youth and youth
organizations, resolution 40/14 of 18 November 1985, entitled "International
Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace", and resolution 45/103 of
14 December 1990, in which it decided to devote a plenary meeting at its
fiftieth session to youth questions,
Noting that the year 1995 will mark the fiftieth anniversary of the
Charter of the United Nations and the tenth anniversary of International Youth
Year,
Recognizing that, in implementing the guidelines, priority should be
given to the enjoyment by youth of human rights, including the right to
education and to work, and to the resolution of other urgent problems faced by
young people in the present-day world, such as hunger, the deterioration of
the environment, drug abuse, disability and disease, including acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS),
Recalling the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 1/ which entered
into force on 2 September 1990, the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action, adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 2/
the World Declaration on the Survival, Protection and Development of Children
and the Plan of Action for Implementing the World Declaration on the Survival,

1/

Resolution 44/25, annex.

2/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

95-76555

/...

A/RES/49/154
Page 2
Protection and Development of Children in the 1990s, adopted by the World
Summit for Children on 30 September 1990, 3/
Noting the holding of the Youth Forum of the United Nations System, at
Vienna from 27 to 29 May 1991, stressing the importance of the role of
non-governmental organizations devoted to questions of youth in the
contribution to United Nations policies in the field of youth, and welcoming
the increasing activities of the youth employment programme HOPE ’87 and its
close collaboration with the United Nations in bringing about employment
opportunities for young people, especially in developing countries,
1.
Encourages all States, all United Nations bodies, in particular
the Economic and Social Council through the Commission for Social Development,
the specialized agencies and the intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations concerned, in particular youth organizations, to continue to
exert all possible efforts for the implementation of the guidelines for
further planning and suitable follow-up in the field of youth; 4/
2.
Calls upon Member States to enable young people to obtain a
comprehensive education, including in human rights questions, environmental
questions and cross-cultural issues, with a view to fostering mutual
understanding and tolerance;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with Member
States and youth organizations, to evaluate youth programmes that were
developed during the follow-up of International Youth Year and to report to
the General Assembly at its fifty-second session, with a view to ensuring
effective implementation of a world programme of action for youth to the year
2000 and beyond; 5/
4.
Encourages the preparation by Member States that have not yet done
so, of a national youth policy, based on an analytical national evaluation of
the situation and needs of youth;
5.
Calls once again upon Member States, United Nations bodies and
non-governmental organizations to implement fully the guidelines for the
improvement of the channels of communication between the United Nations and
youth and youth organizations, adopted by the General Assembly by its
resolutions 32/135 and 36/17, and in particular to facilitate, in accordance
with these resolutions, the activities of youth mechanisms that have been set
up by youth and youth organizations;
6.
Calls upon the regional commissions that have not yet done so,
together with regional youth and youth-serving organizations, to finalize the
comprehensive review of the progress achieved and the obstacles encountered in
the regions since 1985 and to propose draft regional programmes of action for
youth to the year 2000 and beyond;
7.
Invites once again Member States to include, whenever possible,
youth representatives in their national delegations to the General Assembly
and other relevant United Nations meetings, with particular emphasis on the
fiftieth session of the General Assembly, in order to mark the tenth
anniversary of International Youth Year, thus enhancing and strengthening the
channels of communication through the discussion of youth-related issues, with

3/

A/45/625, annex.

4/

See A/40/256, annex.

5/

See E/CN.5/1993/10 and E/CN.5/1993/L.11, annex.
/...

A/RES/49/154
Page 3
a view to finding solutions to the problems confronting youth in the
contemporary world;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to make recommendations on the need
for specific programmes aimed at encouraging school attendance through various
means, in particular by the provision of lessons free of charge and, where
appropriate, free food in schools, in close coordination with the United
Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the multilateral financial institutions, bearing in mind the
fundamental importance to youth of increasing literacy rates as set out in the
draft world programme of action for youth to the year 2000 and beyond;
9.
Decides to consider the question of policies and programmes
involving youth under the item entitled "Social development" at its fiftysecond session based upon a report to be submitted by the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the present resolution.
94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
