A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/S-20/3
8 September 1998

Twentieth special session
Agenda items 9, 10 and 11
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/S-20/11)]
S-20/3.

Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction

The General Assembly
Adopts the Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction annexed to the present
resolution.
9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998

98-77395

/...

A/RES/S-20/3
Page 2

ANNEX
Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction1
I. THE CHALLENGE
1. All countries are affected by the devastating consequences of drug abuse and illicit trafficking:
adverse effects on health; the upsurge in crime, violence and corruption; the draining of human, natural
and financial resources that might otherwise be used for social and economic development; the destruction
of individuals, families and communities; and the undermining of political, cultural, social and economic
structures.
2. Drug abuse affects all sectors of society and countries at all levels of development. Therefore, drug
demand reduction policies and programmes should address all sectors of society.
3. A rapidly changing social and economic climate, coupled with increased availability and promotion
of drugs and the demand for them, have contributed to the increasing magnitude of the global drug abuse
problem. The complexity of the problem has been compounded by changing patterns of drug abuse,
supply and distribution. There has been an increase in social and economic factors which make people,
especially the young, more vulnerable and likely to engage in drug use and drug-related risk-taking
behaviour.
4. Extensive efforts have been and continue to be made by Governments at all levels to suppress the
illicit production, trafficking and distribution of drugs. The most effective approach to the drug problem
consists of a comprehensive, balanced and coordinated approach, by which supply control and demand
reduction reinforce each other, together with the appropriate application of the principle of shared
responsibility. There is now a need to intensify our efforts at demand reduction and to provide adequate
resources towards that end.
5. Programmes to reduce the demand for drugs should be part of a comprehensive strategy to reduce
the demand for all substances of abuse. Such programmes should be integrated to promote cooperation
among all concerned, should include a wide variety of appropriate interventions, should promote health
and social well-being among individuals, families and communities and should reduce the adverse
consequences of drug abuse for the individual and for society as a whole.
6. The present Declaration is an important initiative of the United Nations Decade against Drug Abuse,
covering the period from 1991 to 2000. It responds to the need for an international instrument on the
1

The term "drug demand reduction" is used to describe policies or programmes directed towards reducing the
consumer demand for narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances covered by the international drug control
conventions (the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol [United Nations,
Treaty Series, vol. 976, No. 14152], the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 [ibid., vol. 1019, No.
14956] and the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of
1988 [see Official Records of the United Nations Conference for the Adoption of a Convention against Illicit Traffic
in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, Vienna, 25 November-20 December 1988, vol. I (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.94.XI.5)]). The distribution of these narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances is forbidden
by law or limited to medical and pharmaceutical channels.

/...

A/RES/S-20/3
Page 3

adoption of effective measures at the national, regional and international levels against the demand for
illicit drugs. It builds and expands upon a number of related international conventions and
recommendations, which are referred to in the appendix to the present Declaration.
II. THE COMMITMENT
7.

We the States Members of the United Nations:

(a) Undertake that the present Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction
shall direct our actions;
(b) Pledge a sustained political, social, health and educational commitment to investing in demand
reduction programmes that will contribute towards reducing public health problems, improving individual
health and well-being, promoting social and economic integration, reinforcing family systems and making
communities safer;
(c) Agree to promote, in a balanced way, interregional and international cooperation in order to
control supply and reduce demand;
(d) Adopt measures as provided for in article 14, paragraph 4, of the United Nations Convention
against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, which states, inter alia, that
parties should adopt "appropriate measures aimed at eliminating or reducing illicit demand for narcotic
drugs and psychotropic substances" and may enter into bilateral or multilateral agreements or arrangements
aimed at eliminating or reducing that demand.
III. GUIDING PRINCIPLES
8. The following principles shall guide the formulation of the demand reduction component of national
and international drug control strategies, in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, in particular, respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States,
human rights and fundamental freedoms and the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights,2 and the principle of shared responsibility:
(a) There shall be a balanced approach between demand reduction and supply reduction, each
reinforcing the other, in an integrated approach to solving the drug problem;
(b) Demand reduction policies shall:

2

(i)

Aim at preventing the use of drugs and at reducing the adverse consequences of drug abuse;

(ii)

Provide for and encourage active and coordinated participation of individuals at the community
level, both generally and in situations of particular risk, by virtue, for example, of their
geographical location, economic conditions or relatively large addict populations;

Resolution 217 A (III).

/...

A/RES/S-20/3
Page 4

(iii)

Be sensitive to both culture and gender;

(iv)

Contribute towards developing and sustaining supportive environments.
IV. CALL FOR ACTION
A. ASSESSING THE PROBLEM

9. Demand reduction programmes should be based on a regular assessment of the nature and magnitude
of drug use and abuse and drug-related problems in the population. This is imperative for the
identification of any emerging trends. Assessments should be undertaken by States in a comprehensive,
systematic and periodic manner, drawing on results of relevant studies, allowing for geographical
considerations and using similar definitions, indicators and procedures to assess the drug situation.
Demand reduction strategies should be built on knowledge acquired from research as well as lessons
derived from past programmes. These strategies should take into account the scientific advances in the
field, in accordance with the existing treaty obligations, subject to national legislation and the
Comprehensive Multidisciplinary Outline of Future Activities in Drug Abuse Control.3
B. TACKLING THE PROBLEM
10. Demand reduction programmes should cover all areas of prevention, from discouraging initial use to
reducing the negative health and social consequences of drug abuse. They should embrace information,
education, public awareness, early intervention, counselling, treatment, rehabilitation, relapse prevention,
aftercare and social reintegration. Early help and access to services should be offered to those in need.
C. FORGING PARTNERSHIPS
11. A community-wide participatory and partnership approach is crucial to the accurate assessment of the
problem, the identification of viable solutions and the formulation and implementation of appropriate
policies and programmes. Collaboration among Governments, non-governmental organizations, parents,
teachers, health professionals, youth and community organizations, employers’ and workers’ organizations
and the private sector is therefore essential. Such collaboration improves public awareness and enhances
the capacity of communities to deal with the negative consequences of drug abuse. Public responsibility
and awareness and community mobilization are of paramount importance to ensuring the sustainability
of demand reduction strategies.
12. Demand reduction efforts should be integrated into broader social welfare and health promotion
policies and preventive education programmes. It is necessary to secure and sustain an environment in
which healthy choices become attractive and accessible. Efforts to reduce the demand for drugs should
be part of a broader social policy approach that encourages multisectoral collaboration. Such efforts

3

See Report of the International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, Vienna, 17-26 June 1987 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.87.I.18), chap. I, sect. A.

/...

A/RES/S-20/3
Page 5

should be comprehensive, multifaceted, coordinated and integrated with social and public policies that
influence the overall health and social and economic well-being of people.
D. FOCUSING ON SPECIAL NEEDS
13. Demand reduction programmes should be designed to address the needs of the population in general,
as well as those of specific population groups, special attention being paid to youth. Programmes should
be effective, relevant and accessible to those groups most at risk, taking into account differences in gender,
culture and education.
14. In order to promote the social reintegration of drug-abusing offenders, where appropriate and
consistent with the national laws and policies of Member States, Governments should consider providing,
either as an alternative to conviction or punishment, or in addition to punishment, that abusers of drugs
should undergo treatment, education, aftercare, rehabilitation and social reintegration. Member States
should develop within the criminal justice system, where appropriate, capacities for assisting drug abusers
with education, treatment and rehabilitation services. In this overall context, close cooperation between
criminal justice, health and social systems is a necessity and should be encouraged.
E. SENDING THE RIGHT MESSAGE
15. Information utilized in educational and prevention programmes should be clear, scientifically accurate
and reliable, culturally valid, timely and, where possible, tested with a target population. Every attempt
should be made to ensure credibility, avoid sensationalism, promote trust and enhance effectiveness.
States should, in cooperation with the media, seek to raise public consciousness about the hazards of drug
use and to promote prevention messages, countering the promotion of drug use in popular culture.
F. BUILDING ON EXPERIENCE
16. States should place appropriate emphasis on training policy makers, programme planners and
practitioners in all aspects of the design, execution and evaluation of demand reduction strategies and
programmes. Those strategies and programmes should be ongoing and should be aimed at meeting the
needs of participants.
17. Demand reduction strategies and specific activities should be thoroughly evaluated to assess and
improve their effectiveness. The evaluations should also be appropriate to the specific culture and
programme involved. The results of these evaluations should be shared with all those interested.

/...

A/RES/S-20/3
Page 6

APPENDIX
Supplementary reference material for Governments considering national drug control strategies
1. Under article 38 of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972
Protocol and article 20 of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971, parties to those
conventions are required to take all practicable measures for the prevention of abuse of narcotic drugs or
psychotropic substances and "for the early identification, treatment, education, aftercare, rehabilitation and
social reintegration of the persons involved". Article 14, paragraph 4, of the United Nations Convention
against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988 states that parties "shall
adopt appropriate measures aimed at eliminating or reducing illicit demand for narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, with a view to reducing human suffering and eliminating financial incentives for
illicit traffic."
2. Taking into account the fact that the rise in global concern about the extent, nature and effects of drug
abuse has created an opportunity and the will to intensify action, States reaffirm the validity and
importance of the international agreements and declarations in the area of demand reduction that have been
elaborated. The importance of demand reduction was confirmed by the International Conference on Drug
Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, held at Vienna from 17 to 26 June 1987, which adopted the Comprehensive
Multidisciplinary Outline of Future Activities in Drug Abuse Control. The Comprehensive
Multidisciplinary Outline sets out fourteen targets in the field of demand reduction, as well as the types
of activities needed to achieve them at the national, regional and international levels. The General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the Commission on Narcotic Drugs have all adopted
resolutions endorsing the Comprehensive Multidisciplinary Outline and emphasizing the need to pay
increasing attention to demand reduction. Moreover, at its seventeenth special session, on international
cooperation against illicit production, supply, demand, trafficking and distribution of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, the General Assembly, by its resolution S-17/2 of 23 February 1990, adopted the
Political Declaration and Global Programme of Action. The Global Programme of Action, in paragraphs
9 to 37, addresses issues related to the prevention and reduction of drug abuse with a view to elimination
of the illicit demand for narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and to the treatment, rehabilitation
and social reintegration of drug abusers. Further attention was directed to demand reduction by the World
Ministerial Summit to Reduce the Demand for Drugs and to Combat the Cocaine Threat, held in London
from 9 to 11 April 1990.4
3. In addition, the Convention on the Rights of the Child,5 in article 33, emphasizes the need to protect
children from the abuse of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. A similar point is made in the
World Programme of Action for Youth to the Year 2000 and Beyond,6 which, in paragraphs 77 and 78,
includes proposals for involving youth organizations and young people in demand reduction activities.
Also of significance is the Code of Practice on the Management of Alcohol- and Drug-related Issues in

4

See A/45/262, annex.

5

Resolution 44/25, annex.

6

Resolution 50/81, annex.

/...

A/RES/S-20/3
Page 7

the Workplace,7 adopted by a tripartite meeting of experts and subsequently endorsed by the Governing
Body of the International Labour Organization at its two hundred and sixty-second session, in 1995. The
principles of equality of opportunity and treatment contained in the Convention concerning Discrimination
in Respect of Employment and Occupation (No. 111) adopted by the International Labour Organization
in 1958 are also directly relevant to demand reduction.

7

International Labour Office, Geneva, 1996.
