Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Special Politieal Committee

l. Commends the Working Group on the Financing
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East for its work;
2. Notes with appreciation the report of the Working Group;
3. Requests the Working Group to continue its efforts, in co-operation with the Secretary-General and
the Commissioner-General, for the financing of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East for a further period of one
year;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary services and assistance to the Working Group
for the conduct of its work.
2430th plenary meeting
8 December 1975

3457 (XXX). Comprehensive review of the whole
question of peace-keeping operations in ali
their aspects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2006-. (XIX) of 18 February 1965, 2053 A (XX) of 15 December 1965, 2249
(S-V) of 23 May 1967, 2308 (XXII) of 13 December 1967, 2451 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968, 2670
(XXV) of 8 December 1970, 2835 (XXVI) of 17 December 1971, 2965 (XXVII) of 13 December 1972,
3091 (XXVIII) of 7 December 1973 and 3239
(XXIX) of 29 November 1974,
Having received and examined the report of the
Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations 11 and
the report submitted to the Special Committee by its
Working Group, 12
Conscious that there is a need for agreed guidelines
which would govem United Nations peace-keeping
operations and strengthen the capability of the United
Nations to respond to future peace-keeping needs in
an effective and economical manner,
Noting with regret that it has not proved possible to
realize substantial progress towards the completion of
agreed guidelines for carrying out peace-keeping operations,
l. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations, in particular paragraphs 6 and 7 thereof;
2. Requests the Special Committee and its Working
Group to renew efforts towards the completion of agreed
guidelines for carrying out peace-keeping operations in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations for
submission to the General Assembly at its thirty-first
session;
3. Appeals ,to the members of the Special Committee to show greater accommodation in the search
for an agreement at an early date on the completion of
these guidelines in conformity with the Charter;
4. Requests the Special Committee to devote its
attention also to the consideration of specific questions
related to the practica! implementation of peace-keeping
operations;
5. Requests the Special Committee to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session.
2435th plenary meeting
1O December 1975
11 Ibid.,

Thirtieth Session, Annexes, agenda itero 51, document A/10366.
12 Ibid., annex.

4¡

3525 (XXX). Report of the Special Committee
to lnvestigate Israeli Practices Afiecting the
Human Rights of the Population of the
Occupied Territories
A

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principies of the Charter
of the United Nations as well as the principies and provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949,1 3 as well as of other
relevant conventions and regulations,
Recalling its resolutions on the subject, as well as
those adopted by the Security Council, the Commission
on Human Rights and other United Nations bodies
concerned and by specialized agencies,
Having considered the report of the Special Comrnittee to Investigate Israelí Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories, 14 which contains, in ter alia, public statements
made by leaders of the Govemment of Israel,
1. Commends the Special Committee to Investigate
Israelí Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Population of the Occupied Territories for its efforts
in performing the tasks assigned to it by the General
Assembly;
2. Deplores the continued refusal by Israel to allow
the Special Committee access to the occupied territories;
3. Calls again upan Israel to allow the Special Committee access to the occupied territories;
4. Deplores the continued and persistent violation
by Israel of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, and other applicable intemational instruments;
5. Condemns, in particular, the following Israelí
policies and practices:
(a) The annexation of parts of the occupied territories;
( b) The establishment of Israeli settlements therein
and the transfer of an alien population thereto;
(e) The destruction and demolition of Arab houses;
(d) The confiscation and expropriation of Arab
property in the occupied territories and ali other tr~nsactions for the acquisition of land involving the Israeli
authorities, imtitutions or nationals on the one hand,
and the inhabitants or institutions of the occupied territories on the other;

(e) The evacuation, deportation, expulsion, displacement and transfer of Arab inhabitants of the occupied territories, and the denial of their right to retum;
(f) Mass arrests, administrative detention and illtreatment of the Arab population;
(g) The pillaging of archaeological and cultural
property;
( h) The interference with religious freedoms and
practices, as well as family rights and customs;
13 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.
14 A/10272.

42

General Auembly-Thirtieth Seuion

(i) The illegal exploitation of the natural wealth,
resources and population of the occupied territories;
6. Declares that those policies and practices of Israel
constitute grave violations of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular the principies of sovereignty and
territorial integrity, and the principies and provisions
of international law concerning occupation, and constitute as well an impediment to the establishment of a
just and lasting peace;
1. Reaffinns that ali measures taken by Israel to
change the physical character, demographic composition. institutional structure or status of the occupied
territories, or any part thereof, are null and void;
8. Reaffirms jurther that Israel's policy of se:ttling
parts of its population and new immigrants in the occupied tcrritories is a flagrant violation of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War and of the relevant United Nations
resolutions, and urges all States to refrain from any
action which Israel will exploit in carrying out its policy
of colonizing the occupied territories;
9. Demands that Israel desist forthwith from the
annexation and colonization of the occupied Arab territories as well as from all the policies and practices
referred to in paragraph 5 above;
10. Reiterates its call upon aH States, international
organizations and specialized agencies not to recognize
any changcs carried out by Israel in the occupied territories and to avoid actions, including actions in the field
of aid, which might be used by Israel in its pursuit of
the policies and practices referred to in the present
resolution;
11. Requests the Special Committec, pending the
early termination of the Israelí occupation, to continue
to investigate Israelí policies and practices in the Arab
territorics occupied by Israel since 1967, to consult, as
appropriatc, with the International Committee of the
Red Cros!- in order to ensure the safeguarding of thc
wclfare and human rights of the population of the occupied territories. and to rcport to the Secretary-General as soon as possible and whenever the need arises
thcrcaftcr;
12. Requests the Sccretary-General:
(a) To render all nccessary facilities to the Special
Committee, including those rcquired for its visits to the
occupied territories with a view to investigating Israeli
policies and practices rcferred to Í!l thc present rcsolution;
(b) To make availablc additional stafl as may be
necessary to assist the Special Committcc in the performance of its tasks;
(e) To ensure the widest circulation of the reports
of the Special Committce, and of information rcgarding
its activities and findings, by ali means availablc through
the Office of Public Information of the Sccretariat;
(d) To report to the General Assembly at its thirtyfirst session on the tasks entrusted to him;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session the ítem entitled "Report of the
Special Committee to Investigatc Israelí Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the
Occupied Territories".
:!44 l st plenary meeti11,:

15 December 1975

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3092 A (XXVIII) of 7 December 1973 and 3240 B (XXJX) of 29 November
1974,
Considering that the promotion of respect for the
obligations arising from the Charter of. the U!llted
Nations and other instruments and rules of mternatmnal
law is among the basic purposes and principies of the
United Nations,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Prorection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, 13
Noti11g that Israel and those Arab States whose territories have been occupied by Israel since June 1967
are parties to that Convention,
Taking into account thait States parties to that Convention undertake, in accordance with article 1 thereof,
not only to respect but also to ensure respect for the
Convention in ali circumstances,
1. Rea/firms that the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, is applicable to all the Arab territories
occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem;
2. Deplores the failure of Israel to acknowledge the
applicability of that Convention to the territories it has
occupied since 1967;
3. Calls once more upon Israel to acknowledge and
to comply with the provisions of that Convention in ali
the Arab territories it has occupied since 1967, including J erusalem;
4. Urges ali States parties to that Convention to
exert all efforts in arder to ensure respect for and compliance with the provisions thereof in ali the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including
Jerusalem.
:!441 st plenary meeting
l 5 December 1975

e

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 3240 C (XXIX) of 29 November 1974,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israelí Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories, 14 in particular section V thereof conceming
action by the Special Committee to implement the
provisions of paragraph 3 of resolution 3240 C
(XXIX),
Noting that the Special Committee was not able to
submit to the General Assembly at its current scssion
a full report in accordance with the request made in
paragraph 3 of resolution 3240 C (XXIX),
1. Requests the Special Committee to lnvestigate
Israelí Practices Aflecting the Human Rights of the
Population of the Occupied Territories to continue its
efforts to undertake a survey of the destruction in
Quneitra and to assess the nature, extent and value of
the damage ca'used by such destruction;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
make available to the Special Committee ali the facilities necessary in the performance of its tasks and to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session.
:!441 st plenary meetinR
15 December 1975

Reeolutiom adopt.ed on the reporte of the Special Politiea,I Commlttee

D
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2253 (ES-V) of 4 July
1967, 2254 (ES-V) of 14 July 1967 and 3240 (XXIX)
of 29 November 1974 and Security Council resolutions
252 (1968) of 21 May 1968, 267 (1969) of 3 July
1969, 271 (1969) of 15 September 1969 and 298
( 1971) of 25 September 1971,
T aking note of the information contained in the report _of the S~ial Committee to Investigate Israeli
~raot1ces Aflectmg the Human Rights of the Population of ,the Occupied Territories, 14
Noting with concern the actions of the Israeli autho1;ities in c~~nging the institutional structure and estabhs~e~ rehg1ou~ practices in the sanctuary of Al.Ibrahim1 Mosque m the city of Al-Khalil,
_Considering that these actions constitute grave violations of human rights and religious freedom and of
the norms of intemational law, in particular article 27
of th~ .~eneva Conv~ntion relative to the Protection
of Cmhan Persons 10 Time of War of 12 August
1949, 13
'

Considering also that these violations of established
religious rights are a challenge to the susceptibilities of
hundreds of millions of Moslems all ovér the world,
Consideriug furthermore that these violations, which
have already cau&'Cd civil and religious disturbances,
constitute a new threat to peace and security in the area,
1. Declares ali measures taken by the Israeli authorities with a view to changing the institutional sitructure
and established religious practices in the sanctuary of
Al-Ibrahimi Mosque in the city of Al-Khalil null and
void;
2. Calls upon Israel to rescind and to desist forthwith from all such measures;
. 3.. Requests the S~c~etary-General to investigare the
s1tu~tion m Al-Ibrah1m1 Mosque by contacting the Islam1c, Arab and other authorities concemed and to
report as soon as possible on the implementation of
paragraph 2 above;
4. Calls upon Israel to co-operate with the Secretary-General and to facilita-te his task.
2441st pleru,ry meeting
15 December 1975
