A/RES/75/85

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
18 December 2020

Seventy-fifth session
Agenda item 107
Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to
Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 7 December 2020
[on the report of the First Committee (A/75/403, para. 7)]

75/85.

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively
Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 74/76 of 12 December 2019,
Recalling with satisfaction the adoption and entry into force of the Convention
on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which
May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects 1 and
its amended article 1, 2 the Protocol on Non-Detectable Fragments (Protocol I), 3 the
Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby Traps and Other
Devices (Protocol II) 4 and its amended version, 5 the Protocol on Prohibitions or
Restrictions on the Use of Incendiary Weapons (Protocol III), 6 the Protocol on
Blinding Laser Weapons (Protocol IV) 7 and the Protocol on Explosive Remnants of
War (Protocol V), 8
Recalling the results of the Fifth Review Conference of the High Contracting
Parties to the Convention, held in Geneva from 12 to 16 December 2016,

__________________

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1342, No. 22495.
Ibid., vol. 2260, No. 22495.
3
Ibid., vol. 1342, No. 22495.
4
Ibid., vol. 1342, No. 22495.
5
Ibid., vol. 2048, No. 22495.
6
Ibid., vol. 1342, No. 22495.
7
Ibid., vol. 2024, No. 22495.
8
Ibid., vol. 2399, No. 22495.
1
2

20-16916 (E)

221220

*2016916*

A/RES/75/85

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively
Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects

Welcoming the results of the 2019 Meeting of the High Contracting Parties to
the Convention, held in Geneva from 13 to 15 November 2019,
Welcoming also the results of the Twenty-first Annual Conference of the High
Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II, held in Geneva on 12 November 2019,
Welcoming further the results of the Thirteenth Conference of the High
Contracting Parties to Protocol V, held in Geneva on 11 November 2019,
Noting that the Meeting of the Group of Experts of the High Contracting Parties
to Amended Protocol II, the Meeting of Experts of the High Contracting Parties to
Protocol V and the two sessions of the Group of Governmental Experts related to
emerging technologies in the area of lethal autonomous weapons systems of the High
Contracting Parties to the Convention had to be rescheduled owing to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, and noting the efforts made to hold them in 2020
under exceptional circumstances,
Noting also the consultations by the President of the Twenty-first Annual
Conference with the High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II on
possibilities to include discussions, as appropriate, on good practices in the
implementation of the Protocol, with respect to mines other than anti-personnel
mines, in particular with regard to the protection of civilians, taking into account the
divergent views,
Recalling the role played by the International Committee of the Red Cross in
the elaboration of the Convention and the Protocols thereto, and welcoming the
particular efforts of various international, non-governmental and other organizations
in raising awareness of the humanitarian consequences of various categories of
conventional weapons which may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to have
indiscriminate effects,
Emphasizing the importance of the perspectives of women, men, boys and girls
in considering the issues addressed by the Convention and its Protocols,
1.
Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to take all measures to
become parties, as soon as possible, to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions
on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects and the Protocol s thereto, as
amended, with a view to achieving the widest possible adherence to these instruments
at an early date and so as to ultimately achieve their universality;
2.
Calls upon all High Contracting Parties to the Convention that have not
yet done so to express their consent to be bound by the Protocols to the Convention
and the amendment extending the scope of the Convention and the Protocols thereto
to include armed conflicts of a non-international character;
3.
Emphasizes the importance of the universalization of the Protocol on
Explosive Remnants of War (Protocol V);
4.
Welcomes additional ratifications and acceptances of or accessions to the
Convention, as well as consents to be bound by the Protocols thereto;
5.
Acknowledges the continued efforts of the Secretary-General, as
depositary of the Convention and the Protocols thereto, and of the respective office
holders of the conferences of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention,
Protocol V and Amended Protocol II, on behalf of the High Co ntracting Parties, to
achieve the goal of universality;

2/5

20-16916

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively
Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects

A/RES/75/85

6.
Recalls the following decisions by the Fifth Review Conference of the
High Contracting Parties to the Convention:
(a) To establish an open-ended Group of Governmental Experts related to
emerging technologies in the area of lethal autonomous weapons systems in the
context of the objectives and purposes of the Convention, adhering to the agreed
recommendations contained in document CCW/CONF.V/2, and to submit a report to
the 2017 Meeting of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention consistent with
those recommendations;
(b) To add to the agenda of the next Meeting of the High Contracting Parties
in 2017 the item “Protocol III”;
(c) To add to the agenda of the next Meeting of the High Contracting Parties
in 2017 the item “Mines other than anti-personnel mines”; 9
(d) To add to the agenda of the next Meeting of the High Contracting Parties
in 2017 the item for informal discussion “Consideration of how developments in the
field of science and technology relevant to the Convention may be addressed under
the Convention”;
(e) To invite the Chair-elect to conduct consultations with a view to including
on the agenda of the 2017 annual Meeting of the High Contracting Parties the item
“Strengthening the respect for international humanitarian law and addressing, in the
context and objectives of the Convention and its annexed Protocols, the challenges
presented by the use of conventional weapons in armed conflicts and their impact on
civilians, particularly in areas where there are concentrations of civilians”;
(f) To include on the agenda of the annual Meetings of the High Contracting
Parties the item “Financial issues related to the Convention and its a nnexed Protocols”
and to consider at the next such meeting efficiency and cost-saving measures and a
report to be prepared by the Chair-elect;
(g) To retain the practice of keeping summary records only for the final
sessions of the future Review Conferences, the meetings of the High Contracting
Parties to the Convention, and the Conferences of the High Contracting Parties to
Amended Protocol II and Protocol V;
(h)

To continue the Sponsorship Programme;

7.
Also recalls the following decisions by the Meeting of the High
Contracting Parties to the Convention in 2019:
(a) To call for a total of 10 days of meetings, to be held in Geneva in 2020, of
the Group of Governmental Experts related to emerging technologies in the a rea of
lethal autonomous weapons systems in the context of the objectives and purposes of
the Convention;
(b) To call for the universalization and full implementation of Protocol III on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Incendiary Weapons, given the Protocol’s
importance;
(c) To place on the agenda of its next meeting the item “Emerging issues in
the context of the objectives and purposes of the Convention” and to invite the High
Contracting Parties to submit working papers on issues that they in tend to raise;

__________________
9

20-16916

Noting the update included in paragraph 34 of the final report of the 2018 Meeting of the High
Contracting Parties to the Convention (CCW/MSP/2018/11).
3/5

A/RES/75/85

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively
Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects

(d) To establish a voluntary working capital fund, to be contributed to only by
the High Contracting Parties to the Convention, to provide liquidity during the
financial year with a view to ensuring the stability of Implementation Support U nit
support to the Convention, to review the functioning of the working capital fund at
the Sixth Review Conference of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention and
to request the Secretariat of the United Nations to submit a report on the status of t he
fund to the 2020 Meeting of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention;
(e) To keep under annual review the implementation of the agreed -upon
financial measures and to continue to monitor the financial situation of the
Convention;
(f) To request the Chair-elect to consult the High Contracting Parties and the
Secretariat of the United Nations to address the question of prioritization of funding
for the implementation of the Convention;
8.
Calls upon all High Contracting Parties to ensure full and prompt
compliance with their financial obligations under the Convention and its annexed
Protocols;
9.
Welcomes the adoption by the 2019 Meeting of the High Contracting
Parties to the Convention of the financial measures to strengthen the financial
situation of the Convention, including the establishment of a voluntary working
capital fund to provide liquidity during the financial year, with a view to ensuring the
stability of Implementation Support Unit support to the Convention;
10. Also welcomes the decisions of the 2019 Meeting of the High Contracting
Parties to the Convention pertaining to the Group of Governm ental Experts related to
emerging technologies in the area of lethal autonomous weapons systems, and takes
note of the report of the 2019 session of the Group of Governmental Experts;
11. Further welcomes the commitment by the High Contracting Parties to
continue to contribute to the further development of international humanitarian law,
and, in this context, to keep under review both the development of new weapons and
uses of weapons, which may have indiscriminate effects or cause unnecessary
suffering;
12. Welcomes the commitment of the High Contracting Parties to Protocol V
to the effective and efficient implementation of the Protocol and the implementation
of the decisions of the First and Second Conferences of the High Contracting Parties
to the Protocol establishing a comprehensive framework for the exchange of
information and cooperation;
13. Notes that, in conformity with article 8 of the Convention, conferences
may be convened to examine amendments to the Convention or to any of the Protocols
thereto, to examine additional protocols concerning other categories of conventional
weapons not covered by existing Protocols or to review the scope and application of
the Convention and the Protocols thereto and to examine any proposed amendments
or additional protocols;
14. Underlines the vital role of the full and equal participation of women in
decision-making and implementation of the Convention;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to render the assistance necessary and to
provide such services as may be required for the annual conferences and expert
meetings of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention and of the High
Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II and Protocol V, as well as for any
continuation of the work after the meetings;

4/5

20-16916

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively
Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects

A/RES/75/85

16. Also requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as depositary of the
Convention and the Protocols thereto, to continue to inform the General Assembly
periodically, by electronic means, of ratifications and acceptances of and accessions
to the Convention, its amended article 1 and the Protocols;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-sixth session
the item entitled “Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to
Have Indiscriminate Effects”.
37th plenary meeting
7 December 2020

20-16916

5/5
