A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/18*
2 March 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 38
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/52/L.28 and Add.1)]
52/18.

Support by the United Nations system of the efforts of Governments to
promote and consolidate new or restored democracies

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the indissoluble links between the principles enshrined in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights1 and the foundations of any democratic society,
Recalling the Manila Declaration2 adopted by the First International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies3 in June 1988,
Considering the major changes taking place on the international scene and the aspirations of all peoples
for an international order based on the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, including
the promotion and encouragement of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and other
important principles, such as respect for the equal rights and self-determination of peoples, peace, democracy,
justice, equality, the rule of law, pluralism, development, better standards of living and solidarity,

* Reissued for technical reasons.
1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

A/43/538, annex.

3

Then called the International Conference of Newly Restored Democracies.

98-77057

/...

A/RES/52/18
Page 2

Recalling its resolution 49/30 of 7 December 1994 in which it recognized the importance of the
Managua
Declaration4 and Plan of Action5 adopted by the Second International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies in July 1994, as well as its resolutions 50/133 of 20 December 1995 and 51/31 of 6 December
1996,
Taking note of the Universal Declaration on Democracy, adopted by the Inter-Parliamentary Council at
its session held at Cairo on 16 September 1997,6
Also taking note of the International Conference on Governance for Sustainable Growth and Equity, held
in New York from 28 to 30 June 1997,
Noting with satisfaction the holding of the Third International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies on Democracy and Development at Bucharest from 2 to 4 September 1997, and the adoption
of the document entitled "Progress Review and Recommendations" 7 in which the progress towards
democratization and consolidation of democratic institutions was assessed and guidelines, principles and
recommendations were addressed to Governments, civil society, the private sector, donor countries and the
international community,
Noting in particular the recommendations addressed to the United Nations system and the international
financial organizations, contained in that document,8
Welcoming the inclusion of a Civil Society Forum in the proceedings of the Bucharest Conference,
Noting the efforts of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to encourage
education for democracy,
Taking note of the views of Member States expressed in the debate on this question at its forty-ninth,
fiftieth, fifty-first and fifty-second sessions,
Bearing in mind that the activities of the United Nations carried out in support of the efforts of
Governments to promote and consolidate democracy are undertaken in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and only at the specific request of the Member States concerned,
Also bearing in mind that democracy, development and respect for all human rights and fundamental
freedoms are interdependent and mutually reinforcing and that democracy is based on the freely expressed
will of the people to determine their own political, economic, social and cultural systems and on their full
participation in all aspects of their lives,

4

A/49/713, annex I.

5

Ibid., annex II.

6

A/52/437, annex IV.

7

A/52/334, annex, appendix.

8

Ibid., sect. IV.

98-77057

/...

A/RES/52/18
Page 3

Noting that a considerable number of societies have recently undertaken significant efforts to achieve
their social, political and economic goals through democratization and the reform of their economies, pursuits
that are deserving of the support and recognition of the international community,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General9 and its special focus on policies and principles
and on the recent events shaping the emerging framework for intergovernmental action in the field of
democratization,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;9

2. Expresses its appreciation for the observations and recommendations contained in the report with
respect to electoral assistance, strengthening civil society, coordinating United Nations activities in
democratization and governance and promoting democracy for the twenty-first century;
3. Takes note of the proposal of the Secretary-General that future conferences on democracy be open
to all States Members of the United Nations that wish to participate;
4. Welcomes the decision of the Third International Conference of New or Restored Democracies to
hold the next conference in an African country;
5. Also welcomes the offer of the Government of Benin to host at Cotonou the Fourth International
Conference of New or Restored Democracies;
6. Commends the Secretary-General, and through him the United Nations system, for the activities
undertaken at the request of Governments to support the efforts to consolidate democracy;
7. Recognizes that the Organization has an important role to play in providing timely, appropriate and
coherent support to the efforts of Governments to achieve democratization within the context of their
development efforts;
8. Stresses that activities undertaken by the Organization must be in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations;
9. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to improve the capacity of the Organization to
respond effectively to the requests of Member States through coherent, adequate support of their efforts to
achieve the goals of good governance and democratization;
10. Encourages Member States to promote democratization and to make additional efforts to identify
possible steps to support the efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate new or restored democracies;
11. Invites the Secretary-General, Member States, the relevant specialized agencies and bodies of the
United Nations system, as well as other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, to contribute
actively to the follow-up process of the Third International Conference of New or Restored Democracies on
Democracy and Development;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session
on the implementation of the present resolution, including innovative ways and means to enable the

9

A/52/513.
/...

A/RES/52/18
Page 4

Organization to respond effectively and in an integrated manner to requests of Member States for assistance
in the field of good governance and democratization;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-third session the item entitled "Support by
the United Nations system of the efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate new or restored
democracies".
51st plenary meeting
21 November 1997

/...
