S/2002/725

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 July 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 3 July 2002 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo covering
the period from 1 to 31 May 2002.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-45922 (E)

080702

*0245922*

S/2002/725

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
Kosovo Force
1.
Over the reporting period (1-31 May 2002) there were just over 37,000 troops
of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in theatre.
2.
The overall situation in Kosovo during the month of May remained generally
stable, with only a few incidents reported. There was an increase in the number of
attempts to cross the border illegally. The number of people taking part in
demonstrations, as reported in April, has fallen substantially. The overall level of
serious crime was low compared to the same periods in 2000 and 2001.
Security
3.
Minor incidents involving inter-ethnic violence were reported across the
province, mainly in the Gnjilane and Mitrovica areas.
4.
On 7 May, KFOR detained Shefket Musliu, a former commander of the
disbanded Liberation Army of Presevo, Medvedja and Bujanovac (UCPMB), on
suspicion of involvement in violent incidents in the Presevo Valley. 1 He was
eventually released on 8 June at the end of the 30-day detention period authorized
by the Commander of KFOR.
5.
KFOR soldiers in close cooperation with the police of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) conducted a large-scale search
operation of 270 buildings in northern Mitrovica on 14 May, resulting in the
discovery of a small number of weapons. The new multi-ethnic market on the
southern bank of the Ibar River in Mitrovica was opened without incident. A
representative of KFOR, along with local politicians, community workers, and
members of the international community, attended the opening ceremony. KFOR
announced on 24 May that joint patrolling with UNMIK police in Mitrovica would
be increased.
6.
At the request of UNMIK, KFOR launched an operation on 5 May to open a
walled concrete storage site at the Trepca Company compound in the Prvi Tunnel,
north of Mitrovica. Seventy-five 200-litre barrels filled with sodium and potassium
cyanide were removed from the premises and stored temporarily at the Mitrovica
Industrial Park. UNMIK has accepted responsibility for the disposal of this toxic
waste.
7.
On 19 May, eight Kosovo Albanian prisoners escaped from the UNMIK prison
in Dubrava, five of whom were later recaptured by UNMIK police. KFOR is
assisting UNMIK in the effort to recapture the three remaining prisoners.
8.
During the reporting period, KFOR continued to conduct search operations. In
particular, on 24 May, a KFOR search operation in Grabovac led to the discovery of
a substantial cache of weapons, ammunition, car licence plates and false
identification cards. The total seized during May included 279 assorted weapons,
__________________
1 On 17 April, there was an attack on the multi-ethnic police force in Lucane; and on 27 April a

Serbian army water truck hit a mine in Dobrosin, destroying the truck and injuring two Serbian
soldiers.

2

S/2002/725

305 grenades and mines and 28,209 rounds of ammunition. Seventy-seven people
were arrested for possession of illegal weapons and subsequently handed over to
UNMIK police.
9.
In the context of the weapons destruction programme, 1,831 weapons were
destroyed in the month of May.
Border/boundary security
10. Border security continues to be an issue of concern, with a sustained rise in
attempts to cross the border illegally. Seventy-seven incidents were recorded in May
and 201 arrests were made. 2 More than two thirds of the arrests occurred on the
border with Albania, while the rest occurred on the border with the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. 3
11. On 28 May, KFOR renewed the agreement (Temporary Operating Procedures)
with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to ensure coordination and
cooperation in border security and exchange of information to curb illegal border
crossings. The agreement sets out procedures to cover the inadvertent crossing of
the international border by the forces of KFOR and the forces of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
12. Security forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia remained in general
compliance with the terms of the Military Technical Agreement during the month of
May.
13. With regard to the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC), UNMIK has approved the
Peace Establishment list reviewed by KFOR in May which is being used as the basis
for issuing identity cards. KFOR continued with the registration and issue of the
new KPC identity cards on behalf of UNMIK. On 7 May, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the Commander of KFOR agreed to the new structure
of the Corps, under which there will be a total strength of 5,052 members, with
3,052 on active duty and 2,000 in reserve. Within the new structure, the training
organization will be expanded, and training will be controlled by a new Training and
Doctrine Command. The first seven minority members joined the Corps in the
Gnjilane region.
14. The number of cases of non-compliance decreased during the reporting period.
Fourteen cases involving 26 KPC members were closed and 20 KPC members were
dismissed. The Corps’ stance on absenteeism and lack of discipline has hardened, as
UNMIK and the Joint Implementation Commission are beginning the process of
reviewing and improving the KPC disciplinary code.
15. KPC completed a number of field exercises with the Multinational Brigades in
May, and conducted 46 other training activities including bridge building and
foreign language training.
__________________
2 Over the past year under Operation Eagle, KFOR has seized 4,409 assorted weapons, 3,690

grenades and mines, and 389,750 rounds of ammunition. A total of 1,721 persons have been
detained and turned over to UNMIK police.
3 Turkey recognizes the Republic of Macedonia with its constitutional name.

3

S/2002/725

Cooperation with international organizations
16. KFOR continues to offer security assistance on request from international
organizations and non-governmental organizations and in support of UNMIK police
operations, especially in Mitrovica.
Refugees and displaced persons
17. On 14 May, KFOR assisted the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in securing a Kosovo Albanian area in Vushtrri to allow
the return of 50 refugees. KFOR also escorted over 200 Kosovo Serbs to the
Gorazdlevac Serb enclave and to the Pec monastery for the Orthodox celebrations of
St. Jeremy.
Outlook
18. The threat to security from both ethnic intolerance and local crime is
decreasing. UNMIK police are preparing to take over tasks in northern Kosovo
currently undertaken by KFOR.

4
