S/2017/75

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 January 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution
2299 (2016)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Secretary Council resolution 2299
(2016), in which the Secretary-General was requested to report every three months
on progress made towards the fulfilment of the responsibilities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). It covers key developments related
to Iraq and provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in Iraq since
the briefing of my Special Representative to the Security Council on 9 November
2016. My last report was issued on 25 October 2016 ( S/2016/897).

II. Summary of key political developments pertaining to Iraq
A.

Political situation
2.
In parallel with the ongoing military campaign against Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), the Government of Iraq has been working on putting in place
effective governance and security arrangements for post -liberation Ninawa. On
11 December, the Ninawa Provincial Council directed that all provincial
government offices, many of which had been relocated to Erbil and Dahuk during
the ISIL occupation, should move back to liberated areas of Ninawa. Provincial
authorities resumed the delivery of services in retaken areas, with the Chair of the
Provincial Council, Bashar Kiki, confirming on 23 November that provincial
authorities had started working in the governorate to the extent that the security
situation allowed. On the same day, Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi affirmed in a
session of the Council of Ministers that, upon liberation, Ninawa would be governed
by civilian authorities. The Government also recommenced the recruitment of
personnel for the Ninawa provincial police, with the intent of deploying them to
secure liberated areas.
3.
On 26 November, the Council of Representatives adopted the Popular
Mobilization Commission Law, which establishes the popular mobilization forces as
an independent military entity of the Iraqi armed forces under the com mand of the
Commander-in-Chief, the Prime Minister. Of the 328 members of the Council of
Representatives, 208 were present during the parliamentary session, including most

17-00884 (E)

300117

*1700884*

S/2017/75

of the members of the National Alliance and the Sadrist Movement and some
members of the Kurdistan Alliance. The law was endorsed by all of those present.
Some proponents of the law argued that it would guarantee livelihood and legal
cover for the popular mobilization forces, while at the same time bringing them
under the control of the Government. The majority of the Iraqi Forces Coalition
boycotted the parliamentary session, arguing that after the defeat of ISIL there
would be no need for maintaining military entities outside the ministries of defence
and the interior. The Government is currently working out the modalities for
implementing the law.
4.
Discussions about national reconciliation in Iraq have been ongoing since the
National Alliance, the Shi’a parliamentary bloc, adopted its National Settlement
Initiative on 30 October. Political leaders from the Sunni component met on
26 November and 13 December to exchange views on national reconciliation. On
26 December, the Speaker of Parliament, Salim al-Jubouri, and a number of
representatives from the Iraqi Forces Coalition met with a d elegation from the
National Alliance, including its Chair, Ammar al-Hakim, to discuss the post-ISIL
phase, as well as national reconciliation. At a joint press conference after the
meeting, the parties emphasized the importance of a unified Iraq and an inc lusive
national reconciliation process.
5.
On 7 December, the Council of Representatives approved the 2017 Federal
Budget Law. Key disputed issues included allocations for the popular mobilization
forces and the Kurdistan Regional Government, as well as de mands from southern
governorates. Under the budget, total expenditures are estimated at $85 billion and
total revenues at $67 billion, leaving an $18 billion deficit (or 21.6 per cent of the
total budget). Planned oil exports are set at 3.75 million barrel s per day, at a price of
$42 per barrel. This target is in line with the decision taken by the Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries on 30 November, under which Iraq is committed to
limiting its crude oil production level to 4.35 million barrels pe r day. On
5 December, the International Monetary Fund Executive Board completed its first
review of the three-year stand-by arrangement for Iraq and disbursed a first amount
of $618 million, noting that the revised fiscal programme in 2016 and the 2017
budget were aligned with the stand-by arrangement.
6.
The 2017 federal budget sets the total number of popular mobilization forces
elements at 122,000 and provides a total budget of $1.6 billion for the forces.
According to the budget, the number of popular mobilization forces elements from
governorates and areas affected by the armed conflict would be increased to ensure
that each governorate is represented in a proportionate manner, while also
maintaining a balance between the various communities within each governorate.
7.
During the reporting period, lawmakers continued their deliberations on other
important legislation, notably the draft components’ rights law, formerly known as
the minorities’ rights law, and amendments to the General Amnesty Law of Augus t
2016. Little progress was made in filling vacant ministerial positions in the
ministries of defence, interior, finance, industry and trade. On 6 December, the
Prime Minister announced that he would be putting forward nominations to the
Council of Representatives for the vacant ministerial positions after it reconvened in
January 2017. On 17 January, the Prime Minister appointed Abdul Razzaq al -Issa,

2/18

17-00884

S/2017/75

who is currently the Minister for Higher Education and Scientific Research, as
Acting Finance Minister.
8.
On 10 November, the office of the three presidencies sent a letter to the
Independent High Electoral Commission indicating that the President, the Prime
Minister and the Speaker of Parliament had decided to postpone the Provincial
Council elections, which were to be held in April 2017, to an undetermined date. In
a letter to the Council of Representatives dated 24 November, the Commission
indicated that it would be unable to conduct the Provincial Council elections in
April 2017 as the Provincial Election Law had not yet been amended, internally
displaced persons had not been duly registered and the necessary funds had not been
allocated. The Commission further indicated that it could organize elections in the
first half of September 2017, if adequate funding were provided without further
delay. On 17 January, the Prime Minister confirmed to the Commission that the
Provincial Council elections would take place on 16 September 2017.
9.
The federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government have
maintained close coordination and cooperation on the Mosul military operation,
both through the Joint Coalition Coordination Centre in Erbil governorate and
through regular and ad hoc high-level dialogue. The federal Government and the
Kurdistan Regional Government resumed joint exportation of oil from Kirkuk
governorate after reaching an agreement on 28 August to do so.
10. Concerning key outstanding issues between Baghdad and Erbil, the 2017
federal budget allocated a share of 17 per cent to the Kurdistan Regio nal
Government, provided that it would export a total of 550,000 barrels per day of
crude oil from the Kurdistan region of Iraq and Kirkuk governorate through the
State Organization for the Marketing of Oil. This arrangement has been in place
since 2015 but has not been implemented owing to disagreement over the
modalities. The 2017 federal budget further stipulated that a census should be held
in the Kurdistan region of Iraq in 2017 to determine the size of its population, which
would constitute the basis for determining the size of its budget allocation.
Furthermore, the 2017 federal budget stipulated that the Peshmerga would receive a
percentage of the funds allocated to the Iraqi army, under a framework to be
prepared in coordination between the General Command of the Iraqi Armed Forces
and the Ministry of Peshmerga. On 8 December, the President of the Kurdistan
region of Iraq, Masoud Barzani, stated that the article could be interpreted in
multiple ways and criticized some political parties of the Kurdis tan region of Iraq
for having supported the budget.
11. Efforts to overcome political disagreements within the Kurdistan region of
Iraq and to reactivate the Kurdistan Regional Parliament, which has been inactive
since 12 October 2015, have continued. On 20 November, President Barzani called
for consultations between political parties on a comprehensive proposal that
included the reactivation of the Regional Parliament, appointment of a Speaker,
formation of a new cabinet and appointment of an interim Presi dent. Political
parties, including the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan and the Movement for Change
(Gorran) responded positively to the proposal, and President Barzani ’s Kurdistan
Democratic Party has since then engaged in bilateral consultations with the Pat riotic
Union of Kurdistan and other parties. The Kurdistan Regional Government
announced on 5 December that it would have to implement additional austerity

17-00884

3/18

S/2017/75

measures in 2017 in order not to further increase the budget deficit. Meanwhile,
teachers and other public sector employees in Sulaymaniyah governorate continued
their protests, which began in October, regarding the non -payment of their salaries.

B.

Security
12. The Iraqi security forces, the Peshmerga, the popular mobilization forces and
local fighters, with support from the international counter -ISIL coalition, have made
steady progress in the fight against ISIL since military operations to liberate Mosul
and Ninawa commenced on 17 October. The Iraqi security forces crossed the city
limits of east Mosul on 1 November and have liberated and cleared a large number
of neighbourhoods since then, despite fierce resistance from ISIL in the form of
direct and indirect fire and asymmetric attacks. On 29 December, the Iraqi security
forces announced the commencement of the second phase of their operations in
Mosul, with air and artillery support from the international counter -ISIL coalition.
Operations to liberate and clear terrain south of Mosul, including the east bank of
Sharqat, continue.
13. The popular mobilization forces captured Tall Afar airfield on 16 November,
and on 23 November conquered strategic positions near Tall Afar along the highway
stretching between Mosul and Raqqah, Syrian Arab Republic, adjacent to the
Peshmerga front. As a result, Mosul has been fully cut off from ISIL territory in
western Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. On 24 November, the Government of
Iraq and the Popular Mobilization Commission confirmed in statements that the
town of Tall Afar would be liberated exclusively by the Iraqi security forces and
local fighters. The popular mobilization forces also launched operations west of Tall
Afar in order to extend their control over supply and escape routes towards the
Syrian Arab Republic.
14. ISIL has maintained control of the Hawijah district in Kirkuk governorate and
areas in western Anbar governorate, as well as a limited presence in Ninawa, Salah
al-Din and Diyala governorates, in particular in rural areas. The organization
continued to conduct asymmetric terrorist attacks against government facilities and
security forces positions. It increasingly targeted civilians, especially in Baghdad,
where by the end of the year attacks had become an almost daily occurrence. On
2 January, 41 civilians were killed and 71 injured in thr ee bombings. A vehicleborne bomb that detonated on 17 November during a wedding celebration at the
residence of a popular mobilization forces commander in Fallujah, Anbar
governorate, reportedly killed 17 people and wounded another 35. On 24 November,
a truck rigged with explosives detonated at a fuel station south of Hillah, Babil
governorate, killing at least 56 civilians and wounding 21 others. Victims included
dozens of local and foreign pilgrims returning from Arba ‘in commemorations in
Karbala’.

C.

Regional and international developments
15. Iraq continued to engage with countries in the region and the wider
international community to secure political, military, humanitarian and financial
support. It also engaged with neighbouring countries and relevant international

4/18

17-00884

S/2017/75

organizations to discuss political and economic cooperation. Iraq handed over the
presidency of the Parliamentary Union of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
to Mali on 1 January 2017.
16. Iraqi officials and political leaders undertook a number of senior-level regional
visits with a view to expanding bilateral relationships, including in the area of trade,
and garnering political and military support. The Speaker of Parliament visited
Jordan between 15 and 17 November, where he met with King Abdullah II and
several officials to discuss bilateral relations and regional stability. The Prime
Minister of the Kurdistan region of Iraq, Nechirvan Barzani, visited Ankara on
23 November, where he discussed Turkey-Kurdistan region of Iraq relations and the
Mosul operation with the President of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, and the Prime
Minister of Turkey, Binali Yıldırım. The Chancellor of the Security Council of the
Kurdistan region of Iraq, Masrour Barzani, visited Washington, D.C., between 5 and
9 December and met with the Vice-President of the United States of America,
Joseph Biden, and several other officials to discuss the fight against ISIL. The Chair
of the National Alliance, Ammar al-Hakim, visited Jordan on 7 December and
Tehran between 11 and 17 December to participate in the International Conference
on Islamic Unity. On both occasions, he discussed the National Settlement Initiative
of the National Alliance, as well as regional developments and the fight against
ISIL. On 19 December, a senior Iraqi political delegation, including Vice -President
Osama al-Nujaifi, Deputy Prime Minister Saleh al-Mutlaq and the Speaker of
Parliament, Salim al-Jubouri, met with King Abdullah in Amman. Vice-President
Iyad Allawi met separately with King Abdullah on the same day. At both meetings,
the importance of maintaining a unified Iraq was emphasized.
17. Several foreign officials visited Iraq during the reporting period. On
14 November, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Ibrahim al -Jaafari, received
the Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources of Jordan, Ibrahim Saif, to discuss
the construction of gas and oil pipelines from Iraq to the Jordanian port of Aqabah.
Between 1 and 3 December, the Minister of State at the Department for
International Development of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Rory Stewart, visited Iraq and met with President Masum in Baghdad and
the President and the Prime Minister of the Kurdistan region of Iraq in Erbil. The
Secretary of Defence of the United States, Ashton Carter, visited Erbil on
4 December and both Baghdad and Erbil on 11 December to discuss the fight
against ISIL and post-liberation security arrangements with the Prime Minister of
Iraq and the President of the Kurdistan region of Iraq.
18. On 18 and 19 December, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Belgium, the
Netherlands and Luxembourg visited Baghdad and met with the Prime Minister and
their Iraqi counterpart, as well as with the Prime Minister of the Kurdistan region of
Iraq in Erbil. The Minister of National Defence of Canada, Harjit Sajjan, met with
the Prime Minister of Iraq in Baghdad and with the Prime Minister of the Kurdistan
region of Iraq in Erbil on 20 and 21 December, respectively. On 2 January, the
President of France, François Hollande, accompanied by the Minister of Defence,
Jean-Yves Le Drian, visited Iraq, where he met with the President, the Prime
Minister and the Speaker of Parliament of Iraq in Baghdad, as well as with the
President of the Kurdistan region of Iraq in Erbil, to discuss the fight against ISIL
and preparations for the post-liberation phase. On 8 January, the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Peter Maurer, visited Iraq and discussed

17-00884

5/18

S/2017/75

the protection of civilians and prisoners during armed conflict with the Prime
Minister of Iraq and with Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani. Between 8 and 10 January,
the Minister of Defence, Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, and the Minister for Foreign
Trade and Development Cooperation, Liliane Ploumen, of the Netherlands visited
Iraq to discuss progress in the fight against ISIL and the humanitarian situation. On
9 January, the Prime Minister of Jordan, Hani al-Mulki, and an accompanying
delegation visited Baghdad, where they discussed a wide range of i ssues with the
Prime Minister of Iraq, including trade and cooperation in the fight against
terrorism.
19. Iraq and Turkey continued to address the presence of Turkish troops in
northern Iraq as well as Turkish concerns over the presence of members of the
Kurdish Workers Party (PKK) near Sinjar, Ninawa governorate, through an
intensive bilateral dialogue that culminated in the visit of the Prime Minister of
Turkey, Binali Yıldırım, and an accompanying ministerial delegation to Baghdad on
7 January and to Erbil on 8 January. The visit resulted in a nine-point joint
statement. In the statement, Iraq and Turkey agreed to promote security and stability
as well as to fight terrorism together, while respecting each other’s sovereignty.
Both sides acknowledged that Ba‘shiqah camp was an Iraqi facility, and in this
regard Turkey reaffirmed its commitment to the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Iraq. In addition, the two countries affirmed the importance of increased
cooperation concerning trade, culture and tourism, as well as increased cooperation
in managing the Tigris and Euphrates waters.
20. Turkish air strikes against PKK targets in the Kurdistan region of Iraq
continued during the reporting period. On 27 and 29 November, Turkey targeted
PKK positions in Dahuk and Erbil governorates. On 6 January, Turkey targeted
PKK positions in Erbil governorate. No casualties were reported and the damage to
properties and infrastructure remains unclear.
21. The sixth session of the Kuwait-Iraq Joint Ministerial Committee, aimed at
further bolstering cooperation between the two countries, was held in Baghdad on
27 and 28 December. The First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Al-Khaled Al-Hamad Al-Sabah, and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Ibrahim al-Jaafari, signed three memorandums of
understanding covering security, industry and transportation, as well as a
programme of work on cultural cooperation. In the subsequent high-level meetings
with the President, the Prime Minister and the Speaker of Parliament of Iraq, Sheikh
Sabah Al-Khaled Al-Hamad Al-Sabah reiterated his country’s full support for Iraq’s
fight against terrorism, commending the progress achieved by the Iraqi security
forces.
22. Leading members and supporters of the international counter-ISIL coalition
met on 10 November in Copenhagen and on 17 November in Berlin as part of their
quarterly schedule to discuss political, stabilization and humanitarian issues and to
reflect on the strategic direction of the coalition. My Deputy Special Representative
for Development and Humanitarian Affairs joined both meetings and gave a
presentation on progress in stabilizing newly liberated areas and on the
humanitarian situation. Participants commended the Government of Iraq for its
commitment to civilian protection during the Mosul liberation operation and praised
the military gains of Iraq against ISIL.

6/18

17-00884

S/2017/75

III. Update on the activities of the Mission and the United Nations
country team
A.

Political activities
23. My Special Representative continued his engagement with government
officials, parliamentarians, representatives of political parties, civil society and
religious and community leaders to promote inclusive political dialogue and
national reconciliation. In all his meetings, he emphasized that reconciliation at the
national and community levels would be needed in order to consolidate military
progress against ISIL and to achieve sustainable peace. He called on political,
community and tribal leaders to unify for a future in which all Iraqis could live
together in equality, justice, peace and tolerance. He also highlighted the obligation
to protect the rights of all Iraqi people in accordance with international law and to
ensure justice for the victims of crimes and accountability for the perpetrators as an
important part of rebuilding trust between communities.
24. My Special Representative continued his engagement with Iraqi parties,
including with leaders from the Sunni component, on national reconciliation,
notably on the National Settlement Initiative put forward by the National Alliance.
He requested all parties to consider the Initiative, provide comments and develop a
vision for national reconciliation. He also visited Jordan and Saudi Arabia and
availed himself of opportunities provided by international security conferences in
the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain to solicit regional views and support for
renewed national reconciliation efforts in Iraq, among other issues. In addition,
UNAMI engaged at the grass-roots level, through a series of roundtables on national
reconciliation, to solicit the views of community leaders, academics, youth, women
and intellectuals across the country. The first three of six roundtables were held
during November and December in Erbil, Fallujah and Karbala’. Similar efforts,
coordinated through the joint reconciliation task force, are being undertaken by the
United Nations country team, especially the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), focusing on community and social
reconciliation.
25. In preparation for the post-ISIL period, my Special Representative has
engaged widely with stakeholders from Ninawa governorate on its politi cal future,
including with women, and representatives of religious and ethnic minorities and
civil society. Many representatives highlighted the importance of reinforcing
existing provincial structures and the need to ensure the safe, voluntary and
dignified return of internally displaced persons to their homes as a necessary
prerequisite for reconciliation. Interlocutors at all levels stressed the need to
strengthen and, where necessary, establish mechanisms to promote transitional
justice and truth-telling, address grievances and ensure compensation as well as the
provision of psychosocial services.
26. In an ongoing effort to facilitate dialogue between the federal Government and
the Kurdistan Regional Government, my Special Representative continued to m eet
regularly with representatives of both Governments and with relevant political
leaders. He commended the unprecedented cooperation between Baghdad and Erbil

17-00884

7/18

S/2017/75

in the fight against ISIL and urged both parties to extend such cooperation to cover
all outstanding political, economic and administrative issues. He also committed to
providing his good offices to facilitate a resolution of the political and constitutional
crisis in the Kurdistan region of Iraq.
27. My Special Representative continued to discuss the presence of Turkish troops
in northern Iraq and Turkish concerns over Tall Afar and Mosul with the
Government of Iraq and Turkish interlocutors in Baghdad and during his trips
abroad. He underscored the need to accelerate bilateral efforts to find a mut ually
acceptable solution that would fully respect the principles of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs of Iraq, while taking into
account the security concerns of both countries.
28. As part of the outreach efforts undertaken by UNAMI, my Deputy Special
Representative for Political Affairs and Electoral visited Basrah and Muthanna
governorates between 8 and 10 January where he met with provincial officials and a
number of tribal and civil society representatives. Discussions focused on the
political, economic and security situation in the governorates as well as the issue of
national reconciliation. The interlocutors requested the United Nations to strengthen
its presence and expand its programmes in the governor ates.
29. UNAMI continued its efforts to promote women’s rights in Iraq in support of
the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). UNAMI engaged
with the Government on the joint communiqué on prevention of and response to
conflict-related sexual violence in Iraq, which was signed on 23 September. On
27 November, my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and Electoral
Assistance participated in the Iraqi launch of the annual i nternational 16 Days of
Activism against Gender-based Violence Campaign. Speaking at the launch in
Baghdad, my Deputy Special Representative emphasized that the protection of
women and girls should be central to all peacebuilding and justice -seeking efforts in
the post-ISIL period, and called for the full participation of women in reconciliation
processes at the national and community levels. He also underscored the importance
of continued efforts to change negative social norms, end harmful practices and
promote respect for the rights of women and girls, including through engagement
with religious and community leaders.
30. On 2 December, as part of the promotion of cohesion, peaceful coexistence
and national reconciliation, UNAMI marked the International D ay for Tolerance
with an event attended by a wide range of stakeholders, including religious and
cultural leaders, diplomats, civil society representatives and youth groups. In his
speech, my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and Electora l
Assistance underlined that the healing of the wounds inflicted by ISIL and previous
conflicts could only be achieved by celebrating diversity and promoting the values
of tolerance, unity and compassion.
31. As co-chairs of the Task Force on Children and Armed Conflict, UNAMI and
the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) continued to encourage the
Government to establish an interministerial committee on grave violations of the
rights of children to facilitate a direct dialogue between the United Nations,
government representatives and other parties to discuss and address violations,
action plans and conclusions of the Security Council Working Group on children
and armed conflict.

8/18

17-00884

S/2017/75

B.

Electoral assistance
32. Amid discussions over the timing of the forthcoming elections, the
Independent High Electoral Commission continued to conduct technical
preparations for the Provincial Council elections with support from UNAMI. The
Commission decided to extend the closure of biometric voter registration until
28 February 2017 to enable more Iraqis to visit registration centres. As at
29 December, 212 political parties had submitted their applications for registration
in accordance with the August 2015 Political Parties Law, and the biometric data of
over 9,041,000 voters had been updated in the voter registry database. The special
registration process for internally displaced voters continued, with over 241,000
registered as at the same date. The Commission also commenced biometric voter
registration of the security forces in the Kurdistan region of Iraq.
33. Reform of the legal and institutional framework for elections remained on the
parliamentary agenda. My Special Representative engaged on the matter with the
Independent High Electoral Commission, the Legal Committee of the Council of
Representatives and government and other political leaders. He urged that reform
should take place soon to provide sufficient time for the Commission to prepare for
the elections. He also stressed that an adequate budget needs to be provided to the
Commission in a timely manner. UNAMI met on several occasions with the office
of the three presidencies, which is formulating a draft amendment of the Council of
Representatives Elections Law. While decisions on these matters remain the
prerogative of Iraq, UNAMI continues to provide expert technical advice.

C.

Human rights developments and activities
34. Armed conflict, terrorism and acts of violence continue to take a terrible toll in
terms of loss of civilian lives and injuries. Between 10 November and 21 December,
at least 710 civilian men, women and children were killed and at least 1,449
wounded, bringing the total number of civilian casualties in Iraq since the beginning
of the armed conflict in January 2014 to at least 76,893 (26,646 killed and 50,274
wounded).
35. As more civilians are liberated from ISIL, the extent of the human rights
violations committed is becoming evident. UNAMI has received innumerable
reports of serious and systematic violations of international humanitarian law and
gross abuses of human rights perpetrated by ISIL. The organization continued to use
civilians and civilian infrastructure and private homes as shields. In contravention
of international law, ISIL conducted organized terrorist activities directly targeting
civilians, including shelling civilian locations and using snipers to kill civilians
attempting to flee areas under its control.
36. ISIL carried out systematic forced transfers of civilians as it withd rew from
areas in the face of the Iraqi security forces’ advances during the Mosul operation.
ISIL continued to forcibly move people from subdistricts around and inside Mosul.
For example, on 9 November, ISIL reportedly forcibly moved 42 families from thei r
homes in the Faysaliyah area of eastern Mosul to the western side of the city. On
25 November, ISIL reportedly ordered residents of the Tayaran and Jawsaq areas in
southern Mosul to leave their homes within 24 hours. On 2 December, ISIL forcibly

17-00884

9/18

S/2017/75

displaced residents of the Barid area in eastern Mosul to the western part of the city.
Witnesses informed UNAMI that many of these civilians were forced to accompany
ISIL convoys transporting fighters and weapons, or were held in strategic locations
where ISIL fighters were based.
37. The situation in Mosul is a serious concern. On 3 December, ISIL forcibly
entered civilians’ houses in the Kafa’at and Akha’ neighbourhoods of eastern Mosul
while ISIL fighters were deployed on the roofs of their houses to fire morta rs on
Iraqi security forces positions. The civilians were forced to stay in their houses. An
unattributed mortar round reportedly hit a house in the Kafa’at neighbourhood,
wounding two children. ISIL also threatened civilians with being used as human
shields if they disobeyed its orders. For example on 12 and 13 November, ISIL
reportedly ordered the residents of the Muharibin and Tahrir areas of eastern Mosul
to leave their homes and move to downtown Mosul. ISIL told residents that
non-compliance would result in the use of female family members as human shields.
38. ISIL carried out mass abductions of civilians, including former members of the
Iraqi security forces and their families, persons whose family members had joined
pro-government forces and others that it suspected of not supporting its ideology.
For example, on 16 November, ISIL reportedly abducted 16 civilians in the
Qadisiyah al-Ula area of eastern Mosul. The abductees were allegedly accused of
cooperating with the Iraqi security forces. On 27 November, ISIL abducted 23
shopkeepers in the Bursa area of Mosul for allegedly raising food prices.
39. Scores of civilians have been killed by ISIL. In the evening of 9 November,
ISIL shot and killed 20 civilians at the Ghabat military base. It then hung t he
victims’ bodies at different intersections in the city, attaching placards to their
chests stating, among other things, that the victims had used mobile phones to
contact the Iraqi security forces. On 11 November, ISIL reportedly killed
12 civilians in the Bakr area of eastern Mosul for refusing to allow ISIL to install
and launch rockets from the rooftops of their houses. On 25 November, ISIL killed
27 civilians in Muhandisin Park in northern Mosul for allegedly cooperating with
the Iraqi security forces. On 29 November, ISIL reportedly shot and killed 13
civilians in the centre of Tall Afar for allegedly cooperating with government forces.
ISIL reportedly paraded the victims around the city, threatening residents that such
would be the fate of those cooperating with the Iraqi security forces.
40. ISIL has continued to recruit and use children. UNAMI has received reports
from families in Mosul that ISIL has demanded that they surrender male children
aged 10 years and above to fight for the group. ISIL al so has reportedly been using
children to carry out killings. On 9 November, the ISIL “Wilayat al-Jazeera media
office” posted a disturbing video on social media showing four children, estimated
to be between 10 to 12 years of age, shooting and killing four civilians for allegedly
spying for the Iraqi security forces and the Peshmerga.
41. According to community sources, there may be 1,882 Yazidi women and
children who remain in ISIL enslavement. ISIL allegedly brought an unspecified
number of Yazidi women to Tall Afar in November, placed them in a school and
sold some of them to its fighters. UNAMI continues to receive reports that Yazidi
women and children are being relocated to various locations within Iraq and to
Raqqah, Syrian Arab Republic.

10/18

17-00884

S/2017/75

42. As more territory is retaken from ISIL, mass graves continue to be uncovered.
On 10 November, the Iraqi Federal Police discovered a mass grave on the grounds
of the Agriculture College building in Hammam al-Alil subdistrict, Ninawa
governorate, that was estimated to include at least 400 corpses, some of which
belonged to women and children.
43. UNAMI also received a small number of reports of violations committed by
government and pro-government forces, and has referred these cases to the
Government of Iraq for investigation. UNAMI has reiterated that the Government
must do its utmost to prevent such incidents from occurring and to investigate and
hold accountable the perpetrators of such acts. UNAMI has also received reports of
civilians being killed and injured as a result of government operations and air
strikes carried out by the Iraqi and international counter -ISIL coalition air forces.
For example, on 7 December, air strikes hit ISIL-held Qa’im, western Anbar, killing
and wounding dozens of civilians. However, owing to the lack of direct access and
the lack of reliable first-hand sources, UNAMI has not been able to determine the
scale of such casualties.
44. Following the establishment on 6 June 2016 of a committee to investigate any
violations and crimes committed against civilians in the course of the military
operation in Fallujah, particularly the alleged disappearance of 643 men and teenage
boys from Saqlawiyah in Anbar governorate, UNAMI continued to urge the
Government to make public any findings by the committee, the steps taken to
determine the whereabouts and conditions of any missing individuals and the
measures implemented to hold the perpetrators to account. Despite requests by
UNAMI, the Government has not yet released any information on the status of the
committee or its findings.
45. The Task Force on Children and Armed Conflict, co-chaired by UNAMI and
UNICEF, received reports of 52 incidents of violence against children, affecting 803
children, between 10 November and 27 December. The majority of those incidents
were reported to have taken place in the course of military operations in Ninawa,
Salah al-Din and Kirkuk governorates. Of those incidents, 36, affecting 62 children,
could be verified at the time of preparation of the present report. Ki lling and
maiming continued to be the most reported violations, with 24 children confirmed
killed and 38 maimed. Reports of another 9 children killed and 28 maimed remain
under verification. The Task Force also received information concerning two
incidents of attacks on schools and three on hospitals during the reporting period,
while four incidents of military use of schools and one of military use of hospitals
were reported. Four cases of recruitment and use of children were reported, none of
which could be verified.
46. UNAMI continues to undertake vigorous advocacy with the Government of
Iraq to ensure that the protection of civilians from the effects of armed conflict is at
the forefront of the planning of military operations. On a number of occasions, the
Prime Minister of Iraq publicly reiterated his Government’s commitment to the
protection of civilians and to ensuring justice and accountability for any human
rights violations and abuses committed in relation to the conflict.
47. In this context, the Government of Iraq has announced that security screening
of civilians fleeing ISIL areas would be conducted only by lawfully authorized
authorities in clearly identified locations and would be conducted in a transparent

17-00884

11/18

S/2017/75

manner. The United Nations continues to monitor the screening process by visiting
screening sites to observe the process, engaging with officials to raise any concerns
noted during such visits and meeting with Iraqis who have been subject to vetting to
learn of their experiences.
48. The Iraqi authorities reportedly continued to carry out death sentences. On
24 November, eight prisoners convicted of terrorism-related crimes were reportedly
executed in the Nasiriyah prison in Dhi Qar governorate. The executions were not
confirmed publicly by the Iraqi authorities, raising concerns about transparency in
the administration of justice in conformity with international standards. The United
Nations has repeatedly called on the Government of Iraq to impose a moratorium on
all death sentences and executions.
49. On 26 December, Iraqi journalist Afrah Shawqi was abducted from her home
by unidentified gunmen. The following day, the Prime Minister called for an
investigation of the incident and for prosecution of the perpetrators. Ms. Shawqi
was released on 3 January.

D.

Humanitarian assistance, stabilization and development
50. Since the beginning of the Mosul military operation on 17 October, more than
115,000 people, nearly half of them children under 18 years of age, had fled the
fighting as at 27 December, with the overwhelming majority seeking safety in more
than 20 emergency sites and camps run by the Government of Iraq, the United
Nations and partners. It has been estimated that close to 1.2 milli on civilians remain
in the city. They are at extreme risk, especially the 400,000 to 500,000 people in the
densely populated sections of Mosul, where some of the most difficult and intense
fighting is still likely to occur. Children are particularly vulner able to injury, death
and denial of access to basic rights, including health care and education.
51. The number of civilian trauma casualties is rising rapidly. On average, 700
people per week were referred to Erbil hospitals owing to injuries and nearly 4 0 per
cent of them were civilians. The nature of the injuries, which included young
children and women shot in the face, chest and neck, suggested a clear pattern of
direct targeting. While all government forces involved in the Mosul military
operation continued to prioritize protection of civilians, ISIL deliberately targeted
civilians and used them as human shields. With fighting intensifying, humanitarian
partners are preparing for the possibility of a prolonged siege, an increase in mass
casualties, hunger and widespread deprivation.
52. Conflict and insecurity continued to displace people in other parts of Iraq,
including Kirkuk governorate. Between 9 November and 27 December, almost
17,000 people, half of them children, fled the Hawijah district. Forc ed evictions
significantly decreased during the reporting period; however, identification
documents continued to be confiscated, restricting people’s freedom of movement
and access to services.
53. Despite difficult operating conditions, the United Nations and partners
continued to work around the clock to support the federal Government and the
Kurdistan Regional Government to respond to the humanitarian crisis. Humanitarian
agencies provided assistance to more than 2 million vulnerable civilians across Ira q

12/18

17-00884

S/2017/75

each month, including displaced persons, families returning home and people living
in host communities. Partners reduced their response times and provided life -saving
emergency aid close to the front lines on an almost daily basis.
54. Since the Mosul military operations began, partners have provided emergency
packages containing food, water, purification tablets, high energy biscuits and
hygiene and dignity items to 356,000 people within 48 hours of their displacement,
or, for those who were not displaced, as soon as areas became accessible. By
27 December, more than 83,000 people were living in camps and emergency sites
near Mosul, supported by humanitarian partners. Tented schools were open,
providing for more than 9,000 newly displaced school-age children, and protection
services were provided to 128,000 displaced people, including psychosocial support
for 14,000 children.
55. The Mine Action Service of the United Nations and its partners continued to
minimize the impact of explosive hazard contamination by surveying and clearing
areas and conducting risk awareness. Between 27 October and 27 December, the
Service participated in 50 United Nations inter-agency assessment missions and
missions led by non-governmental organizations in Sharqat (Salah al-Din
governorate) and in Qayyarah and Shurah (both part of Ninawa governorate) to
determine appropriate locations for displacement camp sites and to facilitate the
distribution of aid.
56. Despite generous donations, major gaps still exist in the humanitarian
response. The Mosul flash appeal, launched in July to prepare ahead of the military
operations, received $235 million, or 83 per cent of the $284 million requested. The
2016 Humanitarian Response Plan received $676 million, 80 per cent of the
$861 million requirement, to support 7.3 million vulnerable Iraqis. Recognizing the
scale of the need for continued humanitarian assistance, partners have prepared a
Humanitarian Response Plan for 2017 targeting 5.8 million of the nearly 11 million
Iraqis who will require some form of assistance in the year ahead.
57. In a positive development, people continued to return in large numbers to
newly liberated areas. More than 1.2 million people have returned to their homes in
the last 18 months, including approximately 500,000 people who have returned to
Ramadi, Fallujah and Karmah in Anbar governorate. A total of 574,000 have
returned to Anbar governorate, 366,000 to Salah al-Din governorate, 193,000 to
Diyala governorate and 181,000 to Ninawa governorate.
58. Immediate stabilization support to towns and cities liberated from ISIL
continued to expand during the reporting period. The UNDP Funding Facility for
Immediate Stabilization is currently operational in 18 liberated towns and districts and
has expanded operations in Hadithah, Hit, Rutbah (Anbar governorate), Sharqat
(Salah al-Din governorate) and in areas outside Mosul city (Ninawa governorate).
More than 320 projects are simultaneously under way in Anbar, Ninawa, Salah al -Din
and Diyala governorates aimed at rehabilitating basic grids, putting people to work,
helping businesses reopen, boosting government capacity and facilitating
community-level reconciliation. The first projects under the expanded stabilization
channel of the Funding Facility are expected to start in early 2017. They are aimed
at rehabilitating medium-sized public institutions, which generate large numbers of
jobs in newly liberated cities, and stabilizing the agricultural, transport and
electrical corridors between liberated districts. In preparation for the liberation of

17-00884

13/18

S/2017/75

Mosul, the Funding Facility is pre-positioning equipment worth $40 million,
including electrical supplies, water treatment equipment and health equipment, and
is recruiting teams of planners, engineers and technicians to deploy into each of the
city’s eight subdistricts as soon as they are liberated. The Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations Human Settlements
Programme (UN-Habitat) and UNICEF are also working in newly liberated areas,
rebuilding agricultural systems, helping destitute families repair damaged homes
and supporting education. A number of humanitarian agencies, including the World
Food Programme and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, are assisting returning families. The Mine Action Service has helped to
ensure that 10,000 people returning to their homes in Anbar governorate received
risk awareness messages in displacement camps and schools.
59. Under the leadership of the office of the Prime Minister, UND P worked to
strengthen the capacity of the Federal Integrity Commission to investigate high profile corruption cases pursuant to the agreement signed with the federal
Government in August 2016. These efforts have been part of the Government’s
overall agenda to combat corruption and reinforce its reform agenda. Intensive
investigations are under way on five corruption cases that involve misuse of
national assets worth hundreds of millions of dollars. More cases will be
investigated in 2017. In addition, an assessment was carried out of the effectiveness
of the General Inspector Offices in the prevention of corruption.
60. Discussions are already under way with the Government to revise the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework as soon as ISIL is expelled from the
country. Working groups on preventing violent extremism, promoting social
protection, curbing community-level violence and restoring education and health
services will accelerate their work in the first quarter of 2017, with the intention of
finalizing a new framework by midyear.

E.

Security and operational issues
61. The United Nations in Iraq continues to work in a high -risk and highly fluid
security environment and to implement programmes and activities based on
programme criticality. Demands for humanitarian assistance and immediate
stabilization continue to increase as more areas are regained from ISIL control. ISIL
continues to employ asymmetric attacks against security forces and civilian targets
across Iraq, and United Nations programmes and personnel remain at a high risk of
collateral damage. A security support cell was activated in Erbil to support
humanitarian activities related to the Mosul operations. From 10 November to
23 December, 134 missions were conducted, including 6 at very high and 70 at high
residual risk. The United Nations security management system continues to work
closely with relevant security agencies to ensure that appropriate security measures
remain in place during all missions.
62. The construction of a new integrated compound in Baghdad is ongoing. Over
100 residential accommodations are under construction and expected to be
completed by June 2017. In addition, a further 100 accommodation units and 250
office spaces are at the planning stage. Similar effor ts are being undertaken in Erbil
to support the current humanitarian surge and future requirements.

14/18

17-00884

S/2017/75

IV. Observations
63. Sustainable peace and stability in Iraq can only be achieved through genuine
dialogue conducted in a spirit of cooperation, compromise and mutual respect. As I
have stated elsewhere, only inclusive political solutions can ensure enduring and
sustainable peace and security.
64. I therefore welcome the National Settlement Initiative of the National
Alliance, with its stated objective for Iraq to be “a common house for all its people
and all components”. The initiative has triggered a broad discussion on national
settlement within Iraqi political and social circles. Many groups, including the main
Iraqi components, civil society and minority communities are preparing similar
position papers and initiatives. My Special Representative has commenced broad
consultations on a national settlement to foster support for national reconciliation,
both inside Iraq and in the region.
65. Peace, stability and prosperity for all Iraqis can only be achieved on the basis
of equal rights, opportunities, accountability and justice for all. I encourage leaders
of all communities and groups to embrace a spirit of partnership and equality,
genuine goodwill and adherence to a give-and-take approach, and to present their
views and visions for national reconciliation and work closely with my Special
Representative towards this objective. I also urge and welcome the support of
countries of the region for national settlement.
66. With progress in the Mosul liberation operation, it is increasingly important to
ensure adequate governance and security arrangements for Ninawa, which are vital
prerequisites for the peaceful interaction among all components in the governorate
and the safe and voluntary return of internally displaced persons to their homes. I
take note of and support the Prime Minister’s encouragement of the provincial
authorities to resume their responsibilities and return to Ninawa governorate to t he
extent possible, as well as his commitment to mobilizing and providing all the
support necessary from the federal Government.
67. I am pleased with the level of coordination and cooperation between the Iraqi
security forces and the Peshmerga, and commend the Prime Minister of Iraq and the
President of the Kurdistan region of Iraq for their efforts in this regard. This
provides a sound basis for cooperation between Baghdad and Erbil on a range of
other political and governance issues, which will be critic al during the post-ISIL
phase. A long-term joint vision and the ability to put forward durable solutions to
outstanding issues would benefit all Iraqi communities. I urge the two leaders to
engage in concerted dialogue on outstanding issues, including oil exports and
revenue-sharing, as well as on the matters of the disputed internal boundaries and
the return of internally displaced persons to their places of origin, in accordance
with humanitarian and human rights principles.
68. I am concerned that despite the intensified efforts of political leaders in the
Kurdistan region of Iraq, the political impasse has persisted. I welcome President
Barzani’s political initiative of 20 November, and I reiterate my call on the political
leaders of the Kurdistan region of Iraq to engage in dialogue, end the political
stalemate expeditiously and normalize the functioning of the Kurdistan Regional

17-00884

15/18

S/2017/75

Parliament and the Kurdistan Regional Government, to resolve the issue of the
Presidency.
69. I am encouraged by the increasingly productive dialogue between the
Governments of Iraq and Turkey to identify a mutually acceptable solution
regarding the presence of Turkish troops in northern Iraq that fully respects the
principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and non -interference in the internal
affairs of Iraq, meets both countries’ security concerns and ensures that all activities
conducted in Iraq are undertaken in coordination with and with the full agreement of
the Government of Iraq.
70. While military operations against ISIL are showing good progress, Iraqi
citizens continue to call for better service delivery, fair and equal treatment, and
transparent governance devoid of corruption, political patronage and nepotism.
Notwithstanding some encouraging steps in this regard, further substantive progress
on the Government’s reform agenda is required. I urge the political blocs, civil
society and other stakeholders to cooperate with the Prime Minister to accelerate
this process.
71. I also underscore the importance of women’s participation in decision-making
spanning the entire spectrum of relevant issues, from stabilization and
reconstruction to transition plans and national reconciliation. I urge the Government
of Iraq to implement fully the joint communiqué on prevention of and response to
conflict-related sexual violence in Iraq.
72. I welcome the progress on the legislative agenda, in particular the timely
passage of the 2017 Federal Budget Law. I take note of the adoption of the Popular
Mobilization Commission Law, which provides a legal framework for the popular
mobilization forces. I urge political blocs to move forward and to reach an
understanding on the modalities for implementing the law, with the aim of
accommodating the concerns of all sides. I call upon the Gov ernment and the
Council of Representatives to redouble their efforts to pass outstanding legislation,
including the justice and accountability law and the components’ rights law.
73. I also take this opportunity to call upon Iraqi leaders to ensure that an
appropriate legal and institutional framework for the elections is put in place in a
timely manner to facilitate the operational planning of the Independent High
Electoral Commission. I urge adherence to the principle of inclusivity and the
promotion of women’s active participation in politics. The United Nations stands
ready to provide any technical assistance required.
74. I commend the Government for the steps it has taken to ensure that the
protection of civilians is at the forefront of military plan ning and in the conduct of
anti-ISIL operations. I reiterate my call on the Government and all supporting
parties to remain vigilant and to do their utmost to ensure that the rights of civilians
are protected during operations. I urge the Government to inv estigate any reported
violations of humanitarian and human rights laws and norms, bring perpetrators to
justice and deal with such issues with the transparency necessary to instil
confidence that no violation will remain unanswered. I urge all forces invol ved in
the Mosul campaign to observe international human rights standards with regard to
detainees suspected of terrorism and support to ISIL, so as to create an atmosphere
conducive to social reconciliation in the post-ISIL period. It is also critical that the

16/18

17-00884

S/2017/75

international community support the Government’s attempts to ensure that any
individual committing crimes is properly held to account. Failure to do so will only
deepen tensions and prevent long-term community and national reconciliation.
75. I am concerned about the toll that the armed conflict has taken on civilians and
the corrosive effect the violence has on a range of fundamental human rights.
Women and children, people with disabilities, members of diverse ethnic and
religious communities and older persons continue to be severely affected by armed
conflict, terrorism and violence. Women, and particularly those who are members of
minority ethnic and religious communities, continue to be targeted for crimes by
ISIL. There are credible reports of ISIL committing organized, systematic and gross
violations of human rights and international humanitarian law by using civilians to
shield its fighters or places of strategic interest from attacks by Government forces
or to ensure maximum civilian casualties as a result of military operations. I
condemn these cowardly actions by ISIL in the strongest possible terms.
76. Iraq also continues to face challenges in terms of access to justice, compliance
with due process and fair trials standards, lack of equal access to basic services, and
issues relating to respect and protection of the rights of women, children, people
with disabilities, diverse ethnic and religious communities and journalists and
people of other professions. I emphasize that it is fundamentally important to
address the human rights and rule of law issues that are the root causes of ongoing
cycles of violence. It will be essential to seek to rebuild trust within and between
communities by focusing on common human rights issues, such as access to justice
and basic services and formal and informal justice mechanisms that ensure the care
and protection of the victims and survivors of human rights violations and abuses,
as well as the accountability of the perpetrators of such crimes. It will also be
crucial to assist communities devastated by violence by ensuring that all displaced
persons can return to their places of origin in dignity and safety and in full
compliance with applicable humanitarian standards and providing for programmes
that assist in the rebuilding and reconstruction of such communities.
77. I commend donors for their contributions to humanitarian operations, but note
with concern that funding levels still fall far short of requirements. The
Humanitarian Response Plan in Iraq is one of the most highly prioritized plans for
the United Nations; any shortfall forces agencies and partners to cut back on or
close life-saving programmes. Many critical operations, including approximately
400 front-line health clinics, had to be closed during 2016 owing to a lack of
funding. Given that millions of Iraqi civilians are dependent on humanitarian
support, including the more than 1 million estimated to be trapped in Mosul, I call
upon Member States to redouble their efforts to generously fund human itarian
programmes throughout the country.
78. I am encouraged by the efforts of the Government, supported by Member
States and the United Nations, to facilitate the return of more than 1 million Iraqis
to newly liberated areas. I am aware that up to 4 million Iraqis may be displaced
from their homes by the end of the conflict and concerned that social reconciliation
will be delayed unless communities are rebuilt. Accordingly, I call for the safe,
voluntary and dignified return of families and underline th e importance of moving
beyond immediate stabilization to the full restoration of services, the revitalization
of the economy and the formulation of the structural reforms necessary to ensure

17-00884

17/18

S/2017/75

that Iraq continues on its path towards peace, stability, prosper ity and sustainable
development.
79. Finally, I would like to express my sincere appreciation to my Special
Representative for Iraq, Ján Kubiš, my two Deputy Special Representatives and all
the United Nations national and international staff in Iraq for th eir dedicated efforts
to fulfil the United Nations mandate in Iraq under challenging circumstances.

18/18

17-00884
