-_....

--~-----_

....

_---'-~. -~-----

l018th

United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
SIXTEENTH SESSION

...._--

8)

PLENARY MEmNG
Wednesday, 27 September 1961,
at 3 p.m.

NEW 'YORK

Official Records
CONTENTS
Page
Agenda item 9:
General debate (continued)
Address by Mr. Arturo Frondi?-i, President
of Argentina. • • • • • • ••••••••••••• 129
Speech by Mr. Pazhwak (Afghanistan)• •••• 132
Speech by Mr. Martino (Italy) • •••••••••. 134
Agenda item 8:
Adoption of the agenda (continued)
First report of the General Committee
(concluded) • ••••••••••••••••••••
Second report of the General Committee. • •

137
146

Agenda item 92:
Admission of new Members to the. United
Nations • ••••••.•••••••.••••.••

147

President: Mr. Mongi SLIM (Tunisia).
AGENDA ITEM 9
General debate (continued)

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
would ask if the members of the Assembly would be
good enough to allow me to invite the President of
the Argentine Republic to address the Assembly.
2. I have the honour to welcome Mr. Arturo Frondizi,
President of the Argentine Republic, who wishes to
make a statement 1;0 the Assembly. I take the liberty
of expressing the hope that this important statement
will' throw new light on the various problems which
confront us and will facilitate our efforts to promote
peace and to ease international tension. I now invite
His Excellency the President' of the ArgeIltine Republic to address the Assembly.

_ADDRESS BY MR. ARTURO FRONDIZI, PRESIDEN1'
OF THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
3. Mr. FRONDIZI, President of the Argentine Rer:i.olic (translated from Spanish): The people ofArgentina, on whose behalf I am addressing this Assembly,
wish to support all those who have spoken here in
favour of the maintenance of peace and friendship
among all the peoples of the world. There is no more
urgent and vital undertaking for the men of todaythose of all regions of the world, of all beliefs and of
all social classes-than that of preserving peace. God
created man with the mark of brotherhood, so that he
might survive and multiply throughout the ages. War
and destruction challenge that divine purpose, especially since another war might extinguish man from
the face of the earth. The peoples of the whole world,
anxious and afraid, come to this universal forum
confident that the breath of creation, the supreme act
which gave us life, will inspire the hearts and minds
of all the statesmen, and thus forever banish war and

weapons of mass destruction as instruments of international policy.
4. I should like to pay a tribute of respect and admiration to the memory of Mr. Dag Hammarskjold,
the late Secretary-General of the United Nations. Mr.
Hammarskjold was not only the administrative head
of thici Organization; he also fulfilled highlyresponsible functions in international life. By the vigour of his
action and the exceptional qualities he displayed in
the fulfilment of his task, Mr. Hammarskjold became
in this Organization an official whom it was difficult
to replace, and his death in the line of duty constitutes
a loss the magnitude of which will be fully realized
as time goes by and all that his activiti~s meant for
peace becomes clear.
5.- The nation which I represent is a young one. It
has just celebrated 150 years of independence. Born
in the early years ')f the l.'lineteenth century, it was
guided by the liberal ideas of the American and
French Revolutions when the world-wide interchange
of goods and ideas was breaking up the trading monopolies ::l.nd political autocracies and was spreading
the principles of democracy, freedom and se1£determination of peoples.
6. We Argentines subsequently fought for the right
to trade freely with Europe, without the discrimination and restrictions which the colonial system had
imposed. We fought for our national self-determination, vis-rl-vis not only· Spain but other European
Powers which, disputing the maritime and trading
routes with Spain. were putting pressure on the new
Republic of the River Plate with the object of incorporating it in their spheres of influence. As our
nation grew and became an important producer of
food and raw materials, the great industrial n&.tions
...YJ.~ with one another in see:king to gain control of
that wealth. The history of our country is 9. chronicle
of the heroic efforts ef .the Argentine people to overcome its internai dissensions, consolidate its national unity and defend its political and economic
independence.

7. From the earliest days of the Republic, we Argentines clearly sensed our inviolable national sovereignty, the ties of ideals and interests which bound
us to the sister nations of Latin America. and our
obligation to be generous and open-handed members
of the world community. we were at one and the same
tim,~ Argentines, Americans and citizens of the world.
The patriot armies which gave us independence
marched with the Liberator, San Martfn, across the
high mountains of the Andes to liber8.te Chile and
Peru-to liberate them, but never to dominate them.
8. Invariably, with exemplary consistency, Argentina's international policy has been based OIl the three
fundamental principles of internat~onallife-tb.e legal
equality of States, non-intervention in domestic affairs, and 1:he self-determination of peoples. These .
129

A/PV.l018

130

General Assembly - Sixteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

considerations determined our delegates' actions in
the League of Nations, in the Organization of American States and in the.United Nations.
9. We invd.r~abl? practise a policy of respect for
international legal order, and never fail to support
and implement the principle of the peaceful settle~
ment of disputes by means of arbitration, conciliation
and good offices. We have opposed foreign intervention and any kind of pressure, whether political, economic, legal or ideological, by one nation upon
another. That is how we acted when an extra-continental Power attemptl;ld by force to collect a debt
from an American nation, and it was the same when
any nation attempted to change the Government or
political system of another, or when two sister
nations went to war. in this last case we were always
ready to offer our good offices.
10. There has not been a single instance in which
the' Argentine aation has supported aggression, outside interference in the policy of any country, or recourse to armed conflict for the settlement of international disputes. On the other hand, there is abundant
evidence of Argentine action taken to defend the s~lfdetermination of peoples and universal peace-from
the activities of the Argentine delegations at Geneva
after the First World War down to those of our representatives in the United Nations. This moral a.uthority
encourages us to confirm, before the world, the unequivocal international position of the nation whicl'J I
here ~ave the honour to represent.
11. This assembly of nations reflects, dramatically,
the picture of the contemporary world. The United
Nations, which in 1945 brought together the States
which had been victorious in the last war, has opened
its doors to those which were then the conquered
nations, and it now comprises practically 100 States,
a third of which are nations having recently acquired
independent status. There are represented here all
the age-old beliefs of humanity, all the races, cultures and political and social systems; the most
powerful nations and the most humble; those that once
ruled over vast empires, and the colonies which have
now been freed from their former overlords. There
is thus being realized the ideal of an international
organization excluding none, practising no discrimination or inequality, and bringin~ together nearly all
the sovereign States of the world, represented by
their lawful Governments and on a footing of absolute
equality. TheA.rgentine Republic will support any
effort to make the Organization more universal and
its delegations more genuinely representativd.
12. For the first time in the history of international
.
f t' i . h' h
relations, a world organization is unc lon ng lUW lC
the voice of all peoples is heard. Each of the Governments asso(,liated in it can express itself freely, and
no nation or group of nations has a predominating er
decisive influence over the rest in the important
decisions of this body. Despite the natural limitations
circu!ns!:ribing the authority of any international
legal body and preventing it from exercising supranational powers,the United Nations today rep:resents,
authentically and democratically, the conscience of
mankind. That is why the Argentine ;Republic will
support any' efforts t!J increase the authority and pI'es tige of theU~ited Nations and the independence and
responsibil:i.ty of its principal organs.
13. In this great Assembly is also reflected the
most significant and decisive event of the centur.1that which will give a histo!'ic name to our epoch. I

refer to the heroic and majestic awakening ofthe new
nations of Asia and Africa-to the unprecedented fact
that millions of human beings, belonging to different
pe'oples and separated by vast deserts and impassable
mountains, have joined, within barely twenty years,
in a great movement of liberation and of entry into
the community of sovereign nations. The Argentines
warmly. welcome their Asian and African brothers
and pledge their whole-hea,rted co-operation in the
arduous but glOl'ious process of promoting freedom
and ever-growing prosperity, both for those peoples
which have already won their political independence
and for those which are still fighting to obtain it.
14. We peoples of America won our political in~
dependence a century and a half ago. Yet we know
that sovereignty is not a legal formula, but a national
will to power and self-determination which does not
end but only begins, with the political act of emancipation. Economic under-development is an enemy of
a people's true sovereignty no less menacing thanexternal political factors which restrict or stultify it.
No backward country is completely independent. The
political strife and the institutional distortions and
setbacks which overtake the new democratic republies from the moment when the proclaim their independence are not the casual whims of nature. They
are a consequence of the economic and social poverty,
of the weakness and anachronism of economic structures, which continue to exist after the political act
of emancipation. Highly developed andproE.perous
peoples are apt to judge severely, and from an academic 'standpoint, the difficulties. errors and abuses
which mark the practice of democracy in the new
nations. But democracy is not a fiat transmitted to
mankind from above; it is a slow process, completed
with suffering ~d even with bloodshed by peoples that
are endeavouring to govern themselves.
15. As an American country, we aim at the permanent consolidation of representative democracy
thro'-lghout the continent and the complete guarantee
of republican liberties, as well as at the fullest possible protection of human rights.
16. The only way of helping peoples to practise
democracy and freedom to the full is to collaborate
with them in their economic development and social
well-being, which are essential to their cultural and
political progress. There is no more effective way of
delaying and obstructing that progress than by interfering from outside in the domestic vicissitudes of
such countries and trying to impose institutions and
customs on them, since these cannot be copied or invented but can be created only in the heart and mind
of the people concerned. In this exceptional and serious world situation, the international community has
d
no duty more urgent than that of assisting the un erdevelop~d countries of Latin America, Asia and
Africa.
17. The world which is emerging, the varied and
numerous oongregation of new peoples-such is the
pointer of the scales where the future of mankin~ is
concerned. Our ideals and interests, both immedlate
and long-range,' coincide with the' universal desire
for concord and lasting peace. We shl'.l.ll therefore use
all the weight of our influence in the United Nations
to find adequate solutions for such fundamental problems as disarmament, the banning of nuclear tests,
the question of peace with Germany, the peac.eful
solution of colonial problem.s, and all other questlOns
affecting the peace of the world.

18. The full de
upon internation
ization llnd exp
the world. Only
and mistrust a
sible to achieve
disarmament.
negotiations wo
relaxation of te
urgent agreem
nuclear tests in
world is quite in
19. Disarmame
financial and
Powers can use
of the under-de
cannot be mea",
technical assis
international so
ample t() sust.a.i
freedoIr.l., justice
the international
present anxietie
help to the new
6racy and hum
throughout the g}
20. We peoples
and calling belo
and cultural va
those same pri
that are fightin
ensure for all
with their mora
a right to expec
our sovereignty
and poverty.
21. The philoso
national commu
Christian. Durin
of the eighteenth
Europe. But the
hood and of Chri
that closed, ex
by little, into a
ofvalues in the m
community is a
cultures and eth
side. It is bas
coexistence of al
for ideological a
we proclaim O'
we are postulat
of hostility towa
to establish ant
group of nation
the Christian co
tolerance, coax
and the reign of
22. There is
brotherhood tha
confining the wo.
between war an
term "cold war
sterile because i
which are daily
resources wh~ch
use to accelera
pace. The "cold
and cultura.l ex

1018th meeting - 27 September 1961
18. The full development of our economies depends
upon international financial assistance and the liberalization and expansion of trade between all regions of
the world. Only in an atmosphere free from tension
and mistrust among the great Powers will it be possible to achieve the ideal of universal and controlled
disarmament. The continuation of the disarmament
negotiations would of itself indicate and encourage a
relaxation of tenrion. Failure to reach, at least, an
urgent agreement on the absolute prohibition of
nuclear tests in every form and in every part of the
world is quitE'! inexcusable.
19. Disarmament, in its turn, will liberate vast
financial and technical resources which the great
Powers can use to promote the economic development
of the under-developed countries. That contribution
cannot be measured solely in terms of money and
technical assistance. It involves an active policy of
international solidarity which will serve as an example t/,) sustain, throughout the world, the ideals of
freedom, justice and respect for human dignity. When
the international community succeeds in replacing its
present anxieties and tensions by collective action fer
help to the new emerging world, the ideals of democracy and human freedom will have won the battle
throughout the globe.
20. We peoples of Latin America, who by tradition
and calling belong to the world governed by the ethical
and cultural values of the West, are in virtue of
those same principlGs bound to side with the peoples
that are fighting to establish their freedom and to
ensure for all their sons a level of living compatible
with their moral dignity. In the same way, we have
a right to expect that the great Powers will respect
our sovereignty and help us to overcome backwardness
and poverty.
21. The philosophical and juridical idea of the international community is, in its origins,' Western and
Christian. During the Middle Ages and until the end
of the eighteenth century, it was confined to Christian
Europe. But the selfsame notion of Christian brotherhood and of Christianity's world-wide vocation caused
that closed, exclusive community to change, little
by little, into. an association open to every system
ofvalues in the modern world. The present international
community is a "plural" society, in which different
cultures and ethical and legal systems exist side by
side. It is based on the principle of the peaceful
coexistence of all its members and on mutual respect
for ideological and political differences. 'Hence, when
we proclaim our Western and Christian filiation,
we are postulating no concept of exclusiveness or
of hostility towards qther ideas. Nor are we seeking
to establish antagonism between blocs or' to set one
group of nations against another. On the contrary,
the Christian concept of life predisposes us towards
tolerance, coexistence in freedom and in justice,
and the reign of peace among men and peoples.
22. There is nothing so opposed to this idea of
brotherhood than the rivalries and mistrust that are
confining the world to this dangerous no man's land
between .war and peace which is .identified with the
term "cold war". The "cold war" is negative and
sterile because it dictates the investment, in weapons
which are daily becoming more destructive, of vast
resources wh'ch science and modern technology could
use to accelerate human progress at an incredible
pace. The "cold war" limits and hamp'drs material
and cultural exchanges between peoples that are

13.!

separated into rival camps. Lastly, the "cold war"
constitutes a permanent threat of total war, demoralizing and paralysing the creative spirit of man.
23. The under-developed countries have the most to
lose from this division of the world, because it is
they that stand in greatest need of intel'national cooperation for their own development, and because
war would overtake them as a disastrous consequence
of the rivalries between the great Powers, in whose
decisions they would have had no part whatever.
24. For the under-developed countries, peace and
disarmament are essential to existence itself, as
well as to the realization of a universal ideal which
they, too, uphold. Both in the United Nations and by
unilateral diplomatic action, these nations must take
positive steps, wheneve't opportunity arises, to try
to reconcile conflicting interests; they must refrain
from any acts which might help to poison the international atmosphere yet further; and they must always choose the path of negotiation, which excludes
coercion and threats as methods of solving international disputes.
25. The Argentine Republic will work, so far as
lies in its power, for a reduction of international
tension and for the use of negotiation and the peaceful
methods of conciliation and arbitration, in all the
international organizations, regional or world-wide,
of which it is a member.
26. That is the spirit underlying the most recent
international acts of the Argentine Government, such
as the Agreement of Uruguayana, signed on 21 April
1961 with the Government of Brazil; the Declaration
of Villa del Mar of 11 September 1961, signed with
the Government of Chile; and the Act of the Conference
of Punta del Este, of 17 August 1961. In all these
instruments, the Argentine Republic has confirmed
the immutable principles of its international policy
and its adherence to the ideal of inter-AIlLerican
and world co-operation.
27. The Argentine Republic is a member of the
Organization of American States, and confirms itS
most resolute adherence to the high principles of
Pan-Americanism, which have preserved the indestructible cohesion and solidarity of the American
family of nations on the basis of respect for individual
sovereignty and for the principle of self-determination
and non-intervention. The Argentine Government also
believes that Presidp.nt Kennedy's "Alliance for Progress" marks the beginning of a new era iIi the relations
between the United States of America and the Latin
American republics. The people of the United States
realize that the reinforcement of democratic institutions throughout the hem.isphere is the effective and
essential basis of continental solidarity. It also
realizes that the fate of those institutions is closely
bound up with the economic, social and cultural
development of Latin America,for which it has pledged
substantial and urgent assistance. The Argentine
Republic expresses its most fervent hope for the
success of this co-operative effort, andhas repeatedly
declared its conviction that the speedy and generous
implementation ~f the "Alliance for Progress" will
enable the nations of Latin America to expedite the
fulfilment of their own developmentplans and intensify
their own efforts to overcome· the backwardness
and structural weakness of their economies.
28. Systems and programmes of inter-American
collaboration are not incompatible' with Latin Ameri':

...

132

It

General Assembly - Sixteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

ca's participation in world trade and co-operation.
None of the agreements I have mentioned-to which
should be added the Treaty of Monte,'ideo, which
instituted the LatinAmerican Free Trade Associationin any way excludes or conflicts with the system of
world co-operation. Latin America is uniting in order
to be able to accelerate its rate of development
and thus contribute more effectively to world trade.
The more our peoples expand, strengthen and coordinate their economies, the greater will be the
amount of the gaods and services which they can
offer to and receive from the world. The developing
economies offer vast opportunities for capital investment and technical assistance from the industrial
nations, whose rapid expansion requires equally
rapid development on the pal't ofthe backward nations.
At the same time, these latter nations are increasing
the output and improving the quality of their foodstuffs and raw materials for the world market, to
which they will send their products at competitive
prices. My Government has therefore proclaimed
the right of the Latin American nations to participate
in all trading arrangements made by the European
communities, the traditional markets for their products. In our view any discriminatory or protectionist
policy, or formation of blocs on the part of the industrial nations will militate against the principles
of international CO-(lperation and multilateral trade
which constitute the only guarantees of lasting pAace.
29. In the past, peace was an aspiration of mankindan ideal, tragically frustrated at times by man's
blindness. Today, with his tremendous powers of
invention, man has created such instruments of destruction that peace is no longer a Utopia but has
become an absolute necessity. Man, who henceforth
can kill his fellows only at the risk of destroying
the species, has at the same time become the explorer
and conqueror of the polar snows, the master of the
deep and of stellar space. Science has laid the universe at the feet of the earth's inhabitants. Such science has no frontiers and pays no heed to ideologies
or nationalities. It is as universal in nature as the
cosmonaut who circles the globe and looks down upon
the minuteness of his abode. And it is in this realm,
opened up by man's prodigious intellect, that men
and Peoples divided by beliefs and interests exist.
Man's creative capacity-his ability to transform
nature, to w!'est from it its uttermost resources,
to produce unlimited matter and energy .from the
splitting of the tiny, invisible atom-ushers in an
era unparalleled in human history. No wealth, no
material achievement is now beyond the immediate
reach of mankind, to be distributed freely and fully
for the satisfaction of the petty and transitory needs
of the human race.
30. The same act which enables man to journey
to the stars is a sure instrument for reconciling
the hopes of peoples of the greatest diversity and
the most conflicting beliefs. The brotherhood of man
has received an unprecedented stimulus from this
miraculous flowering of the intellect. The Utopia of
which man has dreamed throughout history is now
within our grasp. And yet, on this earth, where such
a miracle has been performed, two thirds of the
people are living in poverty and ignorance while
nations accumulate weapons of destruction which
they know must never be used and which consume
gigantic resources. I belong to a country which is
part of this "held back" section of humanity.

31. At this moment, my people is making a tremendous
sacrifice to overcome its difficulties and to bUild up
a community which will be politically, democratically
and economically independent, prosperous, and happy.
32. On behalf of my country and the millions of
people who are striving fo:r their freedom and wellbeing in this era of the oonquest of space, I express
my profound faith in the conscience of humanity and
in the moral values and intellect of man. I am confident that the representatives assembled here, and
their respective Governments, will make this great
assembly of peoples into the most active instrument •
for the peace and well-being of all the inhabitants
of the earth. God, who sees man ascendto His heavenly
realms, will give him the wisdom to set aside his
disputes, and will inspire him to turn his mastery
over nature into a common endeavour to redeem the
human race from poverty, ignorance and oppression.
33. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
thank the President of the Arj?;entine Republic for
the eloquent address he has given us. We shall certainly
all ponder it and give it the serious consideration
which its importance deserves. May I now request
the members of the Assembly to remain seated while
I have the honour of escorting the President from
the hall.
34. Mr. PAZHWAK (Afghanistan): It is not to follow
a customary practice but rather to express a real
feeling that I wish to congratulate you on your election,
Mr. President. The unanimous vote of the General
Assembly is recognition of your high qualifications
and the esteem your person deserves as one in whom
such confidence can be placed for the fulfilment of
a task which is particularly important in the prevailing
circumstances.
35. We were deeply impressed when on assuming
your duties as President of the General Assembly
you expressed the feelings of the Members of the
United Nations on the tragic and untimely death of
Mr. Dag Hammarskjold. I have already associated
myself with the tribute you paid to his memory, but
at this particular moment I ask your permission to
allow me to convey the heartfelt sorrow and sympathy
of His Majesty the King, the Government and the
people of Afghanistan to the Members of the General
Assembly, the members of the Secretariat and to
Mr. Hammarskjold's family and his friends.
36. This message of condolence is also extended
to the Swedish Mission to the United Nations and to
all those who are related to the devoted members
of the United Nations Secretariat who died with the
Secretary-General in the line of duty. It ls an expression of our deep respect for men who have died
serving the cause of peace, the ultimate goal of mankind, for the achievement of which the United Nations
is the only existing human institution.
37. This session Cilf the General As'sembly is being
held at a critic'al moment in international affairs.
The threat to peace is no longer a fear of war as
we have known it in the past. The situation is pregnant
with the fear of total destruction. The world is no
longer confronted with events which might one day
become a source of great anxiety to humanity. We
are now faced with a concrete situation in which
mankind is living in the shadow of war. This is not
an imagined fear, for the possibility of war has been
explicitly recognized here by those nations powerful
enough to make the possibility a tragic reality.

38. In such circ
responsible indiv
any assembl~J of
anything but thl':l
further deterior·at

39. My delegati
attitude demonstr
statements durin
the dangers invol
velopment of inte
expressing their
.' spoken of the mi
found that most
stration of force
of its implementat

40. Admitting th
not have effectiv
results, the small
of the population
voices in this Or
least one right t
initiate a course
General Assembl
should demand fr
to refrain from a
crease the possib
cumstances. Whi
think that such a d
from the poweri
.purpose, one cann
for such a pledge
that is the first
Assembly.
41. The second t
should be the real
the existence of
the United Nation
the major politic
solution of which
other problems, s
of the General A
are ninety-one it
The fact that the
agenda is sufficie
At the same time
that a constructiv
is not possible ,
atmosphere which
the efforts of th
on the major wo
items the discussi
tension and the co
warmer. My dele
General Assembls
of the items by i
in dealing with th
temporarily to d«
had dealt with th
of a careful analys
That, of course,
political items.
42. In our view,
the world are th
the cold war and t
and the substituti
and international
the arms race,
complete disarm
bloodshed where t

1018th meeting - 27 September 1961
38. In such circumstances it is not proper for any
responsible individual-and it is even less proper for
any assembly of nations-to spend one moment on
anything but th':l most serious efforts to pr~vent a
further deterior'ation of the situation.
39. My delegation is particularly disturbed by the
attitude demonstrated by the big Powers in their
statements during this session: while fully realizing
the dangers involved in the present undesirable development of international affairs and while strongly
expressing their desire for peace, they have explicitly
.- spoken of the might and power at their disposal. We
found that most alarming because the very demonstration of force can well lead to the provocation
of its implementation.
40. Admitting that the weak and the powerless do
not have effective means of bringing about tangible
results, the small countr~eswhich make up the majority
of the population of the world and the majority of
voices in this Organization cannot be deprived of at
least one right that they still possess. That is to
initiate a course of consideration and a.ction in the
General Assem.bly at this session. These countries
should demand from the powerful cauntries a pledge
to refrain from any actica that would create or increase the possibility of the use of foooe in any circumstances. While one might agree with those who
think that such a qemand by theweak for such a pledge
from the powerful might not serve any practical
.purpose, one cannot possibly agree that such a demand
for such a pledge is not most essential. In our view,
that is the first task of this session of the General
Assembly.
41. The second task in the prevailing circumstances
should be the realization that while allofus recognize
the existence of many important problems with which
the United Nations should deal, it is very urgent that
the major political problems of the world, on the
solution of which depends the possibility of solVing
other problems, should receive the immediate attention
of the General Assembly during this session. There
are ninety-one items on the agenda of this session.
The fact that these items have beeu included in the
agenda is sufficient recognition of their importance.
At the same time, however, everyone of us re.alizes
that a constructive solution to most of these issues
is not possible without tue creation of t~e kind of
atmosphere which can be expected to prevail onlyjf
the efforts of the United Nations are concentrated
on the major world problems. There are certain
items the discussion of which intensifies international
tension aud the cold war, which is gradually becoming
warmer. My delegation would therefore wish that the
General Assembly, having recognized the importance
of the items by including them in the agenda, would,
in dealing with the problems, reach an understanding
temporarily to defer a discussion of them until· it
had dealt with the major problems, within the limits
of a careful analysis ofthe possibilities at its disposal.
That, of course, applies only to the controversial
political items.
42. In our view, the major problems confronting
the world are the follOWing: the discontinuance of
the cold war and the lessening of internationaltension,
and the substitution therefore of peaceful coexistence
and international co-operation; the. discontinuance of
the arms race, and the institution of general and
complete disarmament; the discontinuance of war a~d
bloodshed where they exist at present and particular ~y

133

the war and bloodshed that has resulted from colonial
aggression, through negotiations; and the settlement
of the situation in Berlin-although this last question
is not yet on the agenda of this session. Those are the
major problems confronting the worhl. Tothem should
be added the problem of concentrating our efforts on
solving the situation that has arisen as a result of
the sudden death of Mr. Dag Hammarskjold and the
problem of the structure of the United Nations. The
representation of China in the United Nations is of
course basic to a solution of the latter issue.
43. I have no intention of elaborating at this stage
of the general debate on these or other problems
that will be discussed during this session-partly
because our views on them are known, and basically,
because we shall have a chance to express ourselves
on them when they come up for discussion.
44. I hope that our basi.c views on how to approach
the present unfortunate situation in international
affairs are clear to our colleagues. As a small
country, we have no force behind the thoughts we have
expressed except our good intentions, derived from
our aspirations for peace, and our expectation that
the Members of the Assembly, especially the peaceloving small countries, willtake note of the seriousness
of the situation and seek ways and means which would
secure the interests of humanity as a whole. We do
not wish to insist that our own way of thinking be
gonerally accepted, but we do insist that if the United
Nations is to serve the cause of world peace each
Member of it should consider. the interests of the
entire world as paramount in the pl'esent crisis.
Only by such breadth of vi~ion can the United Nations
make that constructive contribution to the solution
of world problems for which this Assembly has been
convened.
45. Before concluding, I would like to express our
general views on one point which should be recognized
as the most urgent task of this session, namely the
question of how to meet the situation in which this
Organization finds itself in the absence of a SecretrryGeneral. Being well aware of the complexity of the
matter in the prevailing circumstances and hoping
that an agreement will be reached at the end of the
current negotiations, it is our considered opinion
that it is far from desirable for anyone to insist upon
any controversial position on this matter. Unless full
agreement is reached, no hurried measures should
be allowed to be taken in the name of urgency. While
the urgency of the matter should be emphasized,
the lasting interest of the United Nations as an effective world organ for international harmony·· should
not be sacrificed as a result of a psychologically
disturbing situation which can easily mislead us and
can bring about more difficulties. We cannot allow
ourselves to fail to search thoroughly the avenues
of an agreement satisfactory to all. In our view, it
is better not to make a final decision on this matter
in the rush imposed upon us by certain difficulties
with which we admit we are confronted. An interlm
arrangement has been suggested•.The Afghan delegation
favours .this view in priiiCiple. Any provisional arrangement which would bring about a unanimous
understanding will be acceptable to my delegation.
In the case of disagr'.:lement, we shall take astand
in the face' of the compelling circumstances which
we should not like to foresee at this stage.
46. There is, however, a,n exceptional urgency realized by all of us. as to the responsibilities of the

J

.134

..~.~ ..... -.--.

Qeneral Assembly - Sixteenth Sesston - Plenary Meet!ngEl

United Nations in connexion with the situation in the
Congo. To meet this particular urgency, the Afghan
delegation thinks that in the case of a disagreement
on the matter of filling the post of the SecretaryGeneral on a temporary basis, with a clear understanding that this temporary arrangement will not
affect final positions, it would be more advisable to
try to reach an agreement on a provisional arrailgement that would enable the United Nations to function
effectively in the performance of its responsibilities
in the Congo only.
47. The creation of such an authority, under the
direction of the Security Council, should be consider~
possible, while at the same time the Security Council
should be continuously seized of finding a solution,
as soon. as possible, in the interest of the Orga.'lization,
for filling the post of the Secretary-General.
48. The guiding prinoiple in: our thoughts is a
stronger United Nations E!merging from the present
orisis. This goal cannot be achieved without the
tolerance, patienoe and understanding needed for
securing full support of all Members of the United
Nations for any deoision.
49. In oonolusion, I would like to emphasize that
if the United Nations is expeoted to be able to fulfil
~ts primary task for the oause of peace, every individual Member of the Organization should avoid
a hostile attitude in the interest of the restless and
troubled world. The United Nations, to whiohwe belong
and in which we h&.ve the deepest conviction, is not
meant to invite the oold war into the already shaking
Organization, or to send the cold war out to the already
shivering world.
50. Mr. MARTINO (Italy): In offering our heartfelt
congratulations upon your unanimous eleotion, Sir,
as President of the General Assembly we voice the
feelings of a country which is bound to yours by a
traditional friendship which goes back across the
centuries to distant times When our two peoples met,
on the waters of the Mediterranean, to establish
fruitful associations. Your wisd~ and experience
will be invaluable in the constructive and impartial
guidance of our debates.
51. It would be a dangerous mistake to shut our
eyes to the harsh realities of the present world
situation. The General Assembly meets at a moment
which might even mark a crucial turning point in the
history of the Organization. Upon how we taokle the
prpblems which confront us will depend whether we
shall turn onto the path of progress in international
co-operation or will see the triumph of those negative
forces whioh could shatter once and for all the hopes
and beliefs which inspired the founders of the United
Nations meeting at San Franoisco after the Seoond
World War-hopes and beliefs' that, in subsequent
years, led so many new States to join the United
Nations.
52. Our responsibility is great beoause by our actions
we can either dissipate this great moral inheritanoe,
showing .that it was nothing but an illusion, or can
defend and add to it, proving to the world that the
ideals of international oo-operation are a reality in
which we firmly belie~e.
53. This is certainly not the time for high-sounding
phrases and general declarations ofprinoiple, which
are easily made, but for deeds and for deeds alone.'
And the facts show that just when the international
horizon is clouded by the Berlin orisis, just when

J

...~-';"",

our Organization is deeply involved in the Congo and
just when the responsibilities of the United Nations
in such matters as disarmament, assistance to the
under-dsYeloped countries and support for the independenoe of countries that have not yet attained that
goal have become more prE?ssing than ever, thetragic
death of our Seoretary-General has robbed our main
exeoutive organ of its head. The problem of restorU1<1'
the efficient funotioning of the Secretariat is, in th~
view of the Italian delegation, the number one problem
on which rests the solution of all other questions.

54. How is it to be dealt with? And how is it to be
solved? There are some considerations that I would
like to submit.
55. The San Francisco Charter clearly embodies
a prinoiple, namely, tha.t at the head of the Seoretariat
ther3 should be a single individual personally responsible for the implementation of 0\U' decisions
and for the administrative work of the United Nations.
This principle is tacitly reaffirmed upon the admission
of new Member States joining the United Nations,
and these States not only accept the rules oontained
in the Charter but also automatically acquire-on the
same footing as other 'Member States-the right to
withdraw in the event of reforms should they be
considered unacoeptable. Thus any departure from
the institution of a single office ofSeoretary-General!
besides jeopardizing the efficiency of our exeoutive!
could, we feel, gravely complicate matt~rs by casting
doubt on the continued presence in the United Nations
of part of its existing membership.
56. At this stage I should like to emphasize that,
when the principle of a single Secretary-General was
accepted without dispute, the interns.ti .n1'\g:!. community
was substantially no different from now. Even then
there were Member states ruled by the Communist
doctrine, while others foll()wed a policy of neutrality
and still others favoured active democratic solidarity.
So the present tripartite grouping existed even then.
Moreover, the Charter even then provided ID Article
51, for the regional arrangements that were to be
concluded in SUbsequent years, inoluding the Atlantic
Pact and the Warsaw Pact. The Charter even envisaged
the possibility of disagreem.ent between the permanent
members of the Security Council as, in fact, it gave
the~ the right of veto. Why, then, did this right of
veto not extend to the activities of the SecretaryGeneral? There were several obvious reasons:
57. First, if Seourity Council deoisions already
required the consent of all the permanent members,
it was generally agreed that the work of the General
Assembly should be governed by a different principlethat of the two-thirds majority. It did not occur to
anyone at that time that the Assembly's decisions
could be vetoed, which would happen, however, once
the Secretariat was given the power to obstruot the
implementation of its decisions.
58. Secondly, the main executive organ of the United
Nations cannot be paralysed at the whim of one party
except at the oost of total inefficiency.
59. Thirdly-and this deserves speoial attention-the
General Assembly shOuld, like any political assembly,
have to deal with a single responsible individual from
whom, in given circumstanoes, it can withdraw its
confidence by a vote of censure. But, by accepting
the Iltroika11 principle, we would be taking the serious
step of sanctioning what would amount to irresponsibility on the part ")f the Secretariat, as it is obvious

that you oannot
accorded the rig
"troika" system
turn the exeoutiv
merely into the
into the Genera
clearly be unacc

60. Once we ha
of having one Sec
take to ensure th
organ we posse
all know the I'
therefore know t
to make a desi
is asked to ratify
which we hope w
can we just st
right to adopt a
because there i
continue to car
past? Do we con
us are not urgen
pone their consid
would, in our 0
certainly fall sho
in our respecti
choice but to find
Besides, when th
and when, on the e
term of offioe, t
a similar proble
not agree on a
'immediate action
it is imperative
bilities that the
session, had no h

61. In dealing
the political hori
mention the ques
few brief comme
62; Some time b
Countries held a
through its Prim
Iui.d returned fro
belief that the ti
between the Powe
firm. But, in 0
changing of view
take into account
the unconditional
vanced by one sid
that type of exc
render, not negot'
63. Yesterday t
Union pointed out
from the present p
But 'he forgot t
for the failure t
llleans of free el
in principle at t
held at Geneva in
by the Soviet Uni
64•. Mr. Gromy
firmly assured u
chosen that orde
mention the reaso
have always bee
free will. It is s
the opportunity t

l018th meeting - 27 September 1961
that you cannot censure a person to whom you have
accorded the right of veto. In essence. the so-called
lltroikall system would introduce theveto-whichwould
turn the executive organ into a deliberating body-not
merely into the Secretariat but. as a matter of fact.
into the General Assembly as well. and that would
olearly be unacceptable.
60. Once we have shown the legitimacy and the need
of having one Secretary-Genel'al. the course we must
take to ensure the smooth running of the only executive
organ we possess is revealed in its true light. We
all know the rules laid down in the Charter. We
therefore know that the Security Counci! is competent
to make a designatioll which the General Assembly
is asked to ratify. But while awaiting that designation.
which we hope will be made as speedily as possible.
can we just stand back and implicitly abdicate our
right to adopt any further valid decisions simply
because there is no one to implement them or to
continue to carry out decisions already taken in the
past? Do we consider that the. problems confronting
us are not urgent and that we can complacently postpone their consideration indefinitely? Such an attitude
would. in our opinion. be irresponsible and would
certainly fall short. of the expectations of public opinion
in our respective countries. We th,,\refore have no
choice but to find a provisional headfor our executive.
Besides. when the United Nations was first established
and when. on the expiry of the first Secretary-General' s
term of office. the General Assembly was faced with
a similar problem-since the Security Council could
not agree on a new nominee-it solved it by taking.
'immediate action. In the present international situation
it is imperative that we should assume the responsibilities that the General Assembly. at an earl~er
session. had no hesitation in assuming.
61. In dealing with the grave problems that cloud
the political horizon I have already had occasion to
mention the question of Berlin. Let me n.ow make a
few brief comments on that subject.
62. Some time before the Conference of Non-Aligned
Countries held at Belgrade. the Italian Government.
through its Prime Minister and ForeignMinister. who
h8.d returned from a jOlU'ney to Moscow. voiced the
belief that the time was ripe for direct negotiations
between the Powers concerned. This belief still holds
firm. But. in our minds, negotiation means the exchanging of viewsl in search of a solution that would
take into account the interests of both sides. and not
the unconditional acceptance of all the requests ~.d­
vanced by one side. We have a different word to define
that type of exchange: we call it capitulation or surrender. not negotiation.
63. Yesterday the Foreign Minister of the Soviet
Union pointed out the danger to world peace stemming
from the present partitlon ofGermany [1016thmeeting].
But "he forgot to mention where responsibility lies
for the failure to reunify Germany. Reunification by
means of free elections. which was also reaffirmed
in principle at the Conference of Foreign Ministers
held at Geneva in 1955. was never permitted precisely
by the Soviet Union.
64. .Mr. Gromyko. who yesterday so solemnly and
firmly assured us that. the Communist countries had
chosen that order of their own free will, forgot to
mention the reason why the inhabitants ofEast Germany
have always been prevented from expressing their
free will. It is simply because they have never had
the opportunity to do so, that even today a barrier

135

still streches across the Brandenburg Gate in the
centre of the city of Berlin.
65. It is hard to counsel acceptance of the view that
what is lawful for one party is not only .unlawful for
the other but actually a threat to peace. In this respect
the case of East Berlin is of considerable relevance.
Originally its status was governed by the same agreements as those which gave rise to the r~gime in
West Berlin. But whereas any discussion of the de
facto absorption of East Berlin into East Germany
was taboo-even though its inhabitants were so eager
for a different arrangement that a sort of Chinese
wall had to be erected to prevent their exodus to West
Barlin-the citizens of West Berlin are denied any
contact with West Germany Sic vac non vobis.
66. From this :rostrum we wish to renew our appeal
for negotiations, with. the hope that there will be no
misunderstanding as to its meaning.Auyonewhowould
today passively agree to a different course might find
himself tomorrow the prisoner and victim of his own
weakness.
67. In the view of the Italian delegation. the problem
of disarmament today is more crucial than ever for
the preservation of world peace. This belief springs
from the awareness that the solutionto all the cielicate
problems that vex us can be more easily found once
a bold step has been taken towards a system which.
by progressive stages. can bring about general, complete and controlled disarmament.
68. In stressing the Urgency of disarmament in all
age when technology conditi~ns the lives of nations :'
as a Whole, both in the civilian and the military fields,
we are none the less aware that such priority is
conditional upon a complementary but equally i:rnportant
requirement. as the Foreign Secretary of the United
Kingdom pointed out this morning [1018th meeting].
that is the simultaneous establishment of a 1 adequate
security system.
69. This system should be the cornerstone of any
effective and fruitful international reconstruction.
Our inclination to proceed towards general and com-"
plete disarmament can be justified only in so far as,
in our progress towards the ultimate goal. we can
be certain of safeguarding an international justice-<'
which will guarantee that allpaI'~ies respect their
UI"1dertakings. The present balance of terror should
therefore be replaced by a .system of guaranteed
co-operation which will permit economi~ and social
development for all peoples based on freedom and
respect for individual opinions.
70.~With these considerations In mind. the Italian
delegation heartily welcomed the United States-USSR
statement of agreed principles of 20 September 1961
[A/4879]. These principles enunciated for the safeguarding of disarmameL'lt· negotiations fully reflect
qur views. We have always held that a programme
for general and complete disarmament. in order to
cope with the realities ofpresent and future situations,
should be combined with limited but progressive measures designed to promote that "gradual approach"
to the problem, to which P:J:esident Kennedy referred
in his address to the Assembly [1013th meeting].
These initial measures, which could even be adopted
immediately. as they present no inherent difficulties.
would be of great psychological value and would mean
a substantial step towards solving the disarmament
problem.

136

General Assembly - Sixteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

71. The thorny but vital question of controls) so
well defined in the statemellt of principles, neVllrtheles::; impels us to: associate ourselves with the
reservations put forward by Mr. Stevenson and reiterated in his letter of 20 September. The latest
happenings with regard to the nuclear test talks as
well as the previous experience concerning the TenNation Committee on Disarmament, considered in
the light of Soviet stat~ments on control, justify this
caution. At the same time, the Italia~ delegation
cannot but restate its conviction that any proposed
agreement for the suspension of nuclear tests or for
the reduction of armaments and armed forces would
be meaningless in the absence of suitable guarantees.
72. The Italian delegation hopes that the present
inconsistency between the readiness to sign a joint
statement on the' principles of disarmament and the
Soviet Government's decision to resume nuclear tests
will soon be overcome. It would not be hard to quote
entire pages from speeches made three years earlier
by Soviet statesmen and diplomats in the Untted Nations
and elsewhere prompting separate negotiations on the
cessation of nuclear tests as anecessaryprecondition
'tor disarmament, and roundly condemning any Power
that would dare to be the first to break the moratorium. But I shall refrain from doing so and shall
simply recall here that it was the Prime Minister
of the Soviet Union who made a solemn appeal to the
conscience of the entire world when he stated: "If
in the present circumstances a state should resume
nuclear testing, the consequences of this action would
be hard to foresee", and he added that it would "assume a heavy burden of responsibility in the eyes of
the peoples of the world" .
73. On 4 November 1958, in this very Hall, we unanimously approved a resolution [1252 (Xill)] endorsing
those principles. Would we be prepared to repudiate
them today? Such an attitude would fail to reflect the
deep-seated conviction of our pE'oples. Nothing has
changed, technically speaking, since the day on which
we took that unanimous decision.
74. We cannot fail to face two unpleasantfactswhich,
alas, do not seem to aim at promoting the climate
Which is essential for a constructive resumption of
negotiations on disarmament and international security. The first of these facts is the torpedoing of
the negotiations Which, in the space of three years,
had almost resolved the difficult task of preparing a
draft treaty. The second is the unilateral violation of
the moratorium on nuclear tests, accompanied by the
proclaimed intentiOtl of endowing the arsenals of the
conununist world with lOO-megaton atomic warheads.
But what most alarms and even terrifies people are
the reasons which the Prime Minister of. the Soviet
Union has given for his decisions. He has stated
plainly and explicitly that "the resumption of nuclear
tests is in the interests of theSovietUnion". I confess
that it is hard for me-and perhapsnot only foX' me-to
regard this as a contribution to disarmament rather
than as a new and powerfulincentive to the arma.ments
race.
75. My country, however, notwithstanding this bitter
and frightening situation, considers that every effort
should be made to leave the door open for an agreement. At Geneva we took part in the disarmament
discussions and concurred in the efforts towards a
true agreement. We even tried to curb ourimpatienoe
and that of others and to spur ourselves and our friends
on to persevere in the undertaking, however arduous
.'

it mtght appear. And it is in that same spirit that we
now lend our support to the plan laid down by President
Kennedy. This· plan, in form and in substance, seems
to us, within the framework and in accordance With
the principles of the United Nations, to provide a basis
for negotiations which, by paving thewayfordisarmament through security, coGld usefully contribute to the
establishment of a new and better world order.
76. Allow me to make afew conunents on economic
problems which, in my view, are no less important
than the' political ones for the survival of mankind.
77. The United Nations is the largest body in which
countries with different patterns of production and
different levels of economic development can air
their problems and exchange opinions with a view
to taking conunon action to promote economic growth
and social progress throughout the world. 'The need
·for a balanced expansion both of production and trade
h8>s gradually emerged in recent times as the key
to the development of all countries irrespective of
their stage of economic level. This need did not fail
to obtain a response in the United Nations.
78. Italy has already made a substantial contribution
toward the goal of economic interdependence and
general co-operation and is now taking an active
part in the many activities that the United Nations
is carrying out in all spheres of economic and social
development-be it the expansion of trade and increased
financial assistance or intensified efforts in the field
or pre-investments or the utillzation of human resources. To that end, Italy has also substantially
increased its contribution to the Special Fund and
the Expanded Progranune of Technical Assistance.
Italy's over-all economic effort, up to the end of 1960,
had already reached the figure of $930 million.
79. The last session of the Economic and Social
Council showed the groviing importance of social
and economic factors; and the declaration adopted
at Belgrade at the conclusion of the Conference of
Non-Alig,led Countries, concerning the st:r~engthening
and development of our Organization, reflects the
belief of those countries that it is these very economic
and social activities of the United Nations which had
and will have the greatest impact on the civil progress.
of the less developed nationc. We feel that the United
Nations would do well to explore further the opportunities for expanding co-operation especially in those
regions where appropriate action and methods of
consultation could promote a greater flow and better
use of economic and social assistance. My Goverl:lment
is fully aware of the magnitude of the problem and of
its moral and political scope. We therefore propose
to increase our efforts in order to assist those countries which are ~ow in the process of development.
Of course, we can'do so within the limits of. our economic possibilities and of our basic conunitment to
develop the depressed areas of Souther'l Italy. We
also hope that . . every effort will be made by all of
us here to expand and intensify this Organization's
economic and socil:l.l activities. The p:rimary task of
the Organization is to disoourage, impede and halt
any threat to world peace; but this task is closely
linked with economic and social action to combat
poverty and improve the liVing conditions of mankind.
80. In concluding my remarks, I should like solemnly
to rea.ffirm the complete. and unreserved support of
the Italian Government for the principles underlying
the United Nations and our firm determination- to
contribute to their qefence and implementation. In· ..

·•. r:~~ic'{J!>:_>t1;!"l!ii""''''~~!W;Oi~'l.'i''.'O;~'''''"'.X'''.>W:'E';lf~"''''iI''T~~~M·',~'''·~",~",,,,,w.~~j&~.

bequeathing the
zation have bequ
again, as far back
and later at the
crisis and the C
United Nations
in this building
aghast at the sp
world knows, to
that "Mankind
put an. end to
It knows· that this
real citadel of p
times of greates
of the world see
mankind looks to
anchor, shows th
great moral stre
81. I am sure,
session of the· G
the challenge of
g'Uidance, stand t
heritage of ideal
perhaps even e
thing is certain:
in our hands and
the Italian deleg
safeguard it.
Adopti

FIRST REPORT
(

82. The PRESI
invite the Assem
items already ap
Will representati
dations contained
13) of the first
[A/4882]. "

83. The Assem
consideration in
this document, es
'of the items ment

84. With regard
mittee, at its 13
consideration of
tne report of the
should automatic
bly's final decisi
"Permanent sov
The Assembly w
mendation [A/489
of items to the Sbl
85. I draw the
Assembly to an ~
of Soviet Social'
the allocation 0
disarmament" .
86. I propose t
the allocation of
COmmittee's rec
paragraph 19, for
meetings and the

1018th meeting - 27 Septem.ber 1961
bequeathing them to us, the founders of thisOrganization have bequeathed us a priceless legacy.. Once
again, as far back as 1945, when it was first established,
and later at the time of the Korean crisis, the Suez
crisis and the Congo crisis, the world looked to the
United Nations as to the only pillar of pea.ce. It is
in this building that the hopes of troubled mankind,
aghast at the spectre of a new war, are centred. The
world knows, to echo the words of President Kennedy
that "Mankind must put an end to war, or war will
put an. end to mankind" [1013th meeting, para. 40].
It knows that this is still the only urbs pacis. the only
real citadel of peace 011 earth. The very fact that in
times of greatest international tension, when the fate
of the world seems to hang on a slender thread, all
mankind looks to the United Nations as its last sheet
anchor. shows that this Organization really possesses
great moral strength.
81. I am sure, Mr. President, that the sixteenth
session of the General Assembly will measure up to
the challenge of the times and will, under. your able
g'Uidance, stand the test and jealously guard its great
heritage of ideals so as to hand it down intact, and
perhaps even enriched, to further generations. One
thing is certain: the future of the United Nations is
in our hands and depends solely on. us. For its part
the Italian delegatioL pledges all its endeavours to
safeguard it.
AGENDA ITEM 8
Adoption of the agenda (continued)*

FIRST REPORT OF THE ,GENERAL COMMITTEE
(A/4882) [concluded]
82. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
invite the Assembly to consider the allocation of the
items already approved for inclusion in the agenda.
Will representatives please refer to the recommendations contained in section IT (starting at paragraph
13) of the first report of the General Committee
[A/4882]. '
83. The Assembly will no doubt wish to take into
consideration in due course paragraphs 14 to 16 of
this document, especially the order and the allocation
'of the items mentioned.
84. With regard to paragraph 16, the General Committee, at its 139th meeting, recommended that for
Consideration of chapter V, paragraph.s 424-432, of
tne report of the Economic and Social Council. account
should automatically be taken of the General Assembly's final decision as to the allocation of item 87,
"Permanent sovereignty over. natural resources".
The Assembly will therefore examine that recommendation [A/4895] when it comes to the allocation
of items to the Sixth Committee.
85. I draw the attention of the members of the
Assembly to an amendment submitted by the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics [A/L.352] regarding
the allocation of the item entitled "Question of
disarmament" .
86. I .propose that the Assembly should proceed with
the allocation of items on the basis of the General
COmmittee's recommendations, as they appear in
paragraph 19, for the reference of items to the plenary
meetings and the various Committees.
• Resumed from the 1014th meeting.

137

87. We shall deal first with the items recommended
for discussion in plenary meetings, and then with the
items recommended for the FirstCpmmittee (at which
time we shall consider the USSR amendment suggesting
that the disarmament item should be discussed in
plenary meeting). We shall continue .thus, in the same
order, on the basis of the General Committee's
recommendations.
88. Are there any comments on the twenty-five items
which the General Committfle proposes to refer to
plenary meetings? I would ramind you that items 1
to 9 have already been considered by the Assembly
in plenary meeting, so we are dealing with items 10
to 25.
89. Mr. ZORIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics~
(translated from Russian) : The Soviet delegation deemr3
it necessary to repeat its statement, made during
the discussibn CIf this question in the General Corn··
mittee, that it is opposed to any discussion of items
19 and 23, namely the question of Tibet and the question
of Hungary; that it is opposed to any discussion of
these questions in the General Assembly as a whole,
and, of course, to any discussion of them ill plenary
meeting.
90. As for item 24-the question of the representation
of China-the Soviet delegation has also, as is well
known, expressed its objections to theitem'swording.
91. I request that this view of the Soviet delegation
be clearly reproduced in the records of this meeting.
92. The PRESIDENT (tra..'1s1ated from French): The
statement made by the representative of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics will be included in the .
record.
93. Does anyone el~e wish to speak on the allocation
of items 10 to 25 to the plenary meetings?
94. In the absence of comment, I take it that the
General Assembly approves the General Committee's
recommendation that items 10 to 25 should be referred
to plenary meetings.
It was so deoided.
95. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
now ask the Assembly to tak,e a decision with regard
to the eight items which the General Committee, in
its I'eport, recommends should be referred to· th~
First Committee. The first item is entitled "Question
of disarmament", and I wish to recall that the Soviet
Union has submitted an amendment [A/L.352] under
which the item would be considered directly in plellltry
meeting.
96. In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of proc:edure, I shall, following discussion,· first put to the ,
vote the a1l'.endmr;nt of the Soviet Union.
97. Mr. RAPA(:KI f,?oiand) {translatedfrom French):
The motives w~ch have prompted certain states
represented in the General Committee to force the
allOCation of the question of disarmament to the First
Committee, instead of having it considered by the
General Assembly in plenary meeting, are neither
convincing nor clear to the. Polish delegation.
98. There is nO more important question than that
of general and complete disarmament. Not only is it
the decisive question for the future of the world, but
it is m fact, today, the key question £01' the peaceful
evolution of the international si..uation. And, in speaking
of the role of the United Nations', and of its authority,

........."M:\, ...... _

138

General Assembly - Sixteenth session - Plenary Meetings

we should add that its attitude tOWal'Ci the question of
general and oomplete disarmament and its oontribution
to that oause are decisive oriteria.
99. Why,then, should the Genel'a! Assembly shirk
oonsideration in plenar! meeting
this r.'ost important issue? Procedural reasons have been invoked.
Since this is so, let us traoe t'!1e procedural path
followed during the past year by the question of general
and complete disarmament.
100. At the fifteenth session, the questioil of disarmament was referred to the First Committee, which
was to draw up appropriate recommendations for s..mmission to the General Assembly in plenary meeting.
I shall not say that thE! work done last year by the
Fil'st Committ,ee on the question 01 disarmament
was useless. But the apprehensions of the Polish
delegation. expressed a year ago from this same
rostrum during the discussion of the same item. have
been confi1'IIled. The First Committee was unable
to submit any draft principles for generaland complete
disarmament to the General Assembly. and it referred
the task to the Soviet Union and the United States.
101. We know that. at the beginning of this session.
the United States and the Soviet Union did, in fact.
reach agreement on the directives to be given the
body which will have to prepare a t.reaty on general
and complete disarmament. I th.~ we can all welcome
this step forward and recognize that the main task
confronting the First Committee at the fifteenth
session. the submission of· draft principles for general
and complete disarmament to the General Assembly
nas in fact just beeu accomplished.
102. Now the General Assembly in plenary meeting
must express its view. It alone can consider with
proper authority the principles,and directives formulated in the Soviet-American document entitled "Joint
statement of agreed principles .for ~'sarmament
negott.a.tions" [A/4879]. It alone can complete or
ccrrect th;m. It alone can assure that they are interpreted in a uniform manner, confirm them, and
seE' to it that they are binding upon all the organs
of tJ:\e United Nations which \\'ill have to follow up
the work.
103. Obviously, the Soviet-Americ&Il agreement has
not eliminated all differences of Jpinion on the
principles of general and complete disarmament;
some of these differences are substantive ones. But
it is essentially in pIlilnary meeting that they should
be discussed. These are basic q,"olestions and are not
appropriate. forsupposed1y more detailed and--more
practical debate in the Political Committee.
104. To refer the item again to the Fi:cst Committee
and. then from it to plenary meeting would only result
in delay, and we have already' wasted too much time.
The experience of recent years and of the past few
months clearly shows the cost of such procrastination.
105. If we had already achieved any rea' progrA"ls
towards general and complete disarma.ment~theworld
situation would already be very different. There
would already .be .some rep] basis for slowing down
the armaments race, and· many difficult problems
would not have arisenwith suchurgency and acuteness.
We might have been able to avoid certain measures
which have proved inevitable.
106. Thus, experienceSlhowstbat the qUestion· Cf·
general and complete disarmament· is not the only
most. important item. but al~o the most urgent one.

No one olaims that all the diffioulties in the way of
general and oomplete disarmament oan be eliminated
within a brief period of time, but it is possible and
in fact neoessary at least to oomplete the stage of
discussions on the principles andthenreferthemattel'
to whatever body is oalll;}d upon to prepare the impIementation of the General Assembly's di.reotives,
Only the General Assembly in plenary meeting can
do this definitively, and it should do so as soon as
possible by starting debate on the question of general
and complete disarmament immediately after the
general debate.
107. This opinion of the Polishdelegation is refleoted
in the Soviet Union's amendment [A/L.352] to the
General Committee's proposal. We shall vote in

favour of that amendment. and we appeal to the other
delegations to reconsider their position in the light
of the present discussion.
108. Mr. LUKANOV (People's Republic of Bulgaria)
(translated from Russian): Permit me, Mr. President,
on being given the floor by you for the fix-st time.
to congratulate you on your election to the vitally
important office of President of the sixteenth session.
109. The delegation of the People's Republic of
Bulgaria supports the amendment [A/L.352] introduoed
by the delegation of the Soviet Union. and urges that
the question of general and complete disarmament
be discussed, at the sixteenth session of the General
Assembly of the United Nations, in plenary meeting.
110. It is natural for the most important and urgent
questions to be dis'.Iussed by the General Assembly
in plenary meeting. There is no doubt that general
and complete disarmament, which is on the agenda
of the sixteenth session, is one such question. There
can be no two opinions about that. The importance
of this question and the urgenoy of oonsidering it are
not denied even by those delegations whioh urge its
consideration in a subsidiary organ. 'but notinplenary
meetings, of the GeneraL.\ssembly. The United Nations
is already losing prestige in the eyes of the peoples
Owing to the fact of its plenary meetings dealing with
"questions" like those of Hungary and Tibet-thought
up by the narrow-minded policy of certain Powerswhile the question of questions, that of disarmament.
is referred to an organ established not by the Charter
but by the Organization's rules of procedure. It is
just such adions by the Western Powers. and nothing
else. that undermine confidence in the Organization.

111. .The international situation. now more than ever
before. requires that the disarmament question be
considered not merely as a matter of urgency but
with the :ms:ximum degree of publicity, so that all
peoples of the world may learn the positions adopte-'
by the individual delegations on this question whioi!
is so decisive for the fate of the world.
:.,~.

.

Since certain delegations have advanced proceduralarguments in favour of referring the question '
to the First Committee. I take the liberly of reoalling
that annex IT (paragraph 23) to Geners:l Assembly'
resolutioli362 (IV) of 22 October 1949 contains the
following statement on the significance of the dis~
cussion of questions in plenary meetings:
"The consideration of. questions in plenal1' meetings would have the benefit of the attendance of
leaders of delegations and of greater solemnity
and publioity."

A.nd it is s
"The S
this p

for certa
are alre
which hav
at previo

113. The
agenda or t
session. T
for world I
and espect
of public a
thus be no
enoughkno
is there no
of the ques
in plalary
procedural
0ircumstan
tion should
of a major
114. This
nature are
sized, we
orete trea
Even if the
of general
not be cha
treaty. We
principles
treaty on
which sho
concerned
disarma..1lle
that should
of the Gene
115. Two

States of
session of
agreed upo
disarmame
have to pr
and thus
authoritativ
116. The
seems. ind
it consider
the most
signature s
under a s
principles
it undervalt
proposes tb
organ of thE
of the Unit
the organs
any questiol
obstacles i
questions,
delegation
and comple
session can
discussion
disarmame
the clearer
from the s
United stat
.and. complet

l018th meeting - 27 September 1961
And it is subsequently stated in the annex that:
l'The Speoial Cq,mmittee is of the opinion that
this procedure would be espeoia11y approprinte
for certain questions the essential aspects of whioh
are already familiar to Members, auch as items
which have been oonsideredby the General Assembly
at previous sessions •.. "
113. The question of disarmament has been on the
agenda of the General Assembly since its very first
session. The declsive significance of this question
for world peace and the securlty of peoples has long,
and especially in recent years 1 made it the centre
of publio attention throughout the world. There can
thus be no doubt that its "essential aapeots" are weU
enough known to aH delegations. Conaequently, not only
ls there no procedural objection to the consideration
of the question of general and oomplete diaarmament
in plenary meeting, but, on the contrary, there are
prooedural reasons for considering lhis question in
olroumstanoes of substantial pubUcity. A major question should he oonsidered at the plenary meetings
of a major organ of the United Nations.
114. This time, tao, oonsiderations of a "praotioal"
nature are being advanoed. But, aa already emphaaized, we are not talklng about working out the concrete treaty for general and complete dlsarmament.
Even If the First Committee discuased the question
of general and oomplete disarmament, it would still
not he oharged with the detailed drnftlng of suoh a
treaty. We are talldng about the formulation of general
principles whioh are to serve as Il basls!or the future
treaty on general and oomplete disarmament, and
which should be taken into aocount by any organ
concerned with the problem of general and complete
diaarmament. It ls preoisely the plenary meeting
that should issue !ta direotives to a11 other organe
of the General Assembly.
115. Two great Powers, the USSR and the United
States of America, have presented ta the present.
sesslon of the General Assembly the principles,
agreed upon between them for general and complete
disarmament [A/4879j. The General Assembly will
have to pronounce on these prlnclples, adopt them,
and thus make them lts own. It can do this Most
authoritatively 1 and MOst rapidly, in plenary meeting.
116. The position of the Unlted States delegation
seems, Indeed, more than strange. On the one hand,
it considers general and complete disarmament to be
the Most burnlng question of the day, and puts its
signat.ure side by side with that of the USSR delegation
under a set of what we regard as entirely correct
principles on this question. On the other hand, however.
it undervalues the consideratioll of thls question and
proposes that it should be considered in Il subsidiary
organ of the General Aasembly. In view of the taeUes
of the United States, designed to drag through a11
the organs of the United Nations the examination of
any question in the field of disnrmament and to place
obstacles in the way of any practical solution oC the8e
questions, the present position of the United States
delegation as to where and when the question of goneral
and complete disarmament is to be discu8sed at thia
session can be interpreted only as a des ire ta postpone
discussion of the question of goneral and complete
disarmament, as an attempt ta avoid acceptance of
the clearer and more specifie obligations flowlng
from the statement, signed by both the USSR and the
United states, on the basic principles of general
and complete disBrmament.
1

139

117. Involuntarlly, a doubt arises. Is the position

of the United States delegatlon connected with the
disa.rmament plan {A/4891j submitted by its Government to thts sesslon of the General Assembly? From
this rostrum. in plenary session, the United States
dlsarmament plan ia introduced to the world and
praised to the skies; accusations are hurled against
others .• who ara said ta interfere wlth the attaining
of agreement on disarmamenti whlle actual consideration of the plan and its organic defects is, apparently,
to go forward in the relative quiet of the First
Committee.
118. We aU know that tl1e path to agreement on general
and complete disarmament Is still beset by a nllmber
oC dLfficultles. As we also know. there are influential
people and groups that oppose disarmament and have
not yet lost hope that a11 disarmament talks will break
down. They enter upon auch negotiations only to the
extent that public opinion compeis them ta do sa. This
la yet another reason why the question of general
and complete dlsarmament ShOllld be discussed openly,
befora aU peoples and with the participation of the
most reaponsible plenipotentlary representatives of
the Members states.
119. There must be resolute condemnation for any
depreciating of the raie of plenary meetings. Such
depreciation ls Implicit in the demand that BO serioua
El problem as general and complete dlsarmament
be consldered not in plenary meeting but ln the First
CommlUee. The view of certain delegations appears
ta be that the First Commlttee la the place where
aetual business Is done and that plenary meetings
of the United Nations are not concerned with specific
matters. Where an Important question of general
Interest ls at issue, let us not be afraid of the word
"pt'opaganda~. Propaganda for general and oomplete
disarmament ls a noble task, worthy of any international organization. In the present case, however,
t,he point 18 not propaganda, nor even ideas that are
ln themselv6s good. We consider that a11 the Governments represented in t.he Gene1'B.l Assembly can,
by taking a clear-cut position ln plenary meeting,
bar the way to manoeuvres, dodgea, formalistic
cllicanery and other methods of sabotage whereby
the great Powers of the West have, so far, blocked
any pra.ctical solution of the disarmarnent question.

120. 1t la hLgh time to bring the problem of general
!lnd complete disarmament out of the impasse. For
this purpose the JoInt Statement of Agreed Princlples
for Disarmament Negotiatlons issued by the Gavernments of the Soviet Union and the United states of
Amel"ica serves as a good, concrete basis. At the
beglnnlng of the Joint statement, the twogreatPowers
reafflrm thelr adherence to 0.11 the prov Lsions of l'asolution 1378 (XIV) ndopted by the General Assembly,
20 November 1959 and expressing the view that "the
question of goneral and complete dlsarmament is the
most important one facing the world today", and state
that the Governments of the Soviet Unlon and the
Unlted States of America recommend the principles
contained in thel:r Joint Statement "as the basis for
future multilateral negotiations on dlsarmament";
they caU upon other States to co-operate in reaching
carly agreement on generaland complete diearmament
in accordancc wlth those principles.
121. These princlples should be discussed and adopted
very S0011, and in the most responslble manner. For
thls pur pose , thQ most fitting forum ls a plenary
meeting of the General Assembly.

la

z

ill

$

_~

140

. "'la.

u

$

us:

.....

General Assembly - Sixteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

122. In view of all these considerations, the dele;5ation
of the People's Republic of Bulgaria objects to the
recommendation of the General Committee and supports the proposal that the question of general and
complete disarmament should be discussed inplenary
meeting.
123. At the same time, the Bulgarian delegation
considers that the most correct course would be for
all questions forming part ofthe disarmament problem
to be discussed together. This would be, not merely
entirely logical, but eminently useful for our work.
It is more thl'\n obvious that the isolation of any question
like, for instance, that of the discontinuance of nuclear
weapons testing, or its separate discussion, would
be irrational. since in present conditions such questions can be successfully considered only in the
context of the i-1roblem of general and complete
dlslU'mament.
124. Mr. DAVID (Czechoslovak Socialist Republic)
(translated from Russian): The proposal that the
General Assembly should consider the question of
disarmament in plenary meeting is far from procedural. We are dealing with a matter of great
political significance, which is determined by the·
importance of the disarmament question itself and
the attention with which the peoples of the whole
world are following its discussion at the General
Assembly's sixteenth session.
125. What we have to do is to create the most favourable oonditions for the achievement of definite progress on this question. There are serious political
and practical grounds for considering the question
in plenary meeting.
126. The rightness and the usefulness of discussing
the most important political problems at plenary
meetings of the General Assembly were fully confirmed when the DeclaratioIi on the granting of independence to colonial count.ries and peoples was being
considered at the General Assembly's fifteer>i:h session
[1514 (XV)]. There is no doubt that this discussion
did much to underline the political importanGe of the
Declaration as adopted, and with it ~he pressing
necessity of arriving at an immediate and radical
solution of the question of colonialism.
127. It will not be the General Assembly's task to
enter, with regard to disarmament, into a detailed
discussion of technical questions, which fall to be
dealt with in committee work. The General Assembly
must, first of all. discuss and approve a directive
for the consideration of such details in a smaller
disarmament body, and help to set up such a body.
128. In our opinion, the Soviet-United states Joint
Statement of Agreed Principles for Disarmament
Negotiations [A/4879] of 20 September- 1961 might
S8A"Ve as a useful basis for such a directive.
129. Thus it would seem entirely natural that the
General Assembly. as the most important forum of
the United Nations, should discuss and unanimously
approve the Agreed Principles and so demonstrate
its genuine concern that progress should be made
with oonsideration of the disarmament question,
which constitutes the crucial problem of our day.
130. The arguments advanced by those who oppose
discussion of disarmament at plenary meetings of the
, General Assembly are unconvincing. It is clear that
their negative attitude does not spring from a desire
to bring about the most propitious circumstances

,-----'-----"-----------

for a serious considention of this question at the
sixteenth session, as its far-reaching significance
demands.
131. We find this particularly surprising since the
majority of delegations rightly regard disarmament
as the most urgent problem of the day.
132. The Czechoslovak delegation repudiates suchan
cpproach and fully supports the amendment submitted
by the USSR [A/L.352], in which it is pl'oposed that
the question of disarmament be considered at plenary
meetings of the sixteenth session, immediately after
the gene:t:al debate.
133. Mr.. ZORIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): The General Assembly
has before it the report of the General Committee
[A/4882] on the allocation of items and organization
of the session. The Soviet delegation considers that
the question of g&ilsral and complete disarmament
should be discussed in the highest forum ofthe United
Nations; and we have submitted a formal amendment
[A/L.3521 to the report of the General Committee,
to the effect that the disarmament problem should be
referred for examination not to the First Committee,
but to the General Assembly in plenary meeting.
134. Two years ago in this Hall-on 20 November
1959-we unanimously adopted a resolution [1378 (XIV))
in which the General Assembly recognized that the
question of general and complete ,disarmament was
the most important one facing the world today and
called upon Governments to make every effort to
achieve a constructive solution of this problem. By
this decision alone we are bound to give the highest
priority to the disarmament question, to do everything
in our power to ensure it is not thrust into the background but occupies, from the outset, a central place
in the work of this session.
135. Everyone will agree that the problem of disarmament, so far from losing its importance since
1959, has become an even more burning and urgent
issue. Although two years have passed since the
General Assembly adopted that resolution, we are
no nearer to a practical solution of this problem
than we were then, despite persistent efforts by the
Soviet Union and other peace-loving states. Indeed,
we have recently witnessed a sharp intensification
of the arms :r;ace and of military preparations by
several members of the NATO military bloc, and
above all by the United states of America.
136. In this heatedatm~sphereofwarlik~ speculation,
militarist and "revanchard" forces are once again
rearing their heads in Western Germany, reckoning
on a new war in order to take their revenge and doing
everything possible to bring about a clash between
the great Powers. In face of the feverish military
preparations engaged in by the United states and
several other NATO members, the' Soviet Union has
been obliged -to take steps for the strengthening of
its security and the security of its friends. Butthe
Soviet Government is consistently striving for peace,
and to this end is a resolute advocate of general
and complete disarmament.
137. To remove forever the Damoclean sword of
nuclear war which is hanging over the peoples'heads,
there is only one course-general and complete disarmament. We cannot procrastinate any longer, referring the question from Committee to Committee
and putting off a solution of the problem of general
and complete disarmament. As matters noW stand'

every day th
armament pr
new atomic
all this, as m
compli{lates t
of war.
138. The Ge
the question 0
First Coromi
no diplomatic
that the disc
complete dis
delayed, a r
problem be
complete dis
concerning 0
of delegation
every human
fundamental q
the life and
cumstances i
referring the
Committees?
events, it is
who wants thi
point in the s
problem.
139. The int
of the wellproblem of d'
and the most a
at plenary I
the eve of t
ses:sion, the
Am.erica suc
in agreleing
general and c
joint documen
to lthe Gene!'
departulre for
on general a
cireumstance
attempts to c
question. It i
advantag,e of
itself,and t
discussion 0
wIth the broad
of all Membe
meetings imm

140. The Ge
proposals of
carefully to t
the speediest 1
and complete (
will begilll the
age,.old dema
without war.
141. ThEl So
the United Na
report of the
question of cl
meetjlngs of th
142. The Ge
it must weigh
proach the qu
,not to refer
disarmament
it at Us plen

"'"~~~

1018th meeting - 27 &eptember 1961

he

,Ce

:he
lnt
!In

:ed

lat

:ry
:er

lS)

lly

;ee
,on

lat
snt

;ed

snt

3e t

be

ler

iT)]

;he

'as

md

to

By

sst
lng

ik-

Lce

ls-

lOe

ant
~he

tre

am
~he

ad,

ion

by
md
~n,

ain

iug

tng

,en

try
md

Las
of

;he
~e,

ral

of
ds,
is-

every day that passes without !l solution of the disarmament problem means new mountains of weapons,
new atomic and hydrogen bombs, new rockets; and
all t..~is, as must be obvious to everyone, still further
compli{lates the situation and intensifies the danger
of war.
138. The General Committee's recommendation that
the question of dtsarmament should be referred tothe
First Committee is-if we are to speak frankly, with
no diplomatic euphemism-in fact a recommendation
that the discussion of the problem of general and
complete disarmament be protracted and its solution
delayed, a reoommendation that the stature of the
problem be reduced. The question of general and
complete disarmament is not just an agenda item,
concerning one or other delegation or even a group
of delegations. It concerns all peoples, all States,
every human being on earth. It is the major, the
fundamental question-that of war andpeace-"affecting
the life and death of the peoples. How in such circumstances is it possible to play procedur~l games,
referring the question of disarmament to one of the
Committees? To whose advantage is that? At all
events, it is in our opinion of no advantage to anyone
who wants this session to succeed, to be a renl turningpoint in the search for a solution of the disarmament
problem.
139. The interests of peace and security, the interests
of the well-being of the peoples, demand that the
problem of disarmament be discussed in the highest
and the most authoritative forum ofthe United Nationsat plenary meetings of the General Assembly. On
the eve of the opening of the Assembly's sixteenth
session, the Soviet Union and the United states of
America succeeded, as a result of bilateral talks,
in agreleing on the principles which should govern
general and complete disarmament [A/4&:9]. Agreed
joint documents on such principles have been submitted
to 1ihe General Assembly. Thus we have a point of
departUlre for the urgent work of preparing a treaty
on general and complete disarmament. In these new
cirC\umstances, there is all the less justification for
attempts to create new delays in the solution of this
question. It is the General Assembly's duty to take
advantage of this opportunity which has presented
itself, and to initiate a businesslike and detailed
discussion of general and complete disarmament,
with the broadest and most active possible participation
of all Membersbf the United Nations, at its plenary
meetings immediately after the general debate.
140. ThEl General Assembly should eXa.Ir.ine the joint
proposals of the USSR and the United states, listen
carefully to the opinions of other Members who urge
the speediest possible conclusion of a. treaty on general
and complete disarmament, and take a decision which
will ibegilll the translation into reality of the peoples'
agel"'old demand for a world without weapons and
without war.
141. ThEI Soviet delegation calls upon Members of
the United Nations to support its amendment, to the
report of the General Committee, proposing that the
question of disarmament be considered at plenary
meetilngs of the General Assembly.
142. The General Assembly must not shirk its duty;
it must weigh the responsibility resting upon it, approach the question with all seriousness, and decide,
not to refer the question of general and complete
disarmament to some Committee, but to consider
it at Us plenary meetings.

141

Mr. Padilla Nervo (Mexico), Vice- Ohairman, took
the Chair.

143. Mr. YOST (United states of America): My dEllegation is somewhat surprised to hear the Assembly
confronted by this barrage of speeches from our
communist colleagues, proposing that the question
of disarmament be discussed only in the plenary
session and that the normal detailed examination of
the problem in the First Committee be cltogether
omitted. The same proposal was made by the Soviet
delegation inthe General Committee and was thoro_ughly
discussed there [13Sth meeting]. The ·Committee
decided by a majority of 12 to 3. with 4 abstentions
to maintab. without change the recommendation contained in the Secretary-General's memorandum that
this item be discussed in the first instance in the
First Committee.
144. The rea.sons are si,mple and clear. Of course,
we all agree that the question of disarmament is a
matter of vital importance. The address made by
the President of the United states l11st Monday morning
[l013th meeting] clearly reveals my country's profound
feelings on this score.
145. It does not in any way detract from the importance of an agenda item if the General Assembly
asks that it be discussed first in the appropriate
Committee. On the contrary, in asking for the normal
consideration of this item in the forum where it has
always been taken up previously, we are in fact
recognizing that the question of disarmament is important and that it is also t:lomplex and difficult. In
fact, rule 101 of the rules of procedure specifically
describes the First Committee as the Committee
charged with the regulation of armaments.
146. We must not be confused. What is ot everriding
importance for all men everywhere is not slogans
on disarmament. not speeches on disarmament, but
the actual beginning of, negotiations for reductions of
national armaments and armed forces under proper
safeguards,as a means of approaching the goal of
general and complete disarmament. The problem
before the Assembly is how best to move towards
actual arms reduction. The United states and the
Soviet Union have, fortunately, agreed on a statement
of principles [A/4879]. However, that is only the
beginning-a good beginning. but one which is not
binding on other Members of the United Nations.
147. The question is: What shallthe GeneralAssembly
do abol'.t principles of disarmament? What, attitudiOi
should the Assembly take towards disarmament ?What
can t..i.e Assembly best do to ensure that disarmament
negotiations are started again in conditions best
calculated to result in useful agreement? Those ,are
questions that require careful andthorough consideration. They will be more likely to receive such consideration in the workmanlike atmosphere of the First
Committee, a body which customarily deals with such
matters, than in plenary meetings of the Assembly.
There we can best examine, in the first instance,
principles and plans and the utility of the various
types of forums in which disarmament negotiations
could be carried forward.; The documentation before
us is extensive. It covers both general principles
on which the Soviet and Un.ited states Governments
have reached agreement and specific measures such
as those outlined in the United States plan presented
to this Assembly [A/4891]. Other delegations will no
doubt have proposals of their 'own which they will

142
,

General Assembly - Sbrteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

wish te present lit\d to have examined with care and
attention.
148. These are matters which demand thorough
" study. They demand the kind of serious scrutiny which
they can best receive from the representatives to
this Assembly seated in the First Committee. When
the Committee has completed its consideration of the
subject and has issued its report, recommending
the adoption of one 0'1' more draft resolutions, the
time will come for discussion in plenary meetings.
That discussion will be infiniteiy more meaningful
if it is based on the work of the First Committee.
149. Accordingly, I urge that the General Assembly
support the recommendation ofthe General Committee
that the question of disarmament should be referred
to the l!"irst Committee fer consideration.
Mr. Slim (Tunisia) resumed the Chair.

150. Mr. SHTYLLA (Albania) (translatad from
French): The delegation of the people's R~pub1ic
of Albania. considering the problem of disarmament
to be the most important and urgent problem of our
age, fully agrees with the delegation of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, and supports that
country's propos:al [A/L.352] that the question should
be considered directly in the plenary meetings of
, the General Ass1embly immediately after the general
debate.
151. The Albanian delegation considers this proposal

fully justified by the importance of the problem of
disarmament and by the very serious nature of the
present interna1:ional situation. No one can deny that
the situation is becoming every day mora grave, or
that one of its! most striking aspects is the arms
race. Inrespolll5e to the proposals andpeacefulmo'IJes
made by the Soviet Union and the other socialist
countries in order to strengthen peace and to improve
the internation:u situation-such as the proposal to
conclude a peal~e treaty with Germany this year-the
Western Powers, and particularly the United states
of America, M.ve only accelerated the arms race
and taken impoltant military measures le.adingtowar.
152. Accordin~rto the Charter of the United Nations,
the General Asslembly may discuss any question within
the scope of thia Charter, and in particular any question relating to the maintenance of international
peace and secUIity. There is therefore no procedural
or practical reslson why the question of disarmament
should not be dilJcussed directly in plen~'"'Y meetings.
On the coritrarJr, our delegation believes that consideration of thi.s problem by the General Assembly
will demonstrat.e' the importance which the, United
Nations attaches to this problem and will contribute
to, a more' rapid adoption of appropriate measures,
with 'a view to the conclusion and implementation
of an agreement on general and complete disarmament.
153. The United states delegation is at great pains
to force the Gelneral Assembly itself to consider
non-existent and provocative issues such as the question' of'Tibet and the, question', of Hungary, questions
which dO not eXist, but which serve. the cold.war
policy of ~he United states. However. when there.is
anY que~ionof cOIlsidering problems of vitalimportance, such as disarmament, it tries to prevent
~em from beil1gconsidered directly in plenary
meetings.
154. t do I10tthinkthis is a simple question of procedure, or a. procedural quibble: it concerns' the

fund"amental attitude of the United states delegation
with regard to this problem.
155. We believe that consideration of the questiOn
of disarmament, which has been delayed for several
years, can no longer. be postponed. In spite of the
sustained efforts of the Soviet Union, and beGause
of the basically negative attitu,de of the NATO Powers,
no solution to this problem has yet been found. We
believe-and I think our view is shared by all delegations which are truly concerned for the maintenance
of peace-that the solution of this problem is a matter
of urgency and of deep concern to all peoples of the
war Id. The amendment tothe first report ofthe General
Committee which has been proposed by the delegation
of the Soviet Union [A/L.352], best meets the present ,
need.
156. We therefore reaffirm our sUPP9rtfor the Soviet
proposal and appeal to the General Assembly to adopt
it, rather than the recommendation of the General
Committee, and to decide that the question of disarmament will be considered directly in plenary
meeting immediately after the general debate.
157. Mr. MANESCU (Romania) (translated from
French): First, Mr. President, may I congratulate
you on your election to the high office of President
of the sixteenth session of the United Nations General
Assembly.
158. The most important problem now facing mankind-the key problem, on which international peace
and security chiefly depend-is general and complete
disarmament. Only the settlement of this problem
will decide, Ultimately, whether mankind is to undergo
the infinite sufferings of a nuclear war orto be spared.
The achievement of general and complete disarmament
could eliminate all means of making war, abolish
the military machines and war potential of all states
and end the arms race forever. By depriving aggressors ofthe material means of making war, general
and complete disarmament'would abolish war between
states and ensure lasting peace on our planet. At the
same time, the immense resources released by disarmament could be used to promote the industrialization of the 'developing countries in Asia,. Africa
and Latin America, to modernize their agriculture,
to improve the living conditions of their peoples, to
develop education and to improve public health.
159. General and complete disarmament. which was
unanimously approved. by the General Assembly in
its resolution 1378 (XlV) of 20 November 1959, has
become an imperative necessity and an urgent task
which must be fulfilled.
160•. As you will recall, the SOViet Union and the
other socialist countries, desiring a, comprehensive
debate on the problem of general and c.omplete dis..
armament and the adoption of appropl:iate measures
by the General Assembly. proposed at the fifteenth
session, that this question should be discussed in
plenary meeting. The delegations of the Western
Powers,pal";;,1,cularly the United States delegation,
opposed this ,arid insisted that the item should be
referred to the First Committee which they considered to be the body best qualified to give serious
and detailed consideration to the matter.
161. As .experience has shown, and asa result.of
the .negative attitude' of the Goyernment of the United.
states of America and of other Western countries,
the .' debate in the First Committee did not, bring a
solution of the problem of disarmament any-closer.

Althotmh sever
before the Co
states of Ameri
lllent on guiding
in which negoti
complete disar
the United stat
have accelerate
military budget
figures. They h
forces and heW
revenge-seeker
the main force
anew war.
162. The mllit
noW amounts

t

first time in his
sums in peace-t

163. All people
dangerous deve
and everywhere
demands for an
achievement of
164. However,
the United stat
more to preve
general and co
sentative for
meeting of the'
165. Speaking
to the First Co
to the argume
which were sh
the forum in w
plete disarmam
tion of mere f
nature; it is
political implic
manian People'
Assembly is th
organize in coof achieving 0
complete disar
166. Reference
plete disarm
General Assem
and the high s
United Nations
167. The. debs:
United Nations
the necessary
tiations on dism
168. In the opi
Soviet-America:
and complete di
. the resumption,
16S. The Rom
toa positive so
and therefore f
plenary :tneetin
convinced that
General Asse
directives for
also help to s
body these neg
with the interes

1018th meeting - 27 September 1961

..,

[

I.

Althol,\gh several constructive proposals were laid
before the Committee, obstruction by the United
states of America and its allies prevented any agreement on guiding principles or with regard to organs
in which negotiations on the question of general and
complete disarmament should be resumed. Moreover
the United states of America and its NATO allies
have accelerated the arms race by increasing their
military budgets, which have now reached record
figures. They have increased the s~ze of their armed
forces and brwe intensified the rearmament of the
revenge-seekers of West Germany, makingthat country
the main force for the preparation and unleashing of
anew war.
162. The ml1itary expenditure of the United states
now amounts to over $50,000 million. This is the
first time in history that ast~e has spent such large
sums in peace-time for military purposes.
163. All peoples of the world are disturbed by this
dangerous development in the international situation,
and everywhere they are raising their voices in firm
demands for an end to the arms race and the effective
achievement of general and complete disarmament.
164. However, we note that the representatives of
the United states and of its military a,1lies wish once
more to prevent consideration of' the probkm of
general and complete disarmament in the most Fepresentative forum of the United Nations-the plenary
meeting of the General Assembly.
165. Speaking in favour of referring the problem
to the First Committee, these representatives resort
to the arguments which were used a year ago, and
which were shown to be invalid. The question of
the forum in which the question of general and complete disarmament should be discussed is not a question of mere form, of a technical and procedural
nature; it is a question of substance with wide
political implications. The Government of the Romanian People's Republic considers that the General
Assembly is the most appropriate forum in which to
organize in co-operation with all states, the means
of achieving our common aim which is general and
complete disarmament.
166. Reference of the problem of general and complete disarmament to the plenary meetings of the
General Assembly would demonstrate the interest
and the high sense of responsibility with which' the
United Nations approaches this important question.
167. The. debate would then take place in the highest

United Nations organ and this might help to create
the' necessary conditions for a resumption of negotiations on disarmament.
.
168. In the opinion of the Romanian delegation, the
Soviet-American agreement on principles for general
and complete disarmament is an acceptable basis for
the resumption of these negotiations by all states.
16S. The Romanian delegation desires to contribute
toa positive solution of the problem of disarmament,
and therefore favours discussion of this question in
plenary meetings of the General Assembly. We are
Convinced that this will facilitate the adoptiOn by the
General. Assembly of an appropriate resolution on
directives for disarmament negotiations, and will
also, help to solve the problem of deciding' in what
body these negotiations· should be held, in accordance
with the interests of all parties.

143

170. Miss BROOKS (Liberia): Allow me, Mr. President, to extend my personal congratulations on your
election as President of the sixteenth session of the
General Assembly.
171. The Soviet amendment [A/L.3l>2] contains two
points. One is the question of allocation andthe second
is the question of priority, even though the question
of priority is not fully stated in the proposal.
172. On the question of allocation, my delegation
in tha General Committee took the position that. if
the Powers could not agree on the forum in which
the question could be discussed that would mean very
little hope for a result as to the substance of the
matter, and therefore, my delegation would abstain.
173. The question of priority arises in connexion
with items 4 and 5ofthe list of items which the General
Committee rec~mmended, in its first report [A/4882] ,
for allocation to the First Committee-"The urgent
need for a treaty to ban nuclear weR-pons tests under
effective international control" and "Continuation of
suspension of nuclear and thermo-nuclear tests and
obligations of states to refrain from their renewal".
It cannot be denied that there is urgent need to discuss
the question of disarmament and reach a decision
on the solution thereof. It is also true that the hopes
of the peoples of the world have been shattered, as
we are aware when we think of the discussions here
in the General Assembly and at the disarmament
conferences in Geneva.
174. While th.e n)lclear Powers are tryingto determine
the course which they should take in order to arrive
at a solntion of the disarmament question, my delegation feels that there is an immediate need for a continuation of the suspension of nuclear andthermo-nuclear
tests. The air has been polluted, and !t seems that,
if some immediate step is not taken for the cessation
of these tests, perhaps man will not be fit to exist
on the day when a solution ofthe clisarmament-question
is' reached.
i75. My delegation will therefore abstain on this
question.
176. Mr.. GODBER (United Kingdom): I apOlogize for
delaying the vote, and I will do sofor only one minnte,
bnt I would nG~ wish the silence of my delegation to
be interpreted as meaning. that we are indifferent to
this question. Those who followed the debates on
this subject at the Assembly last year and in the
General Committee last week will, of course, be
familiar with the United Kingdom's point of view.
It is that by far the best procedure is to discuss' so
significant and so complex a subject in the First .
Committee before bringing it to plenary•. The representative of the SOViet Union, in bringing forward
his draft resolution, described this as an important
and urgent problem the solution of Which brooks no
delay. I would assure him and other representatives
who' have spoken that, of cOUl'se, we fully endorse
that view, as, I alll. sure, does every delegation here.
Blit where we differ with the delegation of the Soviet
Union and its friends is in their COnclusion thtit these
considerations argue for direct discussion of this
item in plenary meetings of this Assembly. It is the.
view of my delegation that· this is a matter which is
far better conducted, in the first instance,inthe
First Committee.
177. We have. of course, welcomed most waxmly
the agreement that was reached last· week between
the United states and the SovietD:niononthe statement

~---~~ ... ~----,..,~........,.....".--_""--.,j-'"

144

General Assembly - Sixteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

of principles in connexion with negotiation of a disarmament agreement. We are hopeful that this will
expedite consideration of disarmament in this Assembly and will help to get serious negotiations going
again in the near future. We feel that this should
prOVide the right atmosphere for those negotiations
to continue.
178. I am bound to say, however, that, in listening
to some of the speeches this afternoon, I felt tha:t
the accusations of bad faith repeatedly made against
the West can do nothing but exacerbate feelings and
will not help forward the discussions. I believe that
when we are accused in that way it serves no good
purpose, and I very much regret that those accusations
have been made in this field. It would be very easy
for m~ to retaliate in kind. I would only suggest that
representatives who are in doubt consider the past
history of discussions on disarmament. I take it no
further tba:n that, not because I could not-it would
be only too easy-but because I do not wish, as I have
said, to exacerbate feelings on this subject.
179. It is the conviction of my delegation that, if
we really want to see these discussions go forward
in the most helpful way, this ca:n best be done in the
First Committee. It is for that reason that I hope
the Assembly will reject the proposal of the Soviet
Union.
180. Sir Muhammad ZAFRULLA KHAN (Pakistan):
I beg to be forgiven for my intervention at this late
stage of the discussion of this item. But I do wish to

say this in support of what has just been stated by
the representative of the United Kingdom: it seems
to us that the question of disarmament, although
extremely important and very urgent, is a complex
question which has many facets, and that it can be
much more conveniently dealt with in Committee
rather than immediately in the plenary. But I also
wish to add a word with regard to what has been said
by the representative of Liberia. Were it the concern
of those who have moved for the item to be taken
in plenary to move on quickly with it, and if there
were no other consideration behind it, one would have
thought that, as ancillary to the question of disarmament, they would at least have proposed that items
4 ahd 5 also should be taken in plenary, inasmuch
as at the moment they have a greater and sharper
urgency than the question of disarmament, since the
danger from nuclear tests is now present, operative
and proceeding. We had intended to make that preposal
ourselves. But then, thinking that that kind of proposal
might delay matters rather than expedite them, we
have intended to move in the First Committee that
those items should have priority. We still intend to
make that motion when the agenda comes before the
Committee and the Committee is engaged in planning
its programme.
181. Therefore, the plea that I would wiah to make
is that the question of disarmament should go to
Committee, as recommended by the General Committee, and should not be taken up first in the plenary.
But, if it is likely to be taken up in the plenary, I
would then formally move that items 4 and 5 should
be discussedin plenary also as ancillary to the question
of disarmament.
182. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): We
shall now proceed to vote. In accordance with rule 92
of the rules of procedure, I shall first put to the vote
the amendment submittedby the delegation of the Soviet
Union [A/L.352]. This amendment aims to have the

agenda item entitled "Question of disarmament" considered in plenary meeting.

The amendment was rejected by S3 votes to 11,
with 29 abstentions,
183. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
now invite the Assembly to vote on the General Committee's recommendation that the question of disarmament should be allocated to the First Committee.

The recommendation of the General Committee
was adopted by 6S votes to 9, with 19 abstentions.
184. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
now ask the General Assembly to vote on items 2 to
8. The General Committee, in its report, recommends
that these items should be allocated to the First
Committee. If there is no comment, I shall take it
that the Assembly approves the recommendation of
the General Committee.
It was 130 decided.
185. The PRESIDENT (tra:nslated from French): I
now turn, to the six items which the General Committee
has proposed should be allocated to the Special
Poiitical Committee. If there are no objections, I
shall take it that the General Committee's recommeudation is adopted.
It was so decided.
186. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The
General Committee lists in its report nine items
which it proposes should be allocated to the Second
Comm.ittee. If there is no comment, I shall take ,t
that the Assembly approves the General Committee's
recommendation.
It was so decided.
187. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): We
now come to the ten items which the General Committee recommends for allecation to the Third Committee. If there is no comment, I shall take it that
the Assembly approves the General Committee's
recommendation.
It was so decided.
188. The PRESIDENT (translated from FreJ;lch): The
General Committee lists in its report fifteen items
which it recommends should be allocated to the Fourth
Committee. If there is no comment, I shall take ~t
that the Assembly approves the. recommendation of
the General Committee.

It was so decided.
189. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The
General Committee lists nineteen items which it
recommends should be allocated to the Fifth Committee. If there is no comment, I shall take it that
the Assembly approves the recommendation of the
General Committee.
It was so deqided.
....
190. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
now invite the Assembly to vote on the five items
which the General Committee recommends should
be referred to the Sixth Committee.
191. Mr. QUAISON-SACKEY (Ghana): I am very
chary of speaking at this late hour as in factI would
have wished that we might have admitted the delegation
of Sierra Leone, espeoially as the P:roime Minister
himself is here. I have taken the floor to propose to
the Assembly that item 5, "Permanent sovereignty
over natural resources", recommended for allocation

to the Sixth C
Second Commi
grounds that th
resources deals
tion, the manne
their resources
draw up their ec

192. We agree
aspects and, in
is our view th
Committee, the
aspects. If, lat
wisdom felt tha:
phasized, politi
refer the matter
I move that the
Committee. "
193. The PRE
Before giving t
recall that the Ge
recommended th
of the report
should be dealt
item 5 which we
194. Mr. ROSSI
motion made by
the item to the S
that this subject
has very import
. is from the rig
and it has com
the Third Com
the Special Polit
aspects. Then f
its legal aspect
economic aspect
the time being
the subject sho
Committee.
195. The PRES
would like the l'
proposal.
196. Mr. QUAIl refer:r-ed spec'
not to the Specia
is that the repr
the view in the G
be referred to t
sure that in view
here, and knowi
cross swords 0
his support on th
Second Committe
197. Mr. ROSSI]
the misunderstan
representative of
in favour of assig
Committee. So wl
note of what he w
that he would be
everyone has th
meanwhile, and
the economic as;
.should go to the S
193. Mr. PUMP
United States de
voted in favour
Committee on a

1018th meeting - 27 September 1961
to the Sixth Committee, should be allocated to the
Second Committee. I make this contention on the
grounds that the qqestion of sovereignty over natural
resources deals in fact with economic self-determination. the manner in which States wish to dispose of
their resources, the manner in which States want to
draw up their economic programmes and so on.
192. We agree that the item is tinged with legal
aspects and, in fact, with political aspects. But it
is our view that if it is discussed in the Second
Committee. the emphasis would be laid on economic
aspects. If. later on. the Second Committee in its
wisdom felt that certain aspects of it should be emphasized. political or otherwise, then they could
refer the matter to the appropriate Committee. Thus,
I move that the item should be referred to the Second
Committee. "
193. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Before giving the floor to the next speaker, I would
recall that the General Committee, at its 139th meeting.
recommended that paragraphs 424 to 432 of chapter V
of the report of the Economic and Social Council
should be dealt with in the same manner as agenda
item 5 which we are now discussing.
194. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I wish to support the
motion made by the representative or Ghana to refer
the item to the Special Political Committee. It is true
that this subject. has its legal aspects and that it also
has very important economic aspects, but its origin
,is from the right of self-determination of peoples;
and it has come with that subject previously from
the Third Committee. It should have the sanction of
the Special Political Committee because' of its political
aspects. Then from that Committee it may go for
its legal aspects to the Sixth Committee and for its
economic aspects to the Second Committee. But for
the time being, it is my delegation's view that
the subject should go first to the Special Political
Committee.
195. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
would like the representative of Ghana to clarify 1:1is
proposal.
196. Mr. QUAISON-SACKEY (Ghana): When I spoke
I refer:red specifically to the Second Committee and
not to the E.'pecial Political Committee. My recollection
is that the representative of Cyprus did in fact hold
the view in the General Committee that the item .should
be referred to the Special Political Committee. I am
sure that in view of the argument which I put forward
here. and knowing full well that he .and I should not
cross swords on matters like this, he will give us
his support on the matter of referring the item to the
Second Committee.
197. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I am very sorry .for
the misunderstanding. In the General Committee the
representative of Ghana supported the view and spoke
in favour of assigning this item to the Special Politieal
Committee. So when he took the floor I was not taking
note of what hew8.s sayingbecauseItook it for grant,ed
that he would be consistent in his policy. Of course,
everyone has the right to change his view in the
meanwhile, and I qUite appreciate his attitude about
the economic aspects. However, I still think the item
should go to the Special Political Committee.
198. Mr. PLIMPTON (United States of America): Thee
United States delegation in the General Committl~e
voted in favour of referring thiS item to the Sixth
COlDmittee on account of the many legal problems

145

that are involved. At the same time we recognized
there and we recognize' here that the problem of
sovereignty over natural resources is essentially
an economico-legal matter. It participates in both
fields. We are entirely prepared to support the proposal of the representative of Ghana that in the first
instance the item be referred to the Second Committee
on account of its economic aspects. I venture the
suggestion to modify one made by the representative ..
of Cyprus in the General Committee that we might
in the first instance refer the item to the Second
Committee with reference, however, as necessary,
to the Sixth Committee on account of the leg".l aspects
that are involved or, if appropriate, to the joint consideration of the two Committees. I wonder if, by
any possibility, the representative of Ghana might be
willing to consider that as an addendum to his proposal;
in other words, if the Second Committee finds that
there are legal considerations involved, that it then
refer the matter to the Sixth Committee for joint
consideration.
199. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
understand that the delegation of Ghana accepts this
compromise proposal.
200. Mr. QillNTERO (Panama) (translated from
Spanish): I should like to repeat what I said at the
meeting of the General Committee [138th meeting]
at which this item was first discussed-namely that
altJ1ough, in my opinion, this item concerning the
permanent sovereignty of peoples and nations over
their natural' wealth and resources is quite within
the competence of the Sixth Committee, I do not think
there is any objection to the question being dealt with
by anotheer Committee also, or to its being allocated
to a separate Committee. As was pointed out at that
meeting, and as I also stated on that occasion, this
problem has both economic aspects of the greatest
importance and political implications.
201. In view of the fact that it was proposed and
agreed without a vote, at the last meeting of the
General Committee [139th meeting], that the allocation of this item should follow the allocation of the
report of the Economic and Social Council, chapter V,
paragraphs 424 to 432, I feel that it would be best
if the two questions were considered together. Consequently. it seems to me entirely correct that the
item should go to the Second Committee, without of
course, as the United states representative has just
said and as was stated by members of· the General
Committee at the meeting which I have mentioned,
such procedure precluding the possibility of the legal
aspects, which are also very important, being referred
to the Sixth Committee for consideration.
202. Mr. ZORIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I too should like to make
my contribution to the solution of this problem in a
conciliatory way.
203. A number of proposals have been put forward.
The first· was that of' Ghana. to the effect that ~his
question should be considered in the Second Committee;
thereafter, Cyprus proposed that it should be considered in the Special PonticalCommittee; andfinally
an amendment was tabled by the United State.s representative proposing that the question be considered
in the Second Committee and if' necessary, either
jointly or separately, in the Sixth Committee.
204•. To all these proposals I would propose a subamendI,nent to the effect that the proposals of Cyprus

·~'"

146

..

-~

~--"_._.,.

General Assembly - Sixteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

and Ghana bE> combined with theaddition, ifnecessary,
that the question could also be considered in the
Sixth Committee. In other words, we might take up
all three proposals and formulate them as follows:
item 5, mentioned for consideration by the Sixth
Committee, could be examined at a joint meeting
of the Special Political Committee and the Second
, Committee, and could, if necessary, be referred to
the Sixth Committee.
205. Mr. PLIMPTON (United states of America): I
think I must express the view that we are getting a
little complicated here.
206. I would like to say that we support the original
proposal. of the representative of Ghana. This item
should obViously go, we believe, to the Second Committee because it is primaxily an economic question.
It has, obViously, as we all realize, legal points as
well. Naturally, there are political aspects, bl.t we
believe strongly that this is an item, which is of
such importance, particularly to the under-developed
countries, that it should be dealt with in an atmosphere
free from political controversy and dealt with in a
climate and in a frame of mind designed to reach
positive results .which·willbenefitthe under-developed
countries that are principally interested in the question.

211. I think it would be simpler to vote first on the
Ghanaian proposal that the item should be allocated
to the Second Committee.
212. Mr. ZORIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I think you willremember l
Mr. President, the l~lle of procedure whereby a subamendment is Yoted l.\pon befol'e a proposal or any
amendment. There is all the more reason to vote
on my sub-amendment ·first. since it ia exclusive
in the sense that it 'combines all the proposals in one.
213. I would therefore ask you to put to the vote in
the first place my sub-amendment to the effect that
item 5 be discussed by the Special Political Committee and the Second.Committee jointly, and, in case
of need; referred to the Sixth Committee.
214. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The representative of the Soviet Union asks that a
vote should first be taken on his proposal that the
item should be discussed jointly by the Second Committe.a and the Special Political Committee and. if
necessary, referred to the Sixtl1Committee. I put
this proposal to the vote.
The sub-amendment proposed orally by the SoViet
Union was rejected by 38 votes to 18, with 32
abstentions.

.

207. We strongly believe that the best atmosphere
and climate in which to reach the desired results
the under-developed countries. are so interested in
will be found in the non-partisan atmosphere of the
Second Committee" and then. referred by it, as necessary, to the Sixth Committee.

215. The PRESIDENT .(translated from French):
May we vote on the proposal of Ghana, as amended,
under which the item would be allocated to the Second
Committee and, if necessary, to the Sixth Committee?
I put this proposal to the vote.
The proposal was adopted by 61 votes to 1, with

208. Mr. COOPER (Liberia): I should like to ask
that we adjourn or suspendthe decision onthis question
for the time being and take up the next item.inasmuch
as there are some ladies present in the delegation
from Sierra Leone and I think we should be gallant
enough towards these ladies to take up the next
question. I am sure that the delegation of Sierra
Leone would like to participate. in this discussion.
1 move that wo suspend this question until tomorrow
and take up now the question of the admission of
Sierra Leone.
'

21 abstentions.

209. The PRESIDENT (translated from .French): We
have before us a request for adjournment of the item.
However, we' had almost concluded and we were
about to take a vote. Will the representative of Liberia
agree to our finishing with the. item and taking a vote
upon it~ I thank him for agreeing t~ this.
210. May. we now proceed to vote on the various
proposals submitted in connexion with the allocation
of agl:lnda item 87, entitled "Pl:lrmanent soYereignty
over natural resources"? We have before us the
following proposals:
The General Committee's proposal that the item
should be :ulocated to the Sixth Committ.ee;
The proposal of Ghana, with an amendment accepted
by the. sponsor th.at· it should be allocatedto the. Second
Conunittee;
.
The proposal of Cyprus that it should be allooated
to the Speoial Political Committee;
The, amen~ent of the SovietUnion~ the effect of
which would be to have the item discussed initially
in a joint meeting of the Speoial PoliticalCommitiee
and the Second Committee, and then, if necessary,
referredto·the SiXth Committee.

216. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In
the circumstances, need we take a vote on the other
proposals?'
.
217~ Sin.ce no delegation insists that a vote be taken
on the otaer proposals, the General Assembly therefore decides that the agenda item entitled "Permanent
sovereignty over natural resources", and chapter V,
paragraphs 424 to 432 of the report of the Economic
and Social Counci! will be oonsidered by the Second
Committee, and, if neceflsary, referred to the Sixth
Committee. It was so decided.
218. The ~RESIDEN'1' (translated from French): If
there are' no observ.ations on the other .four items
which the General Committee recommends' should
be allocated tcdhe Sixth Committee,'l shall take it
that the Assembly approves this recommendation
of the General Committee.
It was so deqided.
SECOND REPORT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE
(A/4895)
"

2l9. The ERESIDENT (translated from Frencp):
With yOll!' co-operation, the General Assembly has
just completed its consideration of the adoption of
the agenda and of the allocation of the agenda items.
The main Committees will be informed ofthe decisions
which the Assembly has just taken.
220. With regard to the item entitied "Admission
of new Members to the United Nati.ons". !invite Mem", .
bers of the AS,sembly to consider the second report
of the. General Committee [A/4895] • Paragraph lof
this report recommends that the item be included in
the agenda· and· allocated to the· p~enary meeting•• If

there is no obj
Assembly appro
It was so deai
Admission 0

221. The PRE
noW propose th
mendation of t
application of Si
Nations [A/488
has before it a
submitted by thi
222. The Secur
mended the Ge
to membership
that th<:l Gener
to admit Sierra
Nations?
The draft res

223. The PRE
declare Sierra
The delegatio
place in the Gen

224. The PRE
is with some
entire member
arrival among
as a step forw
It is a signal p
tinguished dele
General Asse:n
of the United N
the Government
admission, whic
the Members of
that this young
the great inter
contribution to
accordance with
of the United Nat
225. I invite t
to address the A
226. Sir Milton
mixed emotion t
the people of Si
the honour which
on its· admissio
the United Natio
227. The circUl
Hammarskjold. t
Nations, have tb
.us. Although we
of .first-hand ex
which we have
extolled by those
Leon<:l are amo
duty and in his
smaller nations
most needed by
to direct the for
We therefore j
family of the late
• both of which nu
an invaluable se
sympa,thy to thelf

1018th meeting -·27 September 1961
there is no objection, I shall take it that the Gen.eral
Assembly approves this recommendation.
It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 92
Admission of new Memhers to the United Nations
221. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
noW propose that the Assembly take up the recommendation of the Security Council concerning the
application of Sierra Leone for admission to the United
Nations [A/4888]. In this connexion, the Assembly
has before it a draft resolution [A/L.353 andAdd.l-4]
submitted by thirty Member states.
222. The Security Council has unanimously recommended the General Assembly to admit Sierra Leone
to membership of the United Nations. May I take it
that the General Assembly decides by acclamation
to admit Sierra Leone to membership of the United
Nations?
The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation.

223. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): !
declare Sierra Leone a Member of the United Nations.
The delegation of Sierra Leone was escorted to its
place in the General Assembly hall~ ,

224. The PRESIDENT (tran,slated from French): It
is with some pride that I venture on behalf of the
entire membership of the Assembly, to regard the
arrival among us of the delegation of Sierra Leone
as a step forward in the history of our Organization.
It is a signal privilege for me to welcome the distinguished delegation of Sierra Leone, which the
General Asse:nbly has just admitted to membership
of the United Nations. I most sincerely congratulate
the Government and people of Sierra Leone on this
admission, which was decided upon unanimously by
the Members of the General Assembly. I am convinced
that this young and noble African state, in joining
the great international family, will make a useful
contribution to our work for peace and concord, in
accordance with the high principles of the· Charter
of the United Nations.
225. I invite the Prime Minister of Sierra Leone
to address the Assembly.
226. Sir Milton MARGAI (Sierra Leo'le): It is'with
mixed emotion that, on behalf of the Government-and
the people of Sierra Leone, I· accept with gratitude
the honour which· has been conferred upon my country
on its admission as· the one hundredth Member of
the United Nations.
227. The circumstances of the death of Mr. Dag
Hammarskjold, the Secretary~General of the United
Nations, have thrown a cloud of sorrow upon all of
us. Altholigh we .ourselves did not .have the privilege
of ·firat-hand .experience of tbe .great qualities for
which we have heard the. late .Secretary-General
extolled by those who knew him well, yet we in Sierra
Leone are among those who· saw in his devotion to
duty and in his championship of the .rights of the
smaller nations those qualities which we fult were
most needed by a man who was chosen by destiny
to direct the fortunes of this great family of nations.
We· .therefore join in· exPressing .sympathy to. the
family of the late 8e'JretBJ.:'Y-General andto his country,
both of which nurtured him in preparation for such
an invaluable service to the world. We also extend
sympathy to the families and count~ies of allthe other

147

officials of the United Nations who lost their lives
in the same tragic accident in a quest for peace.
228. This cloud of sorrow, however, has not com·'
pletely over-shadowed the joy we fe'31 in joining the
United Nations. There is no magic in numbers, but
we are particularly pleaeed that it has been our good
fortune to round off the number of Member countries
to the first hundred. Ws are especially happy that
this good fortune has been ours during the session
when., for the first time in the history of the United
Nations, the honour of being President of the General
Assembly has been conferred an a native of our continent of Africa, and in a month when, also for the
first time, the President of the Security Council is
a fellow African, and indeed aneighbour-. We therefore
join all your many friends, Mr. President, in con~
gratulating you upon your unanimous election to this
most exalted office, and wish for. you and for an of
us during the year ofyour presidency a. full realization
of your and our dream that peace will be preserved
and that the welfare of all the peoples of the world
will be advanced.
229. Next I wish to thankourneighbQurs, the Republic
of Liberia and the Republic of Guinea, for so kindly
associating themselves with our colleagues of the
British Commonwealth in sponsoring our application.
before this Assembly·. Our thanks are due also to the
members of the Security Council who did us the great
honour of unanimously adopting a resolution recommending our admission, and to all delegations which,
by their votes and by their kind words, have welcomed
us to the United Nations. Inthankingour Commonwealth
friends we wish here publicly to record Otll' gratitude
to the Government and people of the United Kingdom
who made our transition from a colonial dependency
to an equal member of the Commonwealth such an
orderly, peaceful andfriendly process. When, infuture ,
both within and without the United Nations, we persistently champion the cause of a speedy and final
end to every variety· of colonial rule everywhere in
the world, we wish the fact to be remembered that we
do not speak out of bitterness, but out of convictioa
that the right of self-determinationwhichwe ourselves
now enjoy is a right which all ml;ln everyw:b.ere must
enjoy. We wish, furi:her, to make it clear that w~
reserve the right· to eXpress ourselves fully and independently on all issues.
.
230. I do not intend on this occasion to make any
pronouncements on the important· problems on the
agenda of this Assembly. At a later stage mydelegatinn
will.·crave your indUlgence, when we ask to participate
in the general debate. I shall now publicly :record the
pledge,.which we have already given with our application for membership, to Uphbld the Charter of the
lTuitedNations. I pledge,. further ,on behalf of .my
Government and people, that we shall do all in our
power! while· Sierra Leone is a Member of the United
Nati'i>ns, to. de.al with all questions brought before the
Assembly with an open and impartial mind, and with
nopredeterrninedposition or alignment. Our yardstick
will always be the yardstick of truth. We .are a srnall
country-but our size is in no way a measure. of the
friendship for which. we have been nof-t;Jd and which
we now offer to· every country in the. world. Nor is
the size of our country a measure of our capacity
to bring to. the counsels of•. this great Assembly the
results of the long· years of training and discipUne
and experience which enabled us to pionet" , in developing the natural and hutnan resource.::lof other

148

~General Assembly -

Sixteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

pa;rts of West Africa whichpreceded us to independence
and to membership of the United Nations.
231. We have no territorial ambitions, and we seek
no position of leadership. We ask only that as we
respect the sovereign rights of all countries our own
sovereignty will be similarly respected. With this
assurance we offer our co-operation, first to our
neighbours in Africa and then to all other countries
in every effort to restore and maintain human dignity
everywhere, to establish firm foundations for peace,
and to improve the physical, social and spiritualwellbeing of all mankind.
232. Finally, it is because we had confidence in the

aims and objectives of the Charter of the United
Nations that we .sought membership in it. This confidence, now that we are members, inspires us to
look beyond the mists which appear to dim the road
immediately ahead. Although the future seems dark,
let UB not let go of each other's hands, and, let us
collectively put our hands in the hand of God who
alone can bless our efforts by leading us through
our present difficulties to lasting peace and goodwill.
233. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
thank the Prime Minister of Sierra Leone for his
admirable address. I have a long list of speakers
and I intend, with your co-operation, to give most
of them the floor at this meeting. Then, if there is
no ob,:action, we shall postpone any remaining speeches
until tcm.orrow's meeting.
234. Mr. GRIMES (Liberia): The Government of

Liberia considers this a most happy occasion, and
the task I now perform is a very pleasant one indeed.
It is with much satisfaction that we have co-sponsored
resolutions both in the Security Council and in the
General Assembly for Sierra Leone's admission to
'membership in this international Organization. The
history of Sierra Leone is very. closely linked with
the history of my country. Our two peoples share
a kinship and have a common border as well as a
common culture.
235. While Sierra Leone might be regarded as the
youngest Member of this family, it is important to
know that for more than half a century this country
was the principle source of education fOl' the countries
of West Africa; it has been our tower of intellectual
strength. We rejoice ·that the independence of Sierra
Leone is another victory in the continuing struggle
of the African people to achieve human equality and
dignity, very· necessary for the maintenance of peace.
236. My Government is certainthat this great country
which becomes the one hundredth Member of this
Organization shall give to this body its finest and
noblest. efforts in making it the greatest instrument
of peace mankind has so far created. We congratulate
Sierra Leone on its admission to the United Nations
and welcome it to this Organization.
337. Lord HOME (United Kingdom): When this morning
my statement foilowed that of the representative of
Liberia we were talking about matters which involved
some controversy. But this afte1'noon we are very
happy that the theme we are discus sing is one which
brings us all together to welcome Sierra Leone as a
new Member of our Orgnnization.
238. I had the very greatest delight, on behalf of Her
Majesty's Government, in co-sponeoringthe resolution
recommending admissioh of Sierl'a Leone. If in recent
years we have had more than our fair share of this

privilege, I think my only answer can be that we cannot
have too much of a good thing. Later, during this
session, we shall be coming back to you again on the
same theme. But I rejoice with the Prime Minister
of Sierra Leone that as a Member of the Commonwealth
he comes to join this .great Organization and comes
to join it as the one hundredth member.
239. Sierra Leone has a long history and a very
fine tradition, which I cannot go into this afternoon,
but it was Hanno, the Carthaginian, I think, who first
set eyes on their distinctive hills some five hundred
years before Christ. And it was five hundred years
ago that Pedro d 'Cintro, gave it the name by which
it has become known to the whole world. But it is
really the name of the capital, Freetown, which tells
us more than anything else about Sierra Leone. Because Freetown was just that: a place where the
slaves were brought back to start life afresh and be
free. And when they came back and they gathered
together under a cotton tree, I believe, one hundred
and seventy-five years ago, they started the first
tentative experiments In self-government and democracy. So, Sierra Leone comes to us as a country
which not only welcomed people back home who had
been slaves but haVing brought them backwelded them
together with the people from inland; and so they
have an experience in harmonizing the interests of
different peoples within a single community.
240. Lastly, I should like to welcome th~ Prime
Minister, Sir Milton Margai, and the Foreign Minister,
Dr. John Karefa-Smart, and his colleagues.
241. For the benefit of those who do not know him,
I might tell one story about the Prime Minister. I
do not think that anyone would guess what portfolios
he chose when he took office: he chose the portfolios
of health and natural resources, not only because
these matters were "hardest and presented the most
daunting problems, but also because they were nearest
to the needs of his people. He comes here today leading
a country standing on its own strength and independent
in its own right.
242. I share some of the pride in the fact that Sierra
Leone has been admitted to the United Nations by a
unanimous decision.
243. Mr. PLIMSOLL (Australia): Australia was very
happy to join in sponsoring the admission of Sierra
Leone to membership of the United Nations.
244. It is a very good indication of what has happened
in our development since the creation of the United
Nations that the one-hundredth Member should be
both a nation of Africa and a member of the British
Commonwealth. The last few years of this Organtzation,'s life have shown the emergence into full nationhood of most of the great continent of Africa. They
have shown the results of British policy over a long
period, a policy which ha"! enabled those who have
been associated with the Umted Kingdom in a dependent
status to take their place in the international community as equal partners. Those of us who are already
independent members of the Commonwealth look
forward 'to a long period of association with 'Che newest
member o{the Commonwealth and the newest Member
of the United Nations.
245. Australia already has relations of some intimacy
and the very greatest friendship with Sierra Leone.
A number of people~rom Sierra Leone have been in
Australia as students. Officials of the administration
of Sierra Leon~ nave beilJu in Australia working along-

side Australian of
will not only conti

246. We are ver
Prime Minister 0
here today himse
this Organization
achievement (If in
ments. We know
now pursue to t
offered by memb
forward to having

Litho in UoN.

l018th meeting - 27 September 1961
side Australian officials. We know that this association
will not only continue, but that it will grow.
246. We are very glad that Sir Milton Margai, the
Prime Minister of Sierra Leone, was able to come
here today himself and make the first statement in
this Organization on behalf of his country. His nation's
achievement of independence is one of his achievements. We know that he and his Government will
now pursue to the full the opportunities that are
offered by membership in this Organization. We look
forward to having the representatives of Sierr.a Leone

149

as colleagues here. We already know the Foreign
Minister, Mr. Karefa-Smart; he wa'S here last year.
We also know Mr. Collier, the new permanent representative of Sierra Let)ue, and some of the members
of his delegation.
247. I speak not only on behalf of the Government
of Australia but also on behalf of the people of Australia
in expressing our pleasures at having Sierra Leone
among us as the one hundredth Member of the United
Nations.
The meeting rose at '1.5 p.m.

I
Litho in UoN•

77001-October 1962-2,175
