24

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

gust 197 6, concerning the situation in the Middle East
and the question of Palcstine, 42
Deeply concerned that the Arab territories occupied
since 1967 have continued, for more than ten years, to
be under illegal Israeli occupation and that the Palestinian people, after three decades, are still deprived
of the exercise of their inalienable national rights,
Reaffirming that the acquisition of territory by force
is inadmissible and that all territories thus occupied
must be returned,
Reaffirming also the urgent necessity of the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the region, based
on full respect for the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations as well as for its resolutions concerning the problem of the Middle East including the question of Palestine,
Taking note with satisfaction of the joint statement
on the Middle East issued on 1 October 1977 by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the Secretary of State of the
United States of America in their capacities as CoChairmen of the Peace Conference on the Middle East,
Reaffirming that peace is indivisible and that a just
and lasting settlement of the Middle East problem must
be based on a comprehensive solution, under the auspices of the United Nations, which takes into account
all aspects of the Arab-Israeli conflict, in particular the
attainment by the Palestinian people of all their inalienable national rights and the Israeli withdrawal
from all the occupied Arab territories,
Convinced that the early convening of the Peace
Conference on the Middle East with the participation of
all parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation
Organization, in accordance with relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly, is essential for the realization
of a just and lasting settlement in the region,
1. Condemns Israel's continued occupation of Arab
territories, in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, the principles of international law and repeated
resolutions of the United Nations;
2. Reaffirms that a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East, in which all countries and peoples in the
region can live in peace and security within recognized
and secure boundaries, cannot be achieved without
Israel's withdrawal from all Arab territories occupied
since 5 June 1967 and the attainment by the Palestinian
people of their inalienable national rights;
3. Calls anew for the early convening of the Peace
Conference on the Middle East, under the auspices of
the United Nations and the co-chairmanship of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United
States of America, with the participation on an equal
footing of all parties concerned, including the Palestine
Liberation Organization;
4. Urges the parties to the conflict and all other
interested parties to work towards the achievement of
a comprehensive settlement covering all aspects of the
problems and worked out with the participation of
all parties concerned within the framework of the
United Nations;
5. Requests the Security Council, in the exercise
of its responsibilities under the Charter, to take all
necessary measures in order to ensure the implementa42 See

A/31/197.

tion of relevant resolutions of the United Nations and
to facilitate the achievement of such a comprehensive
settlement aiming at the establishment of a just and
lasting peace in the region;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to follow up the
implementation of the present resolution and to inform
all concerned, including the Co-Chairmen of the Peace
Conference on the Middle East;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to report
to the Security Council periodically on the development
of the situation and to submit to the General Assembly
at its thirty-third session a comprehensive report covering, in all their aspects, the developments in the
Middle East.
82nd plenary meeting
25 November 1977

32/21.

Credentials of representatives to the
thirty-second session of the General
Assembly

A

The General Assembly
Approves the first report of the Credentials Committee.43
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977

B
The General Assembly
Approves the second report of the Credentials Committee. 44
104th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/ 40.

Question of Palestine

A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3236 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974, 3376 (XXX) of 10 November 1975 and
31/20 of 24 November 1976,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
Peoplc, 4 "
Having heard the statement of the Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of the Palestinian
people,·16
Deeply concerned that no just solution to the problem of Palestine has been achieved and that this problem
therefore continues to aggravate the Middle East con4 .1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document A/32/336.
44 Jbid., document A/32/336/ Add. I.
4 5 Jbid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 35 (Al
32/35).
4 6 Jbid., Thirty-second Session, Plenary Meetings, 84th meeting, paras. 46- 79.
