S/PRST/2019/13

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 November 2019
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 8656th meeting of the Security Council, held on 4 November 2019, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Guinea-Bissau”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council held private consultations on 31 October 2019 on
the latest political developments in Guinea-Bissau.
“Expressing full support to the ECOWAS and African Union
Communiques issued respectively on 29 and 30 October 2019 on t he said
developments, the Security Council expresses deep concern over the social and
political situation and calls on President Jose Mario VAZ and the government
led by Prime Minister Aristides Gomez in charge of conducting the electoral
process to resolve their differences in the spirit of respect and cooperation.
“The Security Council calls on all actors in Guinea-Bissau to fully respect
the ECOWAS Heads of State decision of 29 June 2019.
“The Security Council condemns the recent violence that resulte d in the
death of one civilian and several injured. It welcomes the decision by the
government to launch an independent investigation into the matter and looks
forward to its outcome.
“The Security Council urges the political actors of Guinea -Bissau to show
utmost restraint, refrain from all forms of violence or incitement to hatred, and
to resort to dialogue as the only means of resolving their differences and
preserving peace and stability in the country.
“The Security Council encourages the political actors in Guinea-Bissau to
take all appropriate measures to ensure the smooth functioning and stability of
state institutions in accordance with the constitution and the principles of good
governance, and to refrain from taking any actions that could provo ke a relapse
into political and institutional crisis.
“The Security Council seizes the opportunity to draw the attention of
political actors in Guinea-Bissau to the urgent need to hold the presidential
elections on 24 November 2019 as agreed, in order to conclude the electoral
cycle to allow for a peaceful transition of power to an elected President.
“While recognizing the efforts deployed by all stakeholders so far towards
the peaceful conduct of the presidential election, the Security Council
encourages political actors in Guinea-Bissau to work together to preserve the

19-19058 (E)

051119

*1919058*

S/PRST/2019/13

gains of the political and electoral process, in order to strengthen the prevailing
peace and stability.
“The Security Council welcomes that the defense and security forces of
Guinea-Bissau are maintaining strict neutrality and avoiding interference in the
political arena and urge them to continue doing so throughout and beyond the
electoral and political process.
“The Security Council also reminds all actors that the Council ’s possible
reconsideration of the existing sanctions regime will depend on their orderly
conduct as well as that of other political actors. It also reminds all stakeholders
that it will consider taking appropriate measures against those who undermine
stability in Guinea-Bissau in accordance with UNSC resolutions on GuineaBissau.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong support and commitment to the
process of consolidating peace and stability, as well as the development of
Guinea-Bissau, in collaboration with regional actors, and international partners,
including the Group of the Five (AU, ECOWAS, CPLP, EU, UN).”

2/2

19-19058
