asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6887

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6887th meeting
Thursday, 13 December 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Loulichki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Morocco)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Sun Xiaobo
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Briens
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Vinay Kumar
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Karev
Mr. Tladi
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-64723 (E)

*1264723*

S/PV.6887

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
The President (spoke in Arabic): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: I am briefing the Security Council
as the second Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) to address the situation of Darfur, in the
Sudan, which the Council referred to my Office through
resolution 1593 (2005). This is my Office’s sixteenth
briefing to the Security Council on the subject of
Darfur.
The situation in Darfur continues to be of serious
concern to me and my Office. In my report, I have
indicated specific incidents of concern, which seem
to represent an ongoing pattern of crimes committed
pursuant to the Government-avowed goal of stopping
the rebellion in Darfur. I must reiterate that these
alleged ongoing crimes, similar to those already
considered by the judges of the International Criminal
Court on five separate applications, may constitute
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
My Office will consider whether further investigations
and additional applications for arrest warrants are
necessary to address ongoing crimes, including those
undertaken with the aim of thwarting the delivery
of humanitarian aid, attacks on peacekeepers of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, as well as bombardments and other direct
attacks on civilian populations. The words of the
Government of the Sudan’s representatives, promising
further peace initiatives, are undermined by actions on
the ground that show an ongoing commitment to crimes
against civilians as a solution to the Government’s
problems in Darfur.

2

The Council should be even more concerned about
the situation in Darfur, given that crimes continue to
be committed, including by those already indicted by
the Court. The Council referred the situation in Darfur
because of its firm belief that the justice process is
an essential component of any strategy aimed at truly
stopping ongoing crimes and achieving peace in Darfur.
We have always believed the referral to be a joint
endeavour of the Council and the Court to contribute
to lasting peace in Darfur through investigation and
prosecution of those who bear the greatest responsibility
for the most serious crimes. Indeed, in this and
other contexts, the Council has reaffirmed the vital
importance of promoting justice and the rule of law,
including respect for human rights, as an indispensable
element of lasting peace. My Office and the Court as
a whole have done their part in executing the mandate
given by this Council in accordance with the Rome
Statute. The question that remains to be answered is:
How many more civilians must be killed, injured and
displaced for the Council to be spurred into doing its
part?
There are no words to properly express the
frustration of Darfur’s victims, which we share,
about the lack of any meaningful progress towards
arresting those indicted by the Court. The failure of the
Government of the Sudan to implement the five arrest
warrants seems symbolic of its ongoing commitment
to a military solution in Darfur, which has translated
into a strategy aimed at attacking civilian populations
over the past 10 years, with tragic results. The victims
of Darfur crimes can hardly wait for the day that
fragmentation and indecision will be replaced by the
decisive, concrete and tangible actions they expect
from the Council.
Investigating the Darfur situation was an enormous
challenge for the Office and a huge sacrifice for the
witnesses and victims, whose lives remain at risk as a
result of their interaction with the Court. The question
they ask is: Were their sacrifices in vain?
In its resolution 2063 (2012), the Council expressed
concerns about ongoing impunity and the lack of
any progress on national proceedings to date, after
nearly eight years of reported efforts on the part of
the Government of the Sudan authorities. It should be
clear to the Council that the Government of the Sudan
is neither prepared to hand over the suspects nor to
prosecute them for their crimes.

12-64723

S/PV.6887

Despite the challenges we faced, including
non-cooperation by the Government of the Sudan,
the Office conducted independent and impartial
investigations and submitted its evidence to the judges.
Contrary to the often-repeated allegations of bias and
politicization of the Office’s investigative activities,
the judges of the Pre-Trial Chamber independently
evaluated the evidence to determine whether there
were reasonable grounds to believe that particular
individuals bore individual criminal responsibility for
these crimes.
Having considered all the evidence, the judges
concluded that Government of the Sudan forces
committed war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide in Darfur, following a strategy adopted at the
highest echelons of the State apparatus. The findings on
genocide, moreover, were entered following a ruling by
the five-member bench of the Appeals Chamber. The
Pre-Trial Chamber identified the individuals who must
face justice and issued arrest warrants for a militia/
Janjaweed leader, Ali Kushayb, who reported to the
then Minister of State for the Interior, Ahmed Harun,
who in turn reported to the then Minister of the Interior
Abdel Raheem Muhammad Hussein, who reported to
President Al-Bashir. Their responsibility is not a mere
consequence of their official roles. In all of these cases,
there are witnesses who describe in detail their active
participation in the strategy to commit crimes as well
as in the execution of that strategy.
The Judges of the ICC have formally communicated
six times to the Council without receiving any response.
That includes a 25 May 2010 decision of the Pre-Trial
Chamber, informing the Council about the lack of
cooperation by the Republic of the Sudan, in particular
in the Harun and Kushayb cases; two 27 August 2010
decisions of the Pre-Trial Chamber informing the
Council and the Rome Statute Assembly of States
Parties about President Al-Bashir’s visit to Chad and of
his presence in the territory of the Republic of Kenya;
the 12 May 2011 decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber
informing the Council and the Rome Statute Assembly
of States Parties about his visit to Djibouti; the
12 December 2011 decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber
pursuant to article 87(7) of the Rome Statute on the
failure of the Republic of Malawi to comply with the
cooperation requests issued by the Court with respect to
the arrest and surrender of President Al-Bashir; and the
13 December 2011 decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber
pursuant to article 87(7) of the Rome Statute on the
failure of the Republic of Chad to comply with the
12-64723

cooperation requests issued by the Court with respect
to the arrest and surrender of President Al-Bashir.
My Office and I personally remain committed to
working with regional organizations endeavouring
to contribute to a comprehensive solution, including
the League of Arab States and the African Union.
The recommendations of the African Union HighLevel Implementation Panel for Sudan will be one
among other points for discussion that I intend to
raise in my interactions with former President Mbeki
and the African Union Commission Chairperson,
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma. The recommendations
of the African Union High-Level Panel on justice, if
implemented, would go a long way towards addressing
the challenge of the deliberate imposition and tolerance
of impunity not only in Darfur, but in the Sudan as a
whole. My Office undertakes this interaction with the
African Union on its justice recommendations pursuant
to its policy of positive complementarity.
Investigating the Darfur situation remains an
enormous challenge for the Office. Despite these
challenges, we managed to conduct full investigations
that have led to five arrest warrants — two against the
same individual — and three summonses to appear.
Good progress has been made towards the start of
the trial for two of the three individuals accused of
war crimes in the rebel attack on the African Union
peacekeeping base at Haskanita, in Northern Darfur.
I expect that trial to begin in 2013, although the
defence has asked for its postponement until 2014.
The investigation and preparation for the trial have
involved unique challenges, including the translation
of all materials for the defence into Zaghawa, a tribal
language with no written form. That work demonstrates
the commitment of the Office and the Court to a fair
trial.
I look forward to the opportunity to present to
the judges the substantial and voluminous evidence
gathered in the other four cases, including following
the arrest and surrender of four individuals sought by
the Court. That is an essential step towards delivering
justice for Darfur’s victims. I believe it will also
shed light on the obstacles facing other international
processes, such as those endeavouring to bring relief to
victims through the delivery of humanitarian aid or the
conduct of a peace process that aims to be principled
and substantive. The justice process is an essential
component of any strategy aimed at truly stopping
ongoing crimes, by publicly exposing to the highest

3

S/PV.6887

independent judicial standards the reasons why and
how those crimes have been committed, who has been
responsible for them, and how they must be stopped.
I have been encouraged of late by my participation
in discussions with Rome Statute States parties and
others aimed at galvanizing action to ensure greater
cooperation in the Darfur and other Council-referred
situations, including through the implementation of
outstanding arrest warrants. I am committed to working
with both States parties and Non-States parties, inside
and outside of the Security Council, to push those
processes forward.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Prosecutor
Bensouda for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like very clearly to emphasize, as we
have done in previous statements, that our participation
in this meeting in no way indicates recognition or any
sort of interaction with the International Criminal
Court (ICC). As everyone is aware, the Sudan is not
party to the Rome Statute, which established the Court.
Therefore, like a significant number of Member States
on the Security Council, the Sudan has not recognized
the ICC or ratified its Statute. Eight Member States
currently serving on the Council are not parties to the
Rome Statute. Our participation today is merely to
correct the false information and concepts contained
in the sixteenth report of the ICC Prosecutor to the
Council. I would like that to be reflected in the record
of this meeting.
We had expected a different approach from the
Court’s new Prosecutor, unlike the misguided approach
adopted by the previous Prosecutor. We had expected
the new Prosecutor to have refrained from making
unsubstantiated claims that were not supported by facts
on the ground. Unfortunately, however, the sixteenth
report includes the same erroneous concepts that
completely contradict the reality in Darfur today. The
Council might wonder what the facts are that lead me to
say that. I shall tell the Council.
More than 10 persons from Darfur, from the Fur
and Zaghawa tribes, currently serve as ministers in the
central Government in Khartoum. In fact, our country’s
Vice-President is from Darfur. The Minister of Finance
is from Darfur. The Cabinet Minister is from Darfur.
In addition, the Minister of Justice himself is from
4

the Zaghawa tribe — a devoted Darfurian and one
of the most distinguished members of the Zaghawa
tribe — which the Court alleges has been the victim of
ethnic cleansing. The Minister of Federal Governance
is from Darfur. The Federal Minister of Health is from
Darfur. Those are the facts on the ground and the state of
affairs we refer to when we say that what we are hearing
is a litany that is entirely unsupported by logic or facts
on the ground. Moroever, I should like to mention that
five of the states in Darfur are governed by governors
from Darfur itself. All members of the Governments
of the states are from the various groups and tribes in
Darfur. Therefore, where is the deteriorating situatiuon
we read about in wholly baseless reports?
As to the most glaring contradictions in the
sixteenth report — and this is not an exclusive
list — paragraph 15 of the report refers to so-called
attacks by the Government and rebel groups against
camps for internally displaced persons in Darfur,
during which theft, rape and destruction of property
took place. In that connection, I would refer the
members of the Council to refer to the reports of the
Secretary-General on Darfur prepared by the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), which is currently on the ground and
which is the mission with the proper mandate from
the United Nations concerning Darfur. Being on the
ground, it does not prepare its reports by remote control
while relying on imaginary figures. It depends and
relies on international officials working on the ground
throughout Darfur.
With regard to the two most recent reports submitted
by the mission in Darfur, the report issued on 16 July
(S/2012/548) reaffirms the stable situation there and
requests the Security Council to reduce the military
component of UNAMID in the light of the established
security. The most recent report (S/2012/771), issued on
16 October, also reaffirms the stable situation except
for some isolated incidents, which were tribal disputes
in certain areas.
I therefore ask members of the Council: Which
reports should we trust — the Secretary-General’s
reports submitted by the current mission in Darfur, as I
explained, or those of the humanitarian aid coordinators
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs? I met yesterday with the head of its office in
Khartoum, Mr. Mark Cutts, in my own office here. He
reaffirmed the return of 200,000 internally displaced
persons and refugees in the course of this year. How

12-64723

S/PV.6887

could they have returned if the situation was unstable
and insecure and if atrocities were being committed in
Darfur? Should we believe those reports or anonymous
ones whose sources we do not know. The right answer
is, of course, that the reports of the United Nations
missions in the Sudan are more credible.
The report intentionally cites disinformation in
describing events that took place in Kabkabiya, Kutum
and Mellit. In paragraph 16, the report ascribes such
events to what it calls “militias”, although most of the
events were, in fact, tribal disputes. Clashes among
farmers and herders in Darfur are as old as time. The
Government, in coordination with the Darfur Regional
Authority, established pursuant to the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur, has made significant efforts to
contain or put an end to many of those tribal conflicts.
We are striving to prevent such clashes through
development and the provision of water sources by
digging wells, by creating model villages and by setting
up nomad crossings through farming areas.
In paragraph 18, the report mentions that there is
widespread gender-based violence in Darfur. It falsely
accuses the Sudanese Security Forces of such acts. It
alleges that some such information has been included
in United Nations reports but does not mention which
reports or which United Nations offices prepared
the reports. In that connection, we would like to
underscore our complete rejection of such falsification
and defamation on the basis of false, incorrect and
anonymous sources. Needless to say, such practices
contradict the most basic principles of justice and law,
namely, the verification of facts and evidence before
making random accusations.

out those acts. That represents a dishonest attempt to
expand the scope of the crimes and to imply thereby
that the situation in Darfur continues to deteriorate and
that it represents a threat to international peace and
security. That is all untrue.
In that regard, I underscore the problems in the
relationship between the ICC and the Security Council
and its negative implications. The ICC is a judicial
body, whose terms of reference are supposedly set out
in the Rome Statute, while the Security Council is a
political entity, whose mandate for the maintenance
of international peace and security derives from the
Charter of the United Nations. We avoid linking those
two bodies because linking a political and a judicial
body distorts and flouts the principles of justice.
The necessary independence of judicial bodies
must never be questioned. As on previous occasions,
we therefore reaffirm that the referral of the dispute in
Darfur to the ICC was a politicization of international
justice. We also underscore the fact that the Darfur
conflict is an internal matter that has not gone
beyond the borders of the Sudan and has not in any
way threatened international peace and security. The
Security Council’s consideration of that situation
on the basis of such a false assumption is wrong and
unacceptable.

So one reason why we are participating in this
meeting is to draw the attention of Council members to
the danger of such a shameful approach, which is still
being taken by the Office of the Prosecutor despite the
significant and positive changes that have taken place
in Darfur and the prevailing stability and security in
most of the region following the signing and entry into
force of the Doha peace agreement.

Let me refer to the allegations in the Prosecutor’s
report concerning the so-called lack of cooperation by
the Government of the Sudan and its non-compliance
with ICC decisions. Those are illogical and
unacceptable because, as I have said, the Sudan, like
many other States, including members of the Council,
is not a member of the Court. In addition, we recall
the reservations expressed by members of the Council
regarding the Rome Statute, specifically insofar as the
current exercise of its jurisdiction may directly affect
the sovereignty of those States, including through
gross violations of the noble principles of international
law providing for the respect of the privileges and
immunities of Heads of States. The Sudan is therefore
not concerned with the findings of the Court.

In addition, the attacks on UNAMID and some
humanitarian workers were all acts of illegal armed
groups. When they occurred, the Government of the
Sudan was the first to declare its cooperation and strive
to arrest the perpetrators and bring them to justice.
Unfortunately, the report of the Prosecutor before the
Council refers to this issue in paragraphs 21, 22 and 23
without naming the unknown armed groups that carried

As I have noted, the situation in Darfur today is
completely different from what it was in 2005, when
the Council adopted the mistaken decision to refer
that situation to the ICC. The Sudan has come a long
way in implementing the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur, one of the most important pillars of which is
justice and reconciliation. It includes clear provisions
for effective national legal steps to be taken with regard

12-64723

5

S/PV.6887

to any crimes that might have taken place in Darfur. In
that connection, I recall the appointment of the Special
Prosecutor to investigate alleged war crimes in Darfur
and the establishment of branch judicial offices in the
five states of Darfur for that purpose.
We also recall that the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur stipulates, in paragraph 295, that
“immunities enjoyed by persons by virtue of
their official status or functions shall not obstruct
the speedy dispensation of justice nor shall they
prevent the combating of impunity”.
We signed the Document and are one of the original
parties to it. In addition, the Doha Document includes
clear commitments concerning reconciliation and
settlement as primary elements for repairing the social
fabric and establishing justice. All judicial mechanisms
stipulated in that agreement in the context of support
provided by the central Government to the Transitional
Darfur Authority have started their work, with the
welcome participation of civil society organizations
and various constituencies in Darfur.
We are all agreed that peace is the essential
foundation for upholding justice and stability.
Accordingly, the Government of the Sudan has
expanded and continues to expand the umbrella of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur so that those rebel
groups that have not yet joined the path of peace may
do so. We therefore look to the Security Council to
play a greater role in urging those rebel movements to
come to the negotiating table so as to turn the page on
conflict and to begin a new chapter of peace in whcih
all parties, including the Government and former armed
groups, shall work together to realize development and
reconstruction in Darfur for the benefit of the entire
population.
We hope to hold a special donors’ conference for
Darfur in sisterly Qatar in the near future.
In conclusion, we have often repeated in meetings
of the Council and the General Assembly that the
ICC has become a tool exploited to certain political
ends. That position has been proven correct by many
developments, most recently last month when a State
which is a member of the Security Council asked the
Palestinian Authority not to proceed to the ICC in
exchange for a vote in favour of General Assembly
resolution 67/19 recognizing the State of Palestine and
granting it non-member observer State status in the
United Nations. The ICC has been exploited since its
6

inception for political purposes, as has been proven by
historical facts. The Court is being exploited every day
to political ends entirely unrelated to justice. It is being
used as an instrument of blackmail and to undermine
the interests of smaller States and to violate their
sovereignty. I ask, therefore, what kind of international
justice can we expect from that Court?
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now give
the floor to the members of the Council.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We welcome the
Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, to the Council and thank
her for her briefing. We have taken careful note of the
sixteenth report of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, submitted to the Security Council
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). We also heard
the statement of the Permanent Representative of the
Sudan.
Like several other members of the Council, Pakistan
is not a signatory to the statue of the International
Criminal Court. However, Pakistan acknowledges the
rights and obligations of the States parties to the ICC.
Darfur remains one of the most complicated and
intractable issues on the agenda of the Security Council.
Darfur and other parts of the Sudan are suffering the
tragic consequences of that dispute. Pakistan supports a
durable and peaceful resolution of the situation in Darfur
through an inclusive political process that respects and
upholds the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Sudan. The people of the Sudan will benefit from
conditions of peace and stability in Darfur. Creation
of such conditions is also vital for the security and
stability of the entire region.
The goal of durable peace in Darfur can be realized
only through a comprehensive, multipronged strategy.
Such a strategy should provide impetus to the political
process, promote a peaceful solution through dialogue,
justice and reconciliation, establish a conducive
security situation and address the human rights and
humanitarian aspects of the conflict in Darfur.
We reiterate our support for the efforts of the United
Nations, as well as the African Union, particularly its
High-level Implementation Panel, to achieve peace,
stability, justice and reconciliation in Darfur. The role
and positions of the regional organizations, especially
the African Union and the League of Arab States, as
well as the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, should

12-64723

S/PV.6887

be taken into account in our pursuit of justice in the
Darfur region.
Pakistan expresses concern at violations of
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law in the Darfur region. It is the
obligation of all States to guarantee and protect the
right to life of all their citizens. It is also the primary
responsibility of the Government of the Sudan, which
must take all necessary measures to investigate human
rights violations in Darfur and bring perpetrators to
justice.
At the same time, the actions of all parties in
Darfur need to be scrutinized and investigated.
The destabilizing activities of the Darfuri armed
rebel movements and attacks against civilians and
humanitarian workers should be strongly condemned
and thoroughly investigated. The perpetrators of such
attacks should be brought to justice. Sanctions should be
imposed against all armed movements that continue to
obstruct the peace process in Darfur and against those
involved in the violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law.
I conclude by reiterating that the overall objective
of the international community and the Council is the
attainment of durable peace, stability and justice in
the Sudan. We should harmonize and consolidate our
efforts for the early achievement of that objective.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I offer many
thanks to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) for her report and her briefing. She has set
out clearly the action that the International Criminal
Court has taken over the past six months on Darfur and
the areas on which the Court will focus in the coming
months.
But regrettably, the past six months have not seen
much progress in Darfur. The implementation of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur is significantly
behind schedule, despite the timetable having been
extended by a year, in July. The Government of the
Sudan has failed to deliver its funding commitments
to the Darfur Regional Authority. As a result, the
Authority lacks both the human and financial resources
required to deliver the change so desperately needed
by the people of Darfur. There has not even been much
progress on the non-financial commitments. There
is little evidence that the Special Court for Darfur
is operating or that its Prosecutor is filing cases, for
example.

12-64723

The recent announcement that a splinter group of
the Justice and Equality Movement led by Mohammad
Bashar will begin negotiations with the Government in
Doha this month is cause for cautious optimism. We
will continue to urge those other movements that have
not signed the Doha Document to engage constructively
in the peace process. And we hope that all Darfuris
will be given the opportunity to engage in an internal
dialogue, without fear of reprisal.
The lack of political progress is compounded by
the deterioration in the security situation in Darfur,
in Northern Darfur in particular. International human
rights and humanitarian law continue to be violated.
Attacks in Sigili saw civilians suffering once again,
as fighting between Government forces and the
armed movements continued. The reported massacre
in Hashaba in September is of extreme concern, with
about 70 civilians reported dead following armed
militia activity and aerial bombardments.
The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) also continues to
come under attack. Six peacekeepers have been killed
in the past six months. None of the perpetrators of the
attacks has been brought to justice. This is an outrage
and must be condemned.
It is unacceptable that UNAMID continues to
be prevented from gaining access to investigate
such attacks. We have also seen restrictions on the
access of humanitarian agencies, the United Nations
panel of experts and the United Nations independent
expert on human rights. That, too, is unacceptable.
The Government and armed movements must stop
preventing access by humanitarian agencies to those
most in need of assistance and must allow full access to
Darfur for those mandated by the Council.
Given those ongoing and deeply troubling issues,
the continuing jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court in Darfur is all the more relevant,
and the Prosecutor’s continued efforts to monitor and
investigate allegations are vital. Attempts to argue that
this Council did not have the right and power to refer
the situation in Darfur to the jurisdiction of the ICC are
entirely specious.
We welcome the progress in the trial of Abdallah
Banda Abakaer Nourain and Saleh Mohammed
Jerbo Jamus. It is unacceptable, however, that the
Government of the Sudan continues to obstruct the
pursuit of justice for the people of Darfur and has failed

7

S/PV.6887

to take action to enforce the four outstanding arrest
warrants. The Government of the Sudan is bound to
comply with the obligation laid down by this Council
in its resolution 1593 (2005) to cooperate fully with
the ICC and its investigations. The United Kingdom
has repeatedly urged the Government of the Sudan to
comply with that obligation, and we repeat that call
today.
Indeed, we call on all States, whether States parties
to the Rome Statute or not, to assist and cooperate with
the ICC to end impunity. The Council, which referred
the situation in Darfur to the ICC, should consider what
it can do to assist the ICC.
In conclusion, we want once again to thank
Ms. Bensouda, not just for her briefing today, but for
the continuing work of the Office of the Prosecutor. We
will continue to work together to achieve justice for the
victims of that conflict.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for the
presentation of the sixteenth report of the Office of
the Prosecutor, in accordance with resolution 1593
(2005). The report has informed the Council about the
ongoing judicial activities, as well as forecasts. It also
addresses cooperation with States and investigations
undertaken by the Court in the fight against impunity
with respect to the situation in Darfur. It also gives us
the opportunity to make several observations, although
Togo is not a party to the Rome Statute of the ICC.
With respect to security, the situation in Darfur
during the period under review remained fragile. Little
genuine progress was made in implementing the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. It is the same with
regard to implementation of resolution 1593 (2005).
It is clear from that state of affairs that no sufficient
progress has been made on any of the issues since the
last briefing by the former Prosecutor of the ICC in
June (see S/PV.6778).
In terms of judicial activities, we understand that
there has been no decision to date concerning opening
new cases and that most of the recent judicial activities
relate essentially to the Banda and Jerbo case. We
welcome the holding of the status conferences planned
for in that case and hope that the conferences will make
it possible to iron out the differences among the parties
so as to resolve the difficulties that can compromise
the proper functioning of the trial, including setting

8

the opening date. We also recall that the fight against
impunity presupposes the guarantee of a fair trial, which
would ensure that each decision is beyond reproach.
With respect to cooperation with the ICC, we regret
that, despite the principle of complementarity, which
requires that the perpetrators of crimes committed
in Darfur be prosecuted and tried, there has been no
progress in the work of the successive special prosecutors
who have been appointed at the national level. This has
given impunity to those persons suspected of having
committed those acts.
In addition, it has been reported that the four
persons subject to five arrest warrants issued separately
by the ICC have still not been arrested. In this regard,
Togo encourages the various bodies of the ICC and the
Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute to take
any and all initiatives to identify the true root causes of
this lack of cooperation in order to consider appropriate
remedies to it. We express our firm desire that the
request contained in the relevant resolutions of the
Council and the appeals of other institutions, including
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, to
take measures at the national level to ensure justice and
cooperate with the ICC should be followed up by action
on the part of the Sudanese authorities.
In respect of the investigative activities under
way, my country endorses the many calls for an
end to the violence and violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law. We encourage
the Office of the Prosecutor to continue to monitor
the ongoing crimes being committed in Darfur, in
particular aerial bombardments and indiscriminate
ground attacks against civilians, including women and
children, even in camps for displaced persons.
The Office of the Prosecutor should also closely
monitor the widespread sexual and gender-based
violence; attacks against human rights workers,
members of civil society and heads of communities;
the recruitment of child soldiers; and intentional acts
aimed at achieving the total or partial disappearance of
groups. Ongoing monitoring of the situation in Darfur
is a way to ensure deterrence and prevent impunity.
In addition, Togo expresses its serious concern with
respect to the attacks on and abductions of humanitarian
workers and members of United Nations peacekeeping
forces, which have to date led to the deaths of 43
soldiers of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur.

12-64723

S/PV.6887

My country welcomes the announcement by the
Prosecutor’s Office of the start of prosecutions with
respect to the killing of peacekeepers at the Haskanita
base in 2007, particularly since Togo also lost police
officers in Darfur. We hope that these investigations
will, in this case, make it possible to shed light on
the circumstances of these attacks and identify the
perpetrators at all levels of responsibility so that
they can be held accountable for their acts. We also
urge the Office of the Prosecutor to work to advance
the investigations and to prosecute those who recruit
child soldiers and who are responsible for intentionally
subjecting groups to living conditions that lead to their
total or partial disappearance.
A lasting solution to the conflict in Darfur
will entail a negotiated agreement and the fight
against impunity through the prosecution, arrest and
punishment of persons involved in committing crimes.
In this regard, we believe that the political will of
the most senior Sudanese authorities to put an end to
impunity continues to be the key to a lasting settlement
to the conflict in Darfur. From this standpoint, the
Government and the groups that are non-signatories
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur must
immediately put an end to the hostilities and undertake
discussions without preconditions in order to achieve a
peaceful settlement of the conflict and ensure genuine
reconciliation.
Mr. Tladi (South Africa): I would like to thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her progress report and for all
the efforts she and her Office have made in the fight
against impunity.
South Africa is a State party to the Rome Statute,
and as such, we are committed to all the objectives of
the Statute. The values underpinning the Statute include
the belief that the most serious crimes of concern to
mankind must not go unpunished, and the pursuit of
peace, security and the well-being of the world. These
are the dual objectives of the Rome Statute, and both
must be pursued with equal vigour.
Our support for the work of the Prosecutor and the
ICC in Darfur is based on the conviction that those who
have committed serious crimes against the men, women
and children of the Sudan must be held accountable,
whether through the ICC or national systems, in
accordance with the principle of complementarity. As
we have also said in the past, however, those who are
directly affected by the conflict in Darfur will take
12-64723

little comfort in the discussions here today, held in very
comfortable conditions, if we do not take all practical
measures to end the conflict.
In this regard, we note with concern that the
Secretary-General’s report in October (S/2012/771)
signalled that the situation in Darfur had deteriorated.
While mindful of the need for the Council to continue
addressing wider Sudan-related issues, it is important
for the Council not to neglect the situation in Darfur.
It is only when the international community acts with
conviction and in concert, using all available means,
that efforts exerted by different players will reap
benefits for the victims of atrocities.
We wish, in this regard, to stress our continued
support for the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. We
also call for the implementation of the recommendations
of the African Union (AU) High-level Panel on Darfur
and express our unwavering support for the AU Highlevel Implementation Panel for the Sudan. We welcome
in this regard the Prosecutor’s intention to make the
recommendations of the AU High-level Panel one of the
main areas of attention as she interacts with the Chair
of the High-level Implementation Panel and the Chair
of the African Union.
Even with all of these processes, we note
that, ultimately, the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
including in our sisterly State of the Sudan, rests with
the Security Council. We believe that Council support
of AU processes would advance long-term peace and
justice in the Sudan.
We have taken note of the developments with
respect to the Banda and Jerbo case in the ICC, and
we look forward to a decision on the start of the trial,
subject of course to the Trial Chamber’s decision on the
defence’s leave to appeal.
South Africa is concerned about the allegations of
continuing violence in Darfur, including acts of aerial
bombardment that indiscriminately target civilians,
ground attacks and the recruitment and use of child
soldiers. We wish at this point to also express our
concern at reports of the rise in the number of new
militia in the north and west of Darfur, brandishing new
weapons. It is further disconcerting that the violence
has resulted in the deaths of several peacekeepers and
that the perpetrators of the violence show no respect for
the peacekeepers of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. We are particularly

9

S/PV.6887

concerned about the allegations of widespread sexual
and gender-based violence targeting those most
vulnerable. If the information contained in the report
is found to be true, those found to have committed
such acts should be held accountable, and we urge full
cooperation into the investigation of these atrocities.
All the alleged acts of continuing violence are also
a sobering reminder that the institution of criminal
proceedings will not, on its own, help to protect those
who bear the brunt of the political conflict in Darfur.
The Council should therefore use all the tools in its
repertoire, including supporting AU processes, to
definitively address the conflict in Darfur.
We have taken note of the Prosecutor’s call for the
Security Council to ensure the Sudan’s compliance
with resolution 1593 (2005). While we understand
the Prosecutor’s frustration at the lack of arrests of
individuals with outstanding arrest warrants, we would
point out that the problem of impunity in situations
referred to the ICC by the Security Council goes much
deeper and is more systemic than just non-cooperation
by individual countries.
Over the past few months, there have been
several meetings, official and unofficial, in which the
relationship between the Council and the ICC has been
examined. The constant and consistent refrain in all
of those meetings has been that the Court is caught in
the crossfire of the political dynamics of the Security
Council. That is reflected in the skewed manner in which
the referral resolutions themselves are drafted. With
respect to cooperation, for example, some members of
the Council — those that have the greatest influence on
the referral resolutions — have reserved for themselves
the right not to cooperate with the Court, which raises
serious questions about credibility of the process.
In order to enable the ICC to execute its mandate, the
Council should insist on full cooperation with the Court
by all States Members of the United Nations, including
permanent members of the Council, in situations that it
refers to the Court. Until that question and other related
questions are resolved, securing cooperation may
continue to be an uphill battle. We are convinced that
the Prosecutor’s call for full cooperation, which South
Africa fully supports, will ultimately be realized only
when the Council stops seeing referrals as an end in
themselves.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Prosecutor Bensouda her briefing. Since 2005, the

10

Office of the Prosecutor has reported to the Security
Council in a transparent manner on the work of
investigation and the proceedings carried out by the
International Criminal Court (ICC), and we are grateful
for that.
Nearly eight years after the Council referred the
question at hand to the Court, the results are mixed.
The Office of the Prosecutor and the judges of the
Court have implemented their mandate. Preliminary
analyses of crimes have been carried out, investigations
have been undertaken, five arrest warrants against four
individuals have been issued, and judicial proceedings
against rebels who voluntarily gave themselves up have
commenced. The first trial is about to open against two
rebel leaders, Mr. Abdallah Banda and Mr. Saleh Jerbo,
for the attacks on peacekeeping troops in Haskanita.
It cannot be denied that the Court’s action has had an
impact — criminals hesitate to perpetrate the massive
attacks that was their hallmark in 2003.
But there is also a darker side, of which the
Prosecutor reminded us this morning. First of all,
four individuals accused of war crimes and crimes
against humanity — one of whom is also accused
of genocide — continue to evade the Court overtly
and blatantly, despite the arrest warrants issued for
them by the International Criminal Court. These are
the Sudanese President Mr. Al-Bashir, the former
militia leader Mr. Ali Kushayb, the Defence Minister
Mr. Mohammed Hussein, and the present Governor of
Southern Kordofan, Mr. Ahmed Haroun, are at liberty.
Secondly, those four individuals — who are being
prosecuted, let us remember, for the massacre and
displacement of thousands of civilians, and are accused
of having perpetrated genocide by methods that they
hoped were invisible, such as rape, persecution, and
the intentional blocking of access to aid — are still
in key positions and able to order further atrocities.
As illustrated by current affairs before the Council,
impunity is encouraging them to use the same methods
in Southern Kordofan.
Thirdly, despite the Sudanese Government’s
deceitful efforts, reports confirm air strikes, the failure
to disarm the Janjaweed militias, arbitrary arrests,
sexual violence and obstruction to humanitarian aid.
Finally, in contrast with the announcements made
by the Sudanese authorities and the multiplication of the
Sudanese special courts supposedly set up to prosecute
the perpetrators of serious crimes committed in Darfur,

12-64723

S/PV.6887

no legal proceedings have been undertaken. Unlike
Libya, which undertook to prosecute those accused by
the ICC pursuant to the complementarity provisions of
the Rome Statute, the Sudan has not taken the slightest
measure to try the four accused.
The Office of the Prosecutor President Mbeki’s
High-Level Implementation Panel have scrutinized the
work of all the special courts established since 2005 in
the Sudan. They have done nothing, and they can do
nothing since all the perpetrators of crimes are enjoying
total immunity. As Ms. Bensouda reminded us, the
Panel of the African Union made the same finding.
All of the foregoing elements flout resolution 1593
(2005) and other Council resolutions on the Sudan, the
most recent of which being resolution 2063 (2012) of
31 July. The Sudan’s obligation to cooperate pursuant
to those resolutions is not being respected.
I would also point out that the implementation of the
peace process is riddled with failings. Reconstruction
is stymied and the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees has still not taken place, while
the resurgence of fighting is increasing insecurity.
Resources transferred to the Darfur Regional Authority
are still too few. In those conditions, people are not
seeing any of the improvements that alone would win
their support for the peace plan.
There will be no lasting peace in Darfur and in the
Sudan as a whole if we leave crimes against civilians
unpunished. Experience has proven that. In Blue Nile
and Southern Kordofan states, the crimes that were
committed in Darfur are being replicated — the same
crimes, the same organization and the same victims,
civilians. The Office of the Prosecutor has drawn its
conclusions and has asked the Council to think afresh
and consider new legal or operational measures to
ensure the implementation of its resolutions.
Our Council must be consistent. The Secretariat
and the States parties to the Rome Statute must also
do so. First, contacts with fugitives from justice are
unacceptable. They cannot be considered interlocutors
and should not set foot in the territory of a non-party
State without being arrested. Secondly, we must respond
to the letters from the Court addressed to us through
the Secretary-General on non-cooperation issues.
Thirdly, we could certainly resume our consideration
of the listing of individuals concerned by the Sanctions
Committee. That was raised repeatedly in the debate

12-64723

of 17 October last under the presidency of Guatemala
(see S/PV.6849).
I would remind the Council that paragraph 3 of
resolution 1591 (2005) explicitly states that those
violating international humanitarian law or international
human rights law shall be subject to sanctions. All those
measures have a final goal — the arrest and transfer to
The Hague of the accused pursuant to resolution 1593
(2005), which, let us remember, is mandatory for all.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): At the outset, I wish to
welcome the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, to the Council
today and thank her for her report on the situation in
Darfur, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). The cases
of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes
taken up by the Court provide examples of the worst
incidents that have taken place in Darfur. Reports, such
as the one presented to us today by the ICC Prosecutor,
give the Council the opportunity to regularly assess the
progress made by the Court in fighting impunity, as well
as the obstacles and difficulties it has encountered. It is
also an opportunity to look into recent developments
on the ground in terms of observing persistent patterns
of violence that may fall under the category of the
aforementioned grave crimes.
Unfortunately, many of the concerns expressed by
the Council at the end of July persist today. Continuing
violence, attacks on civilians, peacekeepers and
humanitarian personnel; obstacles to the activities of
humanitarian organizations and to humanitarian access
in Darfur; as well as the continuing lack of cooperation
of the Government of the Sudan with the Court, all
stressed by resolution 2063 (2012), are again central
aspects of today’s report of the Prosecutor. Indeed, we
continue to see with real concern that arrest warrants
issued by the Court have still not been executed, and
that the Sudanese authorities continue not to cooperate
with the Court in that regard. We take note, however, of
the developments in the Banda and Jerbo case reported
by the Prosecutor; although it is proceeding at a slow
pace, we welcome its progress towards the trial phase.
But the most troubling aspect is the reiterated
reporting by the Prosecutor on the continuation of aerial
bombardments targeting civilians and the persistence
of ground attacks targeting civilians perpetrated by
both Government and rebel forces in populated areas
and camps of internally displaced persons. As the
Prosecutor refers, such attacks may constitute further

11

S/PV.6887

war crimes or crimes against humanity under the Rome
Statute.
Moreover, we reiterate our concern about the
continuing sexual violence perpetrated in Darfur.
We are troubled by the reported persecution and
intimidation of victims and of those who try to defend
them in an effort to silence that criminal behavior. In
the same vein, we are gravely troubled by the attacks
against civil society and human rights defenders, as well
by the increasing number of attacks on humanitarian
aid workers and United Nations personnel. We also
reiterate the concerns expressed by the Council and
shared by the Prosecutor regarding the obstacles placed
by the Sudanese authorities on the ability of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur to
fully implement its mandate, by deliberately delaying
visas or blocking other United Nations aid activities on
the ground. Such obstacles may seriously impact the
living conditions of many civilians.
We encourage the Office of the Prosecutor to
continue closely monitoring those and other incidents
that may fall under the Court’s purview, in accordance
with its mandate under resolution 1593 (2005).
By virtue of its judicial independence, the ICC
remains unique as a conflict prevention tool that can
ensure both justice and peace in the region. To that
end, the international community, on behalf of which
the Security Council referred the case to the ICC, has
a strong interest in ensuring that the Court fully play
its role. Cooperation is therefore essential. Without
the cooperation of all Member States the Court cannot
fulfil its function.
We are concerned, however, by the continuous lack
of cooperation displayed by the Sudanese authorities
regarding the outstanding arrest warrants. We again
stress the need for all States to strengthen cooperation
with the Court to enforce them.
Finally, we would like to thank Prosecutor
Bensouda for her efforts and contribution during her
initial months as head of the Prosecution Office to
strengthen the Court and the role it may play in the
maintenance of peace and security.
Mr. Kumar (India): Let me begin by thanking the
Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing today.
We have also taken note of her report on the situation
in the Sudan, submitted pursuant to paragraph 8 of
resolution 1593 (2005).

12

The continuing conflict in Darfur is cause for
serious concern. We support all efforts to bring that
conflict to an end. We also support the activities of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) aimed protecting civilians,
in cooperation with the African Union’s High-level
Implementation Panel led by President Thabo Mbeki to
restore an enduring environment of peace and stability
in Darfur. An inclusive political process to address
the legitimate aspirations of all sectors of the Darfuri
population will go a long way in resolving the conflict.
Despite ongoing hostilities in some parts, the
overall humanitarian situation in Darfur has improved
since the signing of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. The efforts of UNAMID, in cooperation with
the Sudanese Government and other partners, have also
contributed to the restoration of peace and security
in several areas and have facilitated the return of
thousands of displaced persons. What is needed now is
for the international community to support those efforts
and to make adequate resources available to the new
institutions created under the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur so that they can become fully operational and
address the political, socioeconomic and social needs
of the Darfuri population.
In that connection, we call upon all parties to
recognize that there is no military solution to the
conflict in Darfur. The Security Council should
consider targeted measures against those groups and
movements that have refused to join the political process
and that continue to pursue a military approach. The
Security Council must ensure that all such groups join
the political process without preconditions and without
further delay. It is also important for the proceedings
in the International Criminal Court to be undertaken
in a manner consistent with its obligations and to assist
efforts aimed at ending the conflict in Darfur.
India is not a signatory to the Rome Statute and
is not a member of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), for reasons that are well known. I need not
reiterate them. India strongly condemns all acts of
violence committed against civilians. We believe that
the right to life is one of the fundamental rights and
that it is the foundation of any social order. It is the
obligation of all States to take appropriate measures to
protect the life of their citizens while maintaining social
order. The States concerned must also bring to justice
those responsible for violations of that right. At the
same time, the ICC should not make any suggestion that

12-64723

S/PV.6887

has the effect of creating new obligations for States and
regional organizations that are not parties to the Rome
Statute. Such suggestions will not serve the purpose
of peace in Darfur, nor will they be legally sound. For
those reasons, we cannot support such suggestions.
In conclusion, India will continue to support all
diplomatic efforts for the early establishment of peace
and security in Darfur that will afford all sections of
the Darfuri population opportunities for socioeconomic
development and peaceful coexistence through an
inclusive political process.
Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like, at the outset, to welcome to the Security Council
Chamber the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda. We have read with
interest the Prosecutor’s sixteenth report on the situation
in Darfur, and are dismayed by the fact that, with the
exception of those accused in the Banda and Jerbo
case, the criminal trials initiated by the Prosecutor at
the express request of the Council have not yet gone
forward because the accused have not yet been brought
before the Court.
The Prosecutor concluded that credible criminal
procedures did not exist in the Sudan such that they
could impugn the admissibility of the open cases that
have been brought or otherwise cast doubt on the Court’s
jurisdiction in their regard. That was the situation in
June, when the fifteenth report was presented, and it
still holds today, since there has been no real progress
in the matter.
In fact, most of the report does not refer to the four
open cases, but rather to ongoing investigations into
alleged crimes that are being committed in Darfur,
which could lead to the opening of new criminal cases.
That would apply to alleged indiscriminate aerial
bombardments and land attacks against civilians,
alleged acts of gender-based and sexual violence,
alleged crimes against human rights activists and
members of civil society, alleged kidnappings and
attacks on aid workers and United Nations personnel,
alleged recruitment of minors and alleged interference
with the delivery of humanitarian aid.
Such facts are cause for concern, and the Council,
along with the ICC, should take up the allegations at
the appropriate time. However, that catalogue of grave
incidents and alleged violations and abuses should not
let us lose sight of the undeniable fact that for now the
primary focus of the Council’s attention and that of the

12-64723

international community should be on carrying out the
arrest orders issued by the Court, which would in effect
fulfil the implementation of resolution 1593 (2005) and
the obligations therein.
One of the stated aims of the Rome Statute and of
the establishment of the ICC was to deter the likely
perpetrators of horrendous crimes in the context of
generalized violence or armed conflict by sending
them the message that atrocities that once shook the
conscience of humankind, such as ethnic cleansing and
genocide, would not go unpunished, and that the United
Nations and its States Memberes would spare no efforts
to bring those responsible for such crimes to justice.
In that context, it is regrettable to see that in a year
when we celebrated the first decade of the International
Criminal Court, international criminal justice has not
been able to function fully in Darfur. In paragraph 2 of
its historic resolution 1593 (2005), the Security Council
decided explicitly “that the Government of Sudan and
all other parties to the conflict in Darfur shall cooperate
fully with and provide any necessary assistance to the
Court and the Prosecutor pursuant to this resolution”.
In my delegation’s opinion, the obligation to cooperate
with the Court definitely includes the duty to implement
arrest warrants issued by the Prosecutor.
Mr. Sun Xiaobo (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing.
The problems in Darfur are complex and closely
intertwined, involving the political process, economic
development, humanitarian assistance and the pursuit
of justice, with the political process being the most
critical. Justice, important as it is, can be secured only
when durable peace and stability are achieved in Darfur
by political means. The top priority for the political
process is therefore for all sides to fully implement the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur so that the parties
concerned can achieve a ceasefire and sign a peace
agreement based on the Document, and any action by
the international community, especially the Security
Council, should be aimed at achieving that goal.
China’s position with regard to the involvement
of the International Criminal Court in Darfur remains
unchanged. We hope that the Council will value and
heed the views of regional organizations, including the
African Union and the League of Arab States.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to join others
in thanking the Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her
report and her statement today. She has comprehensively
13

S/PV.6887

covered recent judicial activities, the alarming situation
in Darfur and the persistent non-cooperation of the
Government of the Sudan regarding the implementation
of arrest warrants.
After the Prosecutor has reported to the Council
for the 16th time following the Darfur referral, we
have to note once again, with deep regret, that the four
arrest warrants issued by the International Criminal
Court (ICC) have not been executed. Ahmad Harun,
indicted for war crimes and crimes against humanity,
is still Governor of Southern Kordofan; Ali Kushayb,
indicted for war crimes and crimes against humanity,
remains at large in the Sudan; President Omer Hassan
Al-Bashir, indicted for war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide, continues to defy the authority
of the Security Council; and Abdel Raheem Hussein,
for whom an arrest warrant was issued in March, is still
Minister of Defence.
As the Prosecutor’s report states yet again, it is
primarily the responsibility of the Government of
the Sudan to comply with the Council’s resolutions,
cooperate with the Court and surrender indicted persons
to the authority of the Court. Yet the Sudan still shows
not the slightest willingness to do any of those things,
and thereby continues to openly defy the Council’s
authority. The situation is extremely deplorable.
We must therefore not weaken in our determination
to ensure that the four indictees will be held accountable.
We take full note of the fact that the Prosecutor calls on
the Security Council to ensure the Sudan’s compliance
with resolution 1593 (2005). Similarly, Germany
reiterates its call to all States parties to the ICC to fully
honour their obligations under the Rome Statute, in
particular the obligation to cooperate and to execute
any arrest warrant issued by the Court. In that regard,
we fully support recent proposals aimed at ensuring
the Council’s more active and consistent involvement
in cases of non-cooperation following the referral of
a situation to the ICC. In the age of accountability,
non-cooperation must be met with increased vigilance
on the part of the Council.
We commend the Office of the Prosecutor for its
continued monitoring of alleged acts of genocide and/
or crimes against humanity in Darfur, and attacks
on humanitarian aid workers and peacekeepers from
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID). In that regard, we are deeply
concerned about reports of continued, indiscriminate
aerial bombardments leading to the deaths of numerous
14

civilians, and the recent increase in violence in general,
especially in North Darfur. We remain concerned
about all forms of violence against civilians in Darfur,
especially sexual and gender-based violence and
violence against children, as well as reports of arbitrary
arrests and detentions. In that regard, we would like
to draw attention to the incidents that took place in
Hashaba in late September. According to various
sources, including United Nations reporting, the
violence in Hashaba included aerial attacks resulting
in the death of as many as 100 civilians. Furthermore, a
UNAMID patrol tasked with investigating the incident
was ambushed, and a South African peacekeeper died
in the attack. We call for a thorough investigation
of the attack on Hashaba, as well as of that on the
peacekeepers. Those responsible must be brought to
justice.
Germany’s tenure as a non-permanent member of
the Council will soon come to an end. It was during
our membership that the Council for the first time took
a unanimous decision to refer a situation to the ICC.
It is our hope that it will show similar resolve in other
situations where very serious international crimes are
being committed. As a State party to the Rome Statute,
Germany will continue its strong support for the ICC.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Bensouda, for her briefing
today.
The United States remains deeply concerned
about the mounting violence in Darfur and reports
of deliberate targeting of civilian areas, including
increased incidents of aerial bombardments, sexual and
gender-based violence and other crimes. The shelling
in late September of Hashaba, which killed at least 60
civilians, and the razing of the town of Sigili in early
November by the Government of the Sudan-aligned
Popular Defence Forces, are stark cases in point. Should
the violence spread beyond North Darfur, threats to
civilians will only multiply.
Growing attacks on civilians have gone hand
in hand with more frequent and serious attempts
to deny the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) freedom of access.
In both Hashaba and Sigili the Government of the
Sudan denied UNAMID access to the affected areas
immediately after the attacks. Since UNAMID’s initial
deploymen,t in December 2007, 43 peacekeepers have
lost their lives, including six since the Prosecutor’s last
12-64723

S/PV.6887

report, in June. Attacks on UNAMID peacekeepers
can be prosecuted as war crimes. The Government of
the Sudan’s deliberate obstruction of UNAMID, and
failure to investigate unwarranted attacks on it, fosters
a continued culture of impunity and is unacceptable.
The Council should condemn any and all attacks on
UNAMID personnel in the strongest possible terms.
Reversing the cycle of violence and impunity
requires accountability for the perpetrators. The ICC’s
prosecution of the architects of the atrocities in Darfur
is crucial in that regard. We note the Prosecutor’s report
about proceedings in the case against Abdallah Banda
and Saleh Jerbo, as well as her Office’s investigation and
monitoring of ongoing crimes in Darfur. However, we
are dismayed that the Government of the Sudan is still
not cooperating with the ICC to execute the outstanding
arrest warrants in the Darfur cases, despite its obligation
under resolution 1593 (2005) to cooperate fully with the
Court. The subjects of the warrants remain at large and
continue to cross international borders. We continue
to urge all States to refrain from providing political or
financial support to those individuals, and we will work
to prevent any such support.
Continued impunity for crimes committed in Darfur
foments instability there and sends a dangerous message
to the Government that there are no consequences for
attacking civilians elsewhere. Attacks have increased in
the two areas in recent months, particularly in the form
of indiscriminate aerial bombardments. We strongly
condemn those attacks.
We urge the Government of the Sudan to uphold
its commitments to establish credible local justice
and accountability mechanisms. The Government of
the Sudan and the Darfur Regional Authority have
repeatedly announced the establishment of investigative
committees to determine responsibility for civilian
deaths but have not followed through. So far, their
announcements have been empty talk. Moreover, the
Government-appointed Special Prosecutor for Darfur
has not made one significant arrest or prosecution.
The Government’s refusal to take serious action in
the matter is an abrogation of its commitments to the
people of Darfur under the justice and reconciliation
chapter of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
We welcome the willingness of States to consider
creative approaches and new tools to enable the ICC’s
work in Darfur, execute outstanding arrest warrants and
ensure compliance by States with relevant international
obligations. We would welcome further discussions
12-64723

focused on ensuring the full implementation of Council
resolutions with ICC referrals.
The United States appreciates Prosecutor
Bensouda’s report and looks forward to continuing a
constructive dialogue with the ICC and the Security
Council as we work together to end impunity for crimes
in Darfur, bring perpetrators to justice and prevent
future atrocities.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, for her briefing and for
presenting the sixteenth report of the Prosecutor to the
Security Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
Azerbaijan is not party to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. We know the efforts
of the Court to investigate violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law in Darfur. It
is important to ensure that the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court acts strictly within the
mandate of resolution 1593 (2005).
It is clear that there is no military solution to the
conflict in Darfur, We note some positive developments
in the overall security environment in the region. We
also take positive note of the signing of the memorandum
of understanding between the Government of the Sudan
and the Justice and Equality Movement faction to
cease hostilities and launch peace talks. It is important
that those groups that have not yet signed the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur join the peace process
without preconditions.
At the same time, we reiterate our serious concern
about the activities of non-State armed groups, which
represent the main obstacle to the peace process. The
reports of serious human rights violations committed
by such groups against civilians, especially those
settled in camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs),
should be properly investigated, in order to bring those
responsible to justice and to prevent those violations
being repeated in the future.
We note with profound concern the increasing
attacks on United Nations staff members and aid
workers, including the looting of a World Food
Programme location in the Otash IDP camp in July.
In conclusion, we stress the need for the international
community to further support the implementation of
the Doha Document, as well as the importance of the

15

S/PV.6887

renunciation of violence by the rebel groups, as a vital
prerequisite for ensuring durable peace in Darfur.
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court for the sixteenth report to the Security Council
and for today’s briefing.
The International Criminal Court is meant to
make an important contribution to the effort to bring
to justice perpetrators of the most serious crimes
committed during the conflict in Darfur. Its efforts in
that area complement the activities of national judicial
institutions in the matter of fighting impunity.
The Court is called on to objectively assess
unlawful actions by all parties involved in a situation.
Its reputation, and consequently States’ relations with
it, depend on how effectively it is able to do that. In
the context of Darfur, that means that a scrupulous
and impartial investigation must be carried out both in
cases involving Sudanese officials and those involving
leaders of insurgent groups that have committed serious
violations meriting the attention of the Court. We are
pleased with the balanced approach of the Prosecutor
in that regard.
In the seven years since the Council adopted
resolution 1593 (2005), the International Criminal
Court has achieved clear results in investigations of
Sudanese cases. In some cases it has reached the stage
when further proceedings are not possible without
the accused appearing personally in The Hague. That
situation requires that thought be given to the Court’s
next steps and that new approaches to the issue of
fighting impunity be explored. In that context, we note
the importance of the implementation by States of their
relevant obligations regarding cooperation with the
Court, while complying with the norms of international
law in the matter of the immunity of senior State
officials.
We welcome the Prosecutor’s steps to bring to
justice persons who committed the attacks against
African Union peacekeepers in Haskanita in 2007.
Considerable work has been put into the case of the
insurgent leaders Banda and Jerbo. It is important not
to lose momentum in those cases and to avoid them
going on too long for reasons that are not objective. We
trust that in administering justice in matters relating to
Darfur, the Court will continue to work harmoniously
with the process of post-conflict recovery.

16

Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Our
delegation thanks the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her
briefing and for presenting the sixteenth report of the
Prosecutor to the Security Council in accordance with
resolution 1593 (2005).
As indicated in paragraph 2 of resolution 1593
(2005), the Government of the Sudan and all parties
involved in the situation in Darfur must cooperate to
assist the Court and its Prosecutor in their work. It is
on that legally binding basis that investigations and
judicial proceedings are carried out with regard to
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide,
in conformity to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court.
We note the report introduced by the Prosecutor,
which brings us up to date on the ongoing activities and
judicial proceedings being carried out by the Court, not
just in the Trial Chamber but also in its investigative
and monitoring activity of alleged crimes that have
the characteristics of acts of genocide and crimes
against humanity. Our delegation welcomes the actions
undertaken by the Court in this area in order to combat
the prevailing impunity in the region of Darfur.
Similarly, we note with extreme concern the
alleged attacks committed against and targeting the
civilian population, perpetrated both by Government
officials and by rebel militia groups, in particular in
internally displaced persons camps, where such attacks
include murder, pillaging, rape and the destruction of
property. Those acts are reprehensible in every possible
way and should be investigated and documented, as
they threaten the safety of the civilian population and,
consequently, greatly affect the incipient peace process
based on the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
Moreover, the information provided to us about the
constant restrictions confronting the distribution of
humanitarian aid aimed at alleviating the suffering of
the vulnerable population is unacceptable.
We are aware of the extraordinary sensitivity of the
Government of the Sudan with regard to the carrying out
of investigations and cooperating with the International
Criminal Court. In our view, by analysing the current
report and then hearing the statement of the Prosecutor
and the Permanent Representative of the Sudan, it is
obvious that there are still enormous gaps with regard to
the lack of cooperation with the International Criminal
Court by the Sudanese Government on the investigation
of the cases over which the Court has competence.
12-64723

S/PV.6887

We appeal to the Government of the Sudan and to the
parties involved in the Court’s judicial investigations to
cooperate effectively and responsibly in order to ensure
accountability for those crimes perpetrated since 2003
and the success of the judicial proceedings under way
today.
Our delegation, as a State party to the International
Criminal Court and consistent with our foreign
policy and in compliance with international human
rights instruments, cannot ignore the suffering of the
population and the serious crimes perpetrated in Darfur
since 2003 and the recent investigations revealing
acts of genocide and crimes against humanity. We are
aware of how complex it is to bring to justice those
responsible, indicated again in the Prosecutor’s report,
for the crimes committed in Darfur. We believe that the
evidence collected and the judicial investigations are
in accordance with the principles of impartiality and
independence.
Under our presidency in the month of October, we
organized an open debate on strengthening cooperation
between the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court (see S/PV.6849). In that context, our
delegation hopes that, from an institutional point
of view, the existing cooperation will be renewed,
combining the judicial and political aspects in order
to maintain international peace and security. That,
of course, does not mean politicizing the Court, nor
does it mean judicializing the Council, but rather the
combination of the two authorities, each one within
its respective competency, to fulfil the respective
mandates that they have in common — the prevention
of conflict and the combating of impunity.
Lastly, we would like to reiterate to the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court Guatemala’s
support and cooperation in carrying out her obligations.
The challenges are alarming, given the deterioration of
the situation in Darfur, which is compounded by the
prevailing impunity.

progress achieved in implementing that resolution. We
have taken note of the sixteenth report, which included
the recent developments and activities of the Court with
regard to the Sudan since 5 June.
Morocco has always called for a political settlement
between all relevant parties in order to alleviate the
suffering of the civilian population. We reiterate
our commitment to the principles of international
humanitarian law, human rights and respect for the
sovereignty and integrity of States. Morocco, at the
time, welcomed the signing of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur and the implementation of the
Document’s provisions with regard to the issues that
had caused the conflict, especially the provisions on the
fair redistribution of power, resources, restitution, the
return of refugees, reconciliation and the continuation
of national dialogue.
We realize that there are still many obstacles
impeding the restoration of peace in Darfur. We regret
that those challenges, including the refusal by some
rebel groups to become involved in the peace efforts,
continue to delay the effective implementation of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. The refusal by
those groups to join the peace process in accordance with
the Doha Document is now a major source of instability
in the region, with some groups having openly declared
their intention to replace the Government in Khartoum.
In that regard, we would like to underscore the
following positive points. A joint declaration has been
issued by the Government and the Interim Military
Council of the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM),
a new group that broke away from JEM. We hope that
other groups will join them. We also underscore the
positive efforts by the new Darfur Regional Authority to
move advance efforts to implement the Doha agreement
and, specifically, their commitment to promoting a
comprehensive dialogue, despite all the obstacles.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make a
statement in my national capacity as the representative
of Morocco.

We look forward to the upcoming donor conference
in Doha and to the normalization of relations between
the Sudan and South Sudan. We hope that that will
provide the necessary funding to the Darfur Regional
Authority to enable it to carry out all the tasks facing it.

At the outset, I align myself with my colleagues
who have welcomed Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, and I thank her for her
detailed briefing. Since the adoption of resolution 1593
(2005), the International Criminal Court has regularly
submitted reports to the Security Council on the

With regard to the ICC indictment of President
Al-Bashir, the League of Arab States stated its position
on the matter a few days after the indictment was
issued. Like other international organizations and
groups, the League has reaffirmed that position on
various occasions.

12-64723

17

S/PV.6887

Stability cannot be restored to Darfur unless public
relations are stable, the agreements signed by the two
countries are signed, and the outstanding issues between
them are resolved. We hope that this happens as soon as
possible so that trust between the two neighbours can
be established on the basis of good-neighbourliness,
cooperation and complementarity, to the benefit of the
peoples of both countries and in the interests of the
stability and security of the entire region.

18

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

12-64723
