Re■olutions

adopted on the report■ of the Second Committee

Recognizing likewise the importance of adopting
appropriate measures to ensure that the link between
the· Disarmament Decade and the Second United
Nations Development Decade shall be fully understood
and utilized in as practical and comprehensive a manner
as possible,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with such advisers88 as he may deem it necessary to
designate:
(a) To formulate suigestions for the guidance of
Member States, the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency, as well as other
organizations of the United Nations system, with a
view to establishing the link between the Disarmament
Decade and the Second United Nations Development
Decade so that an appropriate portion of the resources
that are released as a consequence of progress towards
general and complete disarmament would be used to
increase assistance for the economic and social development of developing countries;
( b) To propose measures for the mobilization of
world public opinion in support of the link between
disarmament and development and thus encourage
intensified negotiatio~s aimed at progress tow~ds. general and complete dISarmament under effective mternational control;
2. Requests Member States, the specialized agencies
and the International Atomic Energy Agency, as well
as other organizations of the United Nations system,
to submit to the Secretary-General their comments and
recommendations on the matters indicated in paragraph 1 above;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
thereon, throuih the Economic and Social Council, in
time for consideration by the General Assembly in
1973 at the first biennial review of the implementation
of the International Development Strategy for the
Second United Nations Development Decade.
1925th plenary meeting,
11 December 1970.

2686 (XXV). Regional economic commissions
The General Assembly,

Bearing in mind the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations relating to economic and social
development, particularly Chapter IX on international
economic and social co-operation and Chapter X pertaining, inter alia, to the mandate and functions of the
Economic and Social Council,
Recalling the relevant resolutions of the Economic
and Social Council on the terms of reference and
functions of the regional economic commissions,
Taking into account the statements made in the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and other United Nations bodies on the need for
uniformity in nomenclature of these commissions, in
keeping with their terms of reference and functions,
Noting the importance of the unified or integrated
socio-economic approach to development which the
regional economic commissions have adopted and will
be called upon to put into practice, particularly in the
as Subsequently referred to as the Group of Experts on the
Economic and Social Consequences of Disarmament.

5'7

context of the International Development Strategy for
the Second United Nations Development Decade, 811
Considering that the renaming of the regional
economic commissions to correspond with the true
nature of their activities in the economic and social
fields would further emphasize the importance of an
integrated socio-economic approach to development,
particularly in the developing countries,
Recommends that the Economic and Social Council
should consider, in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral and taking into account the views of the
regional economic commissions and those expressed
on this subject at the twenty-fifth session of the General
Assembly, the renaming of the commissions as follows:
Economic and Social Commission for Europe, Economic
and Social Commission for Asia and the Far East,
Economic and Social Commission for Latin America
and Economic and Social Commission for Africa.
1925th plenary meeting,
11 December 1970.

2687 (XXV). Role of the regional economic
commiuion1 in the Second United Nation•
Development Decade
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the important role of the regional economic commissions and the United Nations Economic
and Social Office at Beirut in the implementation of
the International Development StrateiY for the Second
United Nations Development Decade;"°
Conscious of the importance of making appropriate
arrangements for conducting regular appraisals, on a
regional basis, of progress made towards the implementation of the International Development Strategy,
Considering that the regional economic commissions and the United Nations Economic and Social
Office at Beirut will be called upon to assume major
responsibilities for review and appraisal at the regional
level of the progress in the implementation of the International Development Strategy, in collaboration with
regional development banks and other regional or
subregional institutions,
1. Expresses its appreciation of the contributions
made by the regional economic commissions and the
United Nations Economic and Social Office at Beirut
towards the formulation of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade;
2. Requests the regional economic commissions
and the United Nations Economic and Social Office
at Beirut to continue and further intensify their efforts
in helping to promote, on a regional, subregional or
interregional basis, trade expansion, economic cooperation and integration among their member countries as a concrete step towards the attainment of the
goals and objectives of the Second United Nations
Development Decade;
3. Affirms that these efforts deserve the active support of the entire international community and particularly of the developed countries;
4. Requests the regional economic commissions and
the United Nations Economic and Social Office at
Beirut, in co-operation where appropriate with regional
so Resolution 2626 (XXV).
40 Resolution 2626

(XXV).

General A111embly-Twenty-fifth Se88ion

development banks and subregional groupings and with
the assistance of other organizations of the United
Nations system, to make suitable arrangements for
conducting regular appraisals and evaluation of the
progress in the implementation of the International
Development Strategy;
5. Urges that the regional economic commissions
and the United Nations Economic and Social Office at
Beirut be provided with the means and resources
necessary to fulfil their role for the benefit of their
member countries.
1925th plenary meeting,
11 December 1970.
2688 (XXV). The capacity of the United Nations
development system

The General Assembly,
Having considered the parts of the reports of the
Governing Council of the United Nations DevP.lopment
Programme on its ninth41 and tenth42 sessions and of
the Economic and Social Council.a concerning the
capacity of the United Nations development system,
Taking note of the observations and reservations
made in the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme at its tenth session44 and in
the Economic and Social Council at its forty-ninth
session,""
Noting that some questions remain to be settled
within the framework of the examination of this
subject,
1. Approves the provisions concerning the United
Nations Development Programme contained in the
annex to the present resolution and declares that such
provisions shall apply to activities of the Programme
commencing on 1 January 1971, taking into account
the transitional measures in those provisions;
2. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to prepare for consideration by the General Assembly at its twentysixth session, if possible, a draft omnibus statute for
the Programme, incorporating the provisions contained
in the annex to the present resolution and appropriate
provisions from past resolutions relating to the Programme.
1925th plenary meeting,
11 December 1970.
ANNEX
I.

THE UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT CO-OPERATION CYCLE

1. The formulation of the United Nations Development
Programme country programme is the first phase of a process
which may be called the United Nations Development Cooperation C~cle. The other phases are project formulation,
appraisal and approval, implementation, evaluation and
follow-up. The Cycle will also include periodic reviews. The
scope of the Cycle might expand as envisaged in paragraph 9
below.
41 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/4782), chapter VI.
42 Ibid., Supplement No. 6A (E/4884/Rev.l), chapter V.
43 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/8003 and Corr.I), chapter X,
section A.
44 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 6A (E/4884/Rev.1),
chapter V, paras. 95-106.
45fbid., Forty-ninth Session, 1712th to 1714th meetings.

II.

UNITED

NATIONS

DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
PROGRAMMING

COUNTllY

A. General principles
2. United Nations Development Programme country programming means the programming of its assistance at the
country level. It involves the identification of the role of
Programme inputs in specified areas within the country's
development objectives.
3. Country programming will be used as a means of
achieving the most rational and efficient utilization of
resources at the disposal of the Programme for its activities
in order to have the maximum impact on the economic and
social development of the developing country concerned.
4. Country programming will be based on in!lividual
national development plans or, where these do not mat, on
national development priorities or objectives.
S. It is recollJlized that the Government of the country
concerned has the exclusive responsibility for formulatiq its
national development plan or priorities and objectives. Individual developing countries should be given, at their request,
assistance from the United Nations, including the regional
economic commissions and the United Nations Economic
and Social Office at Beirut, in the general field of planning and
from the specialized agencies in sectoral plannina.
6. The programming of Programme assistance will be
carried out in each country within the framework of indicative planning figures constituting an order of maanitude of
the resources expected to be available from the Programme
during the country programme period.
7. The country programme, based on national development plans, priorities or objectives and on the indicati-ve
planning figures, will be formulated by the Government of
the recipient country in co-operation, at an appropriate staae,
with representatives of the United Nations system, the latter
under the leadership of the resident representative of the
Programme; it should coincide, where appropriate, with the
period of the country's national development plan. The formulation of the country programme should involve:
(a) A broad identification of the needs which arise out
of the country's objectives in particular sectors, within the
framework of its over-all development objectives, and which
might appropriately be .met by Programme assistance;
( b) As precise an indication as possible of the internal
inputs, Programme inputs and, wherever possible, other United
Nations inputs to meet these needs;
(c) A preliminary list of projects to be subsequently
worked out for financing by the Programme to implement
the country programme.
8. The country programme of assistance should support
activities which are meaningfully related to the country's development objectives. This implies that the assistance provided
constitutes a programme which receives its coherence and
balance from its relationship to these national objectives.
9. In the process of country programming, efforts should
be made at all levels to co-ordinate all sources of assistance
in the United Nations system, with a view to achieving integration of the assistance at the country level.
10. It will be for the Government to take into account,
while preparing the country programme, other external inputs,
both multilateral and bilateral.
11. The resident representative will transmit the country
programme to the Administrator of the Programme who, in
turn, will submit it, with his recommendations, to the Governing Council for its consideration and approval. Approval will
cover the entire period of the programme, with provision
for periodic reviews aimed at possible adjustments. With
the agreement of the country concerned, the Administrator,
in submitting the country programme for consideration and
approval, will invite the attention of the Governing Council
to details of any other related programme of United Nations
assistance.
12. The assistance of the Programme must be sufficiently
flexible to meet unforeseen needs of recipient countries or
