UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

COUNCIL
RECORDS

UN LEgp n”

YEAR

2135’”

J”N

MEETING:

NEW

_

23 MARCH

19m/sA

1 7 1982
GQ&<

r-;~;N

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
agenda (S/Agenda/2135)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Complaint
by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated- 16 March 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13176) . .

SIPV.2135

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OJkial Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is
given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security CoukZ. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2135th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 23 March 1979, at 11 a.m.
president: Mr. Leslie 0. HARRIMAN

&ia), Mr.. Ha Van Lau (Viet Nam) and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

(Nigeria).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received a letter from the representative of India in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the question on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite the representative of India to participate in the discussion,‘without the right to vote, in conformity with the provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2135)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 March 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13176)
9

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jaipal (India) took
the place reservedfor him at the side of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2132nd meeting, I invite Mr.Mishake
Muyongo, Vice-President of the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), to take a place at the Council
table.

The meeting was called to order at 11.55 a.m.

Adoption of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Muyongo (South
West Africa People’s Organization) took a place at the Council table.

The agenda was adopted.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 March 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13176)

4. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received a letter dated 22 March
from the representatives of Gabon, Nigeria and Zambia
[S/13187] which reads as follows:

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken by the Council at previous meetings [223&h,
2132nd and 2133rd meetings], I invite the representative of
Angola to take a place at the Council table, and the
representatives of Algeria, Benin, Botswana, Bulgaria,
the Congo, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, the German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, Liberia, Madagascar, Mozambique, Romania, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
Sri -Lanka, the Sudan, Togo, the United Republic of
Tanzania, Viet Nam and Yugoslavia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

“We, the undersigned members of the Security Council, have the honour to request that, during its meetings
devoted to the consideration of the item ‘Complaint by
Angola against South Africa’, the Council should
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. David Sibeko, representative
of the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania.”
If I hear no objection I shall take it that the Council
agrees to that request.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a pIace at the Council table and Mr. BouayadAgha (Algeria). Mr. Houngavou (Benin), Mr. Thou (Botswana), Mr. Yankov (Bulgaria), Mr. Monajo (Congo),
Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. AbdeI Meguid (Egypt),
Mr. Worku (Ethiopia), Mr.I;lorin
(German Democratic
Republic), Mr. Sekyi (Ghana), Mr. Yansane (Guinea),
Mr. Sinclair (Guyana), Mr. Tubman (Liberia), Mr. Rabetafika (Ma&gascar), Mr. Honwona (Mozambique). Mr. Marinescu (Romania), Mr. Conteh (Sierra Leone), Mr. Hussen
(Somaha), Mr. Rodrigo (Sri Lanka), Mr. Sahloul (St&n),
Mr. Koaovi (Togo), Mr. Chale (United Republic of Tan-

It was so decided.

5. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of the Congo. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
6. Mr. MONDJO (Congo) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, since the debate started on the repeated
criminal acts of aggression by South African troops
against the People’s Republic of Angola, I know that you
1

have been literally bowed down under a heavy load of
compliments, all equally deserved. If I may say SO, YOU
are thus the “victim” of the manifestations of gratitude
by other Member States towards your great COUnW,
Nigeria, towards its dynamic people and its enlightened
leaders who have committed themselves before history to
take an active part henceforth in the struggle for the total
liberation of our continent, Africa, from colonialism,
racism and all other forms of foreign domination and
exploitation. My delegation in turn wishes to express its
sincere satisfaction at seeing you presiding with the requisite competence and urbanity over the debate on this
important question submitted to the Security Council by
the Government of the People’s Republic of Angola.

taking up an historic challenge-to build on the ruins of a
long and deadly war of national liberation an Angolan
socialist and fraternal State, strong and powerful, from
which the exploitation of man by man would be irrevocably banished. Both the tone and the substance of the
statement made by Ambassador de Figueiredo shed a
wholesome light on this debate and, I am sure, enabled
the Council to perceive the vastness of ‘the tragedy.
Although the South African racists have shrewdly kept a
low profile of late, their nature has not changed. Their
recent acts of aggression against the neighbouring African States have definitely torn away the mask of respectability with which their defenders had provided them. As
always, the truth will out. Sad to say, the facts once again
prove us to be right and support the statements we have
so far made.

7. At all times, here and everywhere, our approach to
the criminal conduct of the racists of Pretoria and Salisbury has remained the same. We have incessantly, in all
the international forums, denounced the rabid rage of the
apartheid cliques which have clamped a heavy lid on the
Namibian tile in an attempt to thwart the efforts of the
international community to bring the people of that Territory to independence. Assured of the unction of their
masters and adulators from the West, Vorster and his
clique obstinately seek by every possible means to achieve
their demented dreams by unceasingly resorting to brute
force against the front-line States, where the South African and Rhodesian troops have exacted a heavy toll from
the innocent civilian populations by carrying out a series
of manceuvres, the perfidy of which can be ignored only
by those who, claiming to defend the so-called interests of
the West, cover their inaction by maintaining a, benign
neutrality towards these Fascists, whom they have been
arming. Immured as they are within the archaic world of
racial hatred and implacable logic of the deadly philosophy of apartheid, these minority regimes will inevitably
remain opposed to any peaceful solution in southern
Africa. The policy of scorn and’contempt that they practise with regard to the relevant decisions of the United
Nations and the impunity in which they revel-alas, with
justification-have
more than once dragged the Organization to the brink of failure.

10. The unfailing assistance given to SWAPO, the sole
authentic representative of the Namibian people, by the
People’s Republic of Angola is a decision that deserves
the unequivocal support of the entire international community, and particularly of the Security Council, which
in its numerous resolutions has consistently urged
Member States to support the struggle for the liberation
of the colonial peoples or victims of apartheid. At any
rate, everyone here must be convinced that this aid is
non-negotiable, despite Pretoria’s frenzied attempts to
destroy the achievements of the Angolan revolution.
11. We are continually witnessing an escalation of the
Salisbury and Pretoria aggression against the front-line
countries, which have received from the Organization of
African Unity the sacred mission of beingthe refuge and
the support of the liberation movements in southern
Africa. The troops brought by helicopter from Salisbury
and Pretoria, which sow death and distress in Angola,
Mozambique, Zambia and Botswana, will never be able
to shake the determination to achieve freedom and independence of the peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia,
represented respectively by the Patriotic’Front
and by
SWAPO. The historic rise of the masses in these two
African territories will foil any plots hatched in secret and
disarm the traitors to the cause of their people, recruited
from here and there, and lured by pompous titles of
liberation movements, produced out of the blue to make
things cozy for racism and imperialism at the precise
moment when the people of Namibia see the light of a
new era dawning on the horizon, an era’when radical
changes are to be made as a result of their heroic struggle.

8. Those who have so far chosen to harbour very moving illusions about the so-called metamorphosis of the
Vorster team should renounce definitely their compliant
attitude, which has served only to tarnish and lessen the
prestige of the Security Council, the guarantor of the
maintenance of international peace and security.

12. It is high time for the African racists to be cured of
their schizophrenia and their absurd complexes. Now, as
feelings run high and the situation is serious, we wish to
remind the Council that the People’s Republic of Angola
is not alone; it has reliable friends and active solidarity
throughout Africa. In any case, I shouldlike to reaffirm
here on behalf of the Government of the People’s Republic of the Congo and of the revolutionary institutions of
my country that the Congolese people, today as yesterday, totally support the just struggle of the Angolan
people to defend their territorial integrity and the independence they have acquired at the cost of so much
sacrifice.

9. The complaint before the Council at this time brings
new facts which add to and aggravate an already voluminous dossier against the South African Government,
which definitely seems to take a perverse pleasure in
cultivating unpopularity as though it were a virtue. The
representative of the People’s Republic of Angola, my
brother and comrade, Ambassador de Figueiredo, provided the Council /213&h meeting;l with a grim description of the circumstances and consequences of recent
barbaric aggressions directed by the Pretoria soldiery
against the territory of Angola. These gratuitous acts of
international banditry caused enormous losses to the
brother people of Angola just as that people, under the
guidance of its avant-garde party, MPLA [Movimento
Popular de Libertacdo de Angola], and its prestigious
leader, President Agostinho Neto, were courageously

13. At a time when contacts are being concocted in New
York supposedly to create a brighter tomorrow, we can
no longer be taken in by certain bold moves. On 6 May
2

:

ritories of Angola. Mozambiaue and Zambia. Todav. the
Council has bifork it a complaint by the People’s R&&blit of Angola following the attack by South-Africa on its
territory, a criminal attack launched from Namibia, an
international Territory that the South African regime has
been occupying illegally, notwithstanding international
opinion and the decisions of the Council.

1978 the Council, in its resolution 428 (1978), committed
itself to consider effective measures up to and including
the application of&Chapter VII of the Charter in the event
of “further acts of violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola”.
14. Without trying to overstate the case, we would suggest that the Council should seriously consider the relevant analyses provided by the delegations which have
been heard so far. To remain unarmed before the selfinfatuation of the racist leaders of South Africa is to
aggravate the loss in standing of the Council and the
impression of decay and decline which has been created
whenever we consider a complaint about the crimes of the
Pretoria regime. Here is the opportunity for the Council
not only vigorously to condemn this regime because of its
persistent armed invasions of the territory of Angola, a
sovereign State Member of the United Nations, but,
beyond these ritual formulas, to carry out on the stage
where these evil deeds are committed a mission of inquiry
to draw up an inventory of the destruction and losses
resulting from these acts of aggression and their consequences on the Angolan economy. This time the Council
will not fail to adopt the necessary measures to prevent
the recrudescence of these scandalous armed invasions
which jeopardize the security and stability of Angola. We
must not allow any crossing of the line beyond which it
will not be possible to bear the unbearable.

19. My delegation has listened with particular attention
to the representative of the People’s Republic of Angola,
who in his statement described quite clearly the most
recent South African acts of aggression of which his
country was a victim. We see clearly from that statement
that recently the territory of Angola as well as the territories of other front-line countries are the targets for constant violations by the adventuristic South African forces
from all quarters. For, in order to commit its ultimate
crime, South Africa has undertaken a veritable military
expedition using the most murderous means of destruction: infantry, artillery, armoured vehicles and planes.
The sad results of this military foray need no embellishment, ending as they did in the death of a large number of
innocent Angolans and in much property damage.
20. In seeking to understand the real meaning behind
South Africa’s acts of aggression against the People’s
Republic of Angola and other front-line countries, we are
compelled to mention the very disturbing situation prevailing in Namibia. In other words, the problem we are
discussing today is but one of the tragic consequences
which the Namibian people have suffered since Pretoria
decided to occupy its country illegally and to establish
apartheid there, the institutional expression of the most
brutal kind of racist ideology.

15. Turning now to my brothers, the representatives of
the front-line .States, I should like to remind them that
African peoples have placed in them a trust which makes
their responsibilities particularly heavy in the face of
history. It is in the nature of imperialism to arouse antagonistic contradictions by abusively dramatizing the divergences which may at times appear between States
whose priority mission assigned by the Organization of
African Unity is to assist, at all costs, the liberation of the
peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia. A permanent watch
is required therefore in order to maintain unity in our
ranks and to thwart the manoeuvres and intimidation of
the enemies of the African nation.

21. As many eminent representatives who spoke before
me have stressed, the attack of which the People’s Republic of Angola was victim was not really aimed at reaching
:and destroying camps of SWAPO-one
of the most
/ important members of the Namibian equation-but,
rather,‘at intimidating and destabilizing Angola in order
to divert it from its sacred duty to support and assist the
liberation movements struggling against the minority
16. Despite the unleashed fury of the South African
racist and retrograde regimes of southern Africa. The
racists and of their offshoots at Salisbury, the conscious
latest South African attacks quite clearly show Pretoria’s
true intentions, which are to perpetuate its ominous neomass struggle waged with heroic courage by the peoples
of Namibia and Zimbabwe, under the banner of SWAP0
colonialist designs in Namibia, and are irrefutable proof
and of the Patriotic Front, will soon bear fruit. For the
of the total contempt of this rhgime for international law
and all the decisions of the Organization. For, South
historic inevitability of the victory of these valiant lighters for freedom cannot be doubted.
Africa, like any society partisan of slavery, has an almost
pathological fear of those whose existence it refuses to
17. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (interp~etarion from French):
recognize; hatred and fear of the black majority are the
dominant factors of all political life in South Africa and it
At the time of the adoption of resolution 428 (1978)
which unequivocally condemned the attack by South
is that hatred and fear which drive South Africa to commit such rash acts both inside its territory and against
Africa against the People’s Republic of Angola, I stated
the following:
neighbouring countries. South Africa believes that it can
maintain its hold over Namibia, a particularly rich Terri“It is not only an obvious threat to international peace
tory, and protect its sordid interests in that country
thanks to its military strength. It is easy to understand,
and security but also undeniable proof that’the Security
Council will always be seized of such base acts so long
therefore, why violence is inherent in the system of
as Fascist minority regimes persist in southern Africa.*’
apartheid.
12078th meeting, para. 33.1

22. South Africa must know that its acts of intimidation
will not lead to a cessation of the assistance and support
of all kinds which Angola is giving to its Namibian brothers struggling for the liberation of their country or shatter
the revolutionary zeal for freedom of the Namibian

18. The concern then expressed by my delegation unfortunately has now been confirmed. Indeed, fewer than 20
days ago the Council met to condemn the attacks by the
illegal Smith regime against the independent African ter3

nationalists. In this connexion, I should like to recall the
statement of the President of the People’s Republic of
Angola, which is contained in the communiqut issued by
the Angolan Ministry of Defence and appears in document S/13177:

tion, with your permission, Mr. President, I should like to
thank the Security Council for having given me the
opportunity to participate in the debate on Angola’s
complaint against South Africa.
29. The present debate, in which a large number of
States are participating, reflects the legitimate indignation aroused throughout the world by the latest acts of
aggression of South Africa against the People’s Republic
of Angola. This debate once more shows that the policy
and practices of the Pretoria and Salisbury minority
racist regimes and their unceasing attacks against neighbouring independent African countries, in open defiance
of international
law and relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, are most vigorously condemned as
infamous by the international community.

“the imperialists can come with their planes, their
tanks, their cannons and their warships, but they will
not be able to prevent our heroic people from fulfilling
their sacred internationalist duty towards the peoples
of Namibia, Zimbabwe and South Africa, to whom we
once again reiterate our militant solidarity”.
23. This is certainly not the first time that South Africa
has attacked Angola, but the latest attacks have taken
place at a particularly delicate time. We all know that five
Western countries, three of which are members of the
Security Council, have made strenuous efforts in the
search for an internationally acceptable peaceful solution
of the Namibian problem. We also know that on 18 and
19 March “proximity talks” were to be held in New York
between the five Western countries and all the parties
concerned in the Namibian problem. It was precisely a
few days before the start of these talks that we learned
that South Africa had once more attacked the iqritory of
the People’s Republic of Angola, a sovereign State
Member of the United Nations, to commit acts of aggression and vandalism there, whereas it had been reasonably
expected that South Africa would refrain, before these
“proximity
talks”, from any action which might
endanger prospects for an internationally
acceptable
peaceful settlement of the Namibian problem, as provided for by the Security Council plan.

30. These repeated acts of aggression give the Security
Council a clear view of the particularly grave and complex situation that the racist rkgimes of Salisbury and
Pretoria have created in southern Africa. They once more
confirm the fact that the armed attacks against the independent front-line African countries have become common practice for the racist regimes of South Africa and
Rhodesia. The uninterrupted chain of such acts of aggression, which have taken place in previous years and at the
beginning of this year and which have each time resulted
in the loss of many lives and heavy property damage,
makes these regimes one of the most serious factors,
threatening peace in Africa and the whole world.
31. The air raids against the young independent and
sovereign Angolan State, which is devoting its efforts to
the peaceful reconstruction of the country, and the
bombings of civilian localities and Namibian refugee
centres are not random in nature, as is claimed in South
Africa’s letter [S/13Z80], and cannot be justified in any
way. What we have here is, in fact, a whole series of
systematic and premeditated acts of aggression, well
known to the Security Council, directed against the Namibian and Zimbabwean peoples and against the independent African States. The real aims of South Africa,
which have been repeatedly unmasked in the past during
the deliberations in the Council, are undoubtedly meant
to stifle the national liberation struggle of the peoples qf
southern Africa, to maintain the state of racial and colonial domination, to destabilize the economies of Angola
and the neighbouring independent African States and to
preserve conditions of domination in that important strategic region. Those criminal acts, which have been repeatedly condemned by the United Nations, show the grave
danger to peace and international co-operation of the
continuation of racist and apartheld regimes and regimes
of colonial domination. They call for the adoption of
specific and urgent measures which go beyond merely
again condemning and appealing to the racist regimes to
heed reason, They must put an end to the roots of aggression and ensure respect for the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the African States; they must
allow for the immediate implementation
of the sacred
right of the Namibian and Zimbabwean peoples to a free
and independent life.

24. My delegation sincerely hopes that this belligerent
attitude of South Africa will not affect the process aimed
at establishing genuine independence in Namibia, in
accordance with Council resolution 435 (1978).
25. The Council must forcefully condemn the attack
against the People’s Republic of Angola and consider any
measure deemed useful so that in future neither Angola
nor any other front-line country will ever again. be the
victim of savage aggression by the minority racist regimes
of southern Africa.
26. In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms itssolidarity
with the People’s Republic of Angola, for, as His Excellency El Hadj Omar Bongo said before the General
Assembly on 14 October 1977:
“What is the good of talking of justice or of emancipation if they both stop at the Zambezi?
“The misfortune of our brothers makes it incumbent
upon us to prepare to deliver them. Once the noble
fight has begun for them, no one can doubt that we will
have to win it for ourselves.“i
27. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Romania. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
28. Mr. MARINESCU~(Romania)
(inrerpreetartonfrom
French): Before stating the views of the Romanian delegaI Official Records o the General Assembly, Thirty-second

Plenary Meetings,34t rf meeting, paras.91 and 92.

32. BY their acts of aggression, the minority racist
rdgimes of Pretoria and Salisbury have left no doubt of
their real intentions with respect to the demands for
independence by the Namibian and Zimbabwean peo-

se@onn

4

ples. Those acts show, at the same time, the real positions..
of those rkgimes with respect to the initiatives and efforts
to find a peaceful solution to the grave situation in southern Africa.

39. Romania, as has recently been emphasized by President Nicolae Ceat+scu, considers that the time has come
to act firmly to pui a complete end to the colonial policy,
in whatever form, in order to ensure the independence of
all peoples, with respect for their right to a free life. It is
along these lines that the Romanian delegation supports
the adoption of energetic and effective measures by the
Security Council.

33. The new armed attacks by South Africa against
Angola, at the very moment when negotiations are taking
place to finalize the United Nations plan to implement
resolution 435 (1978), constitute, in our view, a flagrant
and provocative act. Those attacks can only serve to
hamper and block efforts to realize the aspirations and
the fundamental rights of the Namibian people to freedom and independence.

40. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the renresentative of Mozambique. I invite hii to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
41. Mr. HONWONA
(Mozambique): I should like to
begin by addressing a word of thanks to the members of
the Security Council for the honour and privilege of
speaking before this body.

34. There is no doubt that the racist regime of Pretoria
is sparing no effort to promote its strategic plans in
southern Africa and thus to ensure its control over the
Territory of Namibia, which it holds by force, illegally
and in a brutal fashion.

42. The Security Council has, through the years, established a tradition of sensitivity to the major problems
affecting our peoples, especially the people whose daily
lot is to feel in their flesh the odious nature of the racist,
minority regimes of southern Africa. When the people of
Angola rose up in arms against Portuguese colonialism,
the Council took an unequivocal stand in favour of their
cause, the cause of freedom and independence. That in
itself gives us the certainty that, now that that same
freedom and independence is directly threatened, the
Security Council will have no difficulty in once again
giving the Angolan people its full support.

35. We are firmly convinced that all the manceuvres of
the racist r&imes as well as their abusive acts of force and
repression cannot prevent the final victory of the struggle
being waged by the Namibian and Zimbabwean peoples
more and more staunchly for their freedom of
independence.
36. The aggressive actions of the racist rtgimes, like the
one now before the Council, can only worsen the situation in southern Africa, increase tension in the region and
increase thi danger to international peace and security.
That serious situation requires, without further delay,
energetic action so that the Council can discharge the
responsibilities entrusted to it by the Charter and use the
means provided for situations in which peace and security are threatened. At the same time, the situation
requires better co-ordination of efforts and actions by the
international community against the racist mgimes. In
this respect, the Romanian delegation supports the
requests addieised to the Council by the African delegations, including assistance measures for the front-line
African countries.

43. On behalf of the Government of the People’s
Repubhc of Mozambique, I wish to pay a special tribute
to the President of the Council, Ambassador Leslie Harriman, and through him to the people’and Government
of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, that great African
country whose proved commitment to the cause of freedom in Africa augurs well for the successof this meeting.
44. Once again the Security Council is meeting to discuss wanton aggression against an independent African
State by the South African apartheid dgime. The People’s Republic of Mozambique strongly condemns South
Africa’s attacks against Angola, and indeed against Zambia and Botswana. The people of Angola, with whom we
shared the experience of colonial oppression, exploitation and humiliation and with whom we fought for freedom and independence, continue to enjoy our militant
solidarity and support.

37. The Government and people of Romania, which
‘have also in the past resolutely condemned the irresponsible acts of aggression of the racist and apartheid rkgimes,
firmly demand that an end should be put to any armed
intervention against the African States and that their
sovereignty and independence should be respected. We
call for the cessation of the illegal occupation of Namibia
so that the Namibian people can exercise, without any
restriction, their inalienable right to a free, unified and
independent homeland, in conformity with their profound aspir&ons.

45. The South African regime is a regime condemned,
by the entire international community for its inhumant
apartheid policies. This is the regime that, not content i
with oppressing and exploiting the people of South i
Africa, cold-bloodedly massacres men, women and child- ’
ren, whether in Sharpeville or Soweto, for the simple
reason that they demand-their legitimate rights. This is
the regime which, in defiance of Africa and the international community, illegally occupies Namibia, divides its
people through the extension of the bantustan policies
and subjects them to the most cruel forms of colonial
domination and exploitation. This is the regime that has
embarked upon a major military build-up, including the
development of nuclear weapons. This is the regime
which, disregarding the most basic pritiiples of international law, has enacted legislation giving itself the right to
intervene militarily anywhere in Africa south of the equa-

38. Romania is firmly opposed, in its foreign policy, to
the imperialist policy of domination and oppression and
supports respect for the right of each people to a free and
independent existence. In this spirit, we express our complete solidarity with the people of Angola, a friendly
country, and with the peoples of other front-line African
countries in their struggle against the provocation and
aggression of the racist regime of Pretoria. We repeat the
firm support of Romania for the people of Namibia and
their legitimate national liberation movement, SWAPO,
until final victory is achieved over foreign domination
and until national liberation and independence are won.
5

tor. This is the regime that brutally attacks Angola and
other front-line States.
I

by undertaking strong measures in defence of our people
and in opposition to the racist aggressors.

46. The Angoian people have had to fight a 14-year war
of liberation from Portuguese colonialism. Angola had to
repel the South African and imperialist aggression of
1975. Angola is even today having to defend itself against
constant South African acts of aggression and sabotage.

52. The Western countries whose weapons and fighting
men are being used, whose civilization is invoked to
perpetrate and justify these barbaric acts of aggression,
have the responsibility to demonstrate in clear and
unequivocal actions to the racist aggressors, to their victims and to the international community that they are not
on the side of the racists and that they are not party to the
racist regimes’ constant violations of the Charter.

47. In spite of all those difficulties, the People’s Republic of Angola has courageously assumed its duties as a
member of the Organization of African Unity and
accepted all sacrifices for the furtherance of the struggle
of the African continent for totai liberation.

53. In the words of President Samora Machel of the
People’s Republic of Mozambique: “It is easier to kill the
crocodile when it is still young and stays on the river bank
than when it is fullv crown and moves to deener waters”.
We feel that now.isThe time for action.
1

48. We do not regard South Africa’s aggression against
Angola as an isolated act. We see it, first, as an aggression
against Africa as a whole and as an attempt to curtail the
liberation efforts of OAU. Furthermore, such a blatant
violation of the Charter of the United Nations constitutes
an affront to the international community. Indeed, we
witness today in southern Africa an escalation of racist
acts of war at a time when all the front-line States are the
victims of aggression and at a time when South Africa has
seen fit to reject the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia, after having for so long pretended
to accept it.

54. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
55. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): I should like at the
outset to associate myself with preceding speakers i!
congratulating you, Sir, on the assumption of the presrdency of the Security Council for this month and in
expressing our happiness at seeing you, a distinguished
and able African diplomat, presiding over the deliberations of the Council on a vital issue for Africa and the
third world.

49. Our own country also has recently been the victim
of racist acts of aggression and provocation. From 1 January to 14 March-in
other words, in the first 73 days of
this year-there were 67 registered armed racist acts of
aggression against Mozambique. In those attacks a total
of 45 people have died and the damage includes the
destruction of two warehouses, five motor cars, fiveagricultural tractors and two electricity generators.

56. The complaint before the Council. is grave and
serious and has been amply substantiated by the representative of Angola. Once again the illegal racist minority
regime of South Africa has resorted to its usual practice
of international
terrorism and launched a barbaric
aggression against the territory of an independent African State, bombing towns and villages and killing peaceful, innocent populations and refugees.

50. There is a danger that the international community
will come to accept racist armed attacks against front-line
States as the normal state of things. But our people
cannot accept violent loss of life and property as normal;
they cannot accept as normal the permanent insecurity
which the racist regimes of southern Africa have created
in the region, for we know that the racists use the most
modern and sophisticated weapons that Western countries can supply. They openly recruit mercenaries from
those countries to assist in carrying out massacres of the
people of Zimbabwe, Namibia, South Africa and the
front-line States. Furthermore, the racist regimes ciaim
to be doing all that in defence of Western civilization and
Western interests. How, then, are our people to interpret
persistent Western vetoes against the Security Council’s
adoption of stronger measures against the racist regimes?
How are our people to interpret the increasingly high
level of technological co-operation, including in’nuclear
weapons, between the West and South Africa? How are
our people to interpret present attempts by Western
countries to lift United Nations mandatory sanctions
against Rhodesia?

57. We have been following with great concern and
indignation the news of the recent intensified armed
attacks by the illegal racist regimes of Salisbury and
Pretoria against the front-line States. These acts of
aggression are rapidly increasing with ominous and dangerous dimensions to which the United Nations can no
longer afford to be indifferent, since they aim at entrenching the white minority regimes in southern Africa and
undermining every international effort to eliminate those
racist regimes and to achieve genuine independence for
the peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia.
58. The timing of the recent armed attacks by South
Africa against the sister African country of Angola and
other front-line countries is not without significance. It is
crystal clear now that South Africa has ‘no intention
whatsoever of withdrawing from Namibia. It is fully
convinced that SWAPO, which enjoys the overwhelming
support of the people of Namibia as well as of the international community, will win the elections supervised by
the United Nations by a sweeping majority. Therefore,
South Africa has decided to resort to its usual practice
and has launched the current wave of armed aggression
to destroy SWAPO, to terrorize the neighbouring countries which courageously support SWAPO, and at the
same time to sabotage the process of bringing about
genuine independence for Namibia, in accordance with
the provisions of resolution 435 (1978).

51. South Africa and Rhodesia have often enough been
identified as a threat to international peace and security
by the United Nations and other international bodies.
There have been enough appeals, warnings and condgmnations of South Africa and Rhodesia. It is important
that at this time the Security Council should act in such a
way as to boost our people’s traditional confidence in it
6

59. There is no doubt in our minds but that the international community in general and the supporters of those
racist regimes in particular bear a grave responsibility for
the racist war now raging in southern Africa. The international community has so far failed to crush the rebellion
in Rhodesia and to end the illegal racist minority regime
of Ian Smith; it has so far failed to end the illegal occupation of Namibia by the racist regime of Pretoria; and it
has so far failed to end that most inhuman apartheid
rCgime in South Africa. The international community has
failed also to deal with the unholy alliance between the
racist minority regimes and their supporters. The racist
minority regimes, encouraged by the failure of the international community, have felt free to add to the oppression of the black majority, to claim the right to attack the
camps of those refugees who have succeeded in fleeing to
other independent African States, and to claim the right
to violate the sovereignty and territorial integrity of independent States.

66, Only a few days ago the Council discussed the
attack against Angola launched by the armed forces of
the illegal Smith regime of Rhodesia. And now the Council is considering a series of attacks against Angola by the
South African air force and armoured and infantry units,
involving aircraft, artillery and napalm bombs. These are
deliberate and unprovoked
attacks against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola. No one in the
Council has taken the slightest notice of the South African allegation that Angola had first attacked South African forces.
67. Evidently the timing of the South African attacks is
related to the so-called proximity talks on Namibia-talks
in which apparently physical proximity makes up for lack
of proximity in regard to agreement over the United
Nations plan. It is clear to us that South Africa is trying to
buliy those involved in the talks into accepting United
Nations monitoring of SWAP0 bases in neighbouring
countries, or else to continue to face South African
attacks against Angola, Botswana and Zambia.

60. Egypt, along with other African and other friendly
countries, has on numerous occasions drawn the attention of the international community to the detrimental
effects of the negative attitude adopted vis-a-vis the racist
regimes. We have voiced deep concern that, unless the
aggressors feel that the world’s denunciation of their
attitude will be translated into action and political and
military measures, they will continue to believe that they
can persevere in their aggression without having to pay
the price for it.

68. This imperial dispenser of African destiny is
obviously totally insensitive to the urgings of those Powers that claim to have influence at Pretoria. The extent of
insensitivity was demonstrated when the Foreign Minister of South Africa had the impertinence to demand
condemnation of SWAPO. Surely it must now be recognized that no one State or group of States has any influence on South Africa, and it is therefore on that basis that
the Council should decide its future course ofaction. The
recent attacks against Angola and their timing are proof
enough of the inability of some Western States to put
good sense into South African heads. I am afraid that
those Western States must acknowledge their incapacity,
or else provide proof to the contrary. There are limits
beyond which we cannot strain the credulity of African
States.

61. The expected result is what is occurring now in
southern Africa, where an extremely complex situation
exists, fraught,with danger to peace and security not only
in Africa but in the whole world. We do earnestly hope
that the Security Council will at this stage assume its full
responsibility and consider appropriate measures against
South Africa under the provisions of Chapter VII of the
Charter.

69. Members of the Council will have to choose
between legality and illegality. The choice is really quite
as simple as that for those who accept the fact of collective responsibility for the only Territory that has international status. The very presence of South Africa in
Namibia is illegal and its attack against Angola is doubly
illegal; this illegality cannot be permitted to continue with
impunity.

62. It is also our conviction that the least the international community can do is to help Angola and other
front-line States increase their defensive capacity in order
to deter racist armed attacks in the future and help reconstruct the areas devastated by racist military incursions.
63. I should like to conclude by expressing to our brothers of Angola and other front-line States in southern
Africa, and also to all the freedom fighters in the region,
our firm and unwavering support in all domains and to
assure them that Egypt will always give its support without hesitation to the oppressed peoples and will defend
the right of man everywhere to live freely and with dignity
and enjoy all his human rights and fundamental freedoms. We shall stand determined and firm with all the
other peoples, beside our brothers who are struggling
against injustice and racism in southern Africa.

70. When the Security Council adopted resolution 428
(1978) last year, it warned that, in the event of further
aggression against Angola, enforcement measures would
be taken against South Africa under Chapter VII of the
Charter. That warning has to be made goodby the Council. My delegation was then a member of the Council and
had suggested a study of a variety of enforcement mea&
ures to be applied progressively so as to secure such
limited objectives as the Council might decide on from
time to time. It is along those lines that the Council
should now direct its attention, with the co-operation of
the Western countries, because their co-operation
is
essential for the successful application of Chapter VII.

64. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of India. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

71. South Africa is clearly looking for an excuse to
wreck the United Nations plan or to turn it to its own
benefit and to wean the Western Powers away from
supporting the plan which they themselves conceived but
unfortunately
have so far failed to deliver through no

65. Mr. JAIPAL (India): Mr. President, I should like
to express to you and to the members of the Council my
delegation’s gratitude for this opportunity
to state our
views.
7

fault of theirs. The recent scandal brought to light by the
BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation] has exposed the
two faces of South Africa.
72. What is the responsibility of the Security Council in
the face of South African aggression against Angola?
Some have suggested that the answer is to provide economic and humanitarian assistance to Angola and to call
upon all the parties concerned to exercise the utmost
restraint. We are not satisfied with this answer. In OUT
view it is high time that the Council demonstrated its
seriousness of purpose through action-oriented
decisions. In our view it should seriously begin the process of
considering the application of selective enforcement
measures under Chapter VII of the Charter.
73. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make a statement,
74. Mr. ROA KOURI
(Cuba) (intt$retation
from
Spanish): Mr. President, first of all I should like to thank
you and the other members of the Council for affording
me this opportunity to state the views of my delegation.
75. Barely three weeks ago, before the Council, my
delegation most energetically condemned the barbaric
and indiscriminate aggression being perpetrated by the
racist illegal rigime of Ian Smith against the front-line
States because of their consistent support for the liberation movements in southern Africa which, in Zimbabwe
and Namibia, are striving to eradicate the opprobrious
apartheid rigime and to win complete independence.

government in Zimbabwe and Namibia, have repeatedly
sabotaged the attainment of the true objectives of the
people of the region contained in the programmes of the
Patriotic Front and of SWAPO. It is nevertheless an
inescapable duty to reiterate this condemnation and to
unmask those who tauntingly and perfidiously mock the
peoples of the world and the Organization.
80. The recent attacks against Angola and those against
Mozambique, Zambia and Botswana are catculated to
prevent a genuine solution in Zimbabwe and Namibia. It
is not, as the racists argue, a matter ofoperations directed
solely against the fighters of the Patriotic Front and
SWAPO, since the camps that have been bombarded are
inhabited predominantly
by children, women and old
people. The purpose is to sow terror among the citizens of
Zimbabwe and Namibia who have found refuge in the
front-line countries and to strike various centres and
cities in those sovereign States, even damaging their economic production so as to weaken them economically
and militarily and above all to compel them to stop
supporting the liberation movements.
8 1. The imperialists have recourse to such inhuman and
shameful practices while, like Pharisees, they proclaim
their will to negoiiate. It is sufftcient to recall that the
escalated bombing of Haiphong, Hanoi and other Vietnamese cities wtis’ ordered by the President of the United
States after offtcial talks have been started between the
representatives
of his Government
and those of the
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam. In the jargon of those
who comment on international events, this bullying is
called “‘negotiating from a position of strength”.

76. Today once again I have come to the Council to
condemn the attacks perpetrated by South Africa against
the People’s Republic of Angola.

82. Is it not obvious that the present attacks against
Angola and neighbouring States of Rhodesia and South
Africa have coincided very strangely with. the famous
New York talks on the so-called peaceful settlement of
the situation in Namibia and are the prelude to the spurious elections to be held at Salisbury w.hereby it is
intended to sabotage genuine independence for the people of Zimbabwe? Apparently these “negotiators*’
have
no’arguments to persuade the representativesofSWAP0
and the front-line States that they are acting for their
benefit and not for the benefit of their racist partners.

77. It is no mere chance that these violations occur and
have even increased lately. Ian Smith’s Rhodesia and the
Pretoria regime are but instruments of imperialism, and
all their actions are designed to safeguard their setfish
interests in the region. To this end they do not hesitatenor have they ever hesitated-to
undertake military and
other operations against sovereign neighbouring States,
seriously threatening international peace and security.

83. The imperialists and their allies, Botha and Smith,
offer the fake carrot of an agreement while they brandish
the stick: bombings and indiscriminate massacre from
Puma helicopters,
using napalm and machine-guns
manufactured in the “free world”. This is the nauseating
and undisguisable face of fascism; the trumpeting of
“good intentions’* by the hangmen of Rhodesia and
South Africa amount to this. The vermin of apartheiddo
not deserve to be given the chance to engage in a peaceful
dialogue; they deserve to be hanged as war criminals.

78. Racist South Africa, the principal bastion of the
imperialist oppressor regime in Africa, exists and subsists
-against
the will of the vast majority of the African
people in South Africa and of the international community-precisely
because certain Western Powers, the very
ones which daily beat their breasts and proclaim themselves to be democratic and in favour of independence,
daily violate resolutions adopted by the Security Council
and the General Assembly and keep up an uninterrupted
flow of the financial, technological and military resources
which the South African Fascists need.

84. In the recent attacks the South African racists
bombed the regions of Melunga, Kahama and Catengue,
in the People’s Republic of Angola. They violated the
territorial integrity and air space of that sister nation and
made forays into Angola with tanks and infantry, penetrating many kilometres into its territory and strafing the
inhabitants.

79. It would seem a sterile exercise to complain aboui
this shoddy complicity in this forum if we only took into
account the results that might be expected from Security
Council action. But its resolutions are in fact nothing
more than wet paper, in so far as they concern some
Western Powers which, under the shieId of alleged plans
for a peaceful change-over to independence and majority

85. And it is these gentlemen, these barbarous Nazi
murderers, who afford themselves the luxury of publicly
8

objecting to the United Nations plan for Namibia; it is
thdy who cavil at the report of the-Secretary-General
an_d
seek to impose conditions on the international community for the accession to independence of a country which
they are occupying against the will of its people and of all
progressive mankind; it is they who shamelessly propose
to the Security Council the adoption of a resolution
condemning SWAPO.
86. The insolence of Vorster and company merits but
one response: the heroic struggle being waged by the
Namibian people under the banner of its only legitimate
representative, SWAPO. Rights are won; they are not
begged for. When all roads are closed to a people’s will
for freedom, that people has no choice but to defeat its
oppressors, weapons in hand. The imperialists and their
racist partners obstinately try to impose neo-colonial
solutions on Zimbabwe and Namibia and to maintain in
South Africa the monstrous uparrheid regime. They wish
by every means to ensure their continued domination of
southern Africa for ever and ever. Beyond doubt, this
plan is at odds with history, with the irreversible trend of
our times towards true independence and the final overthrow of colonialism, neo-colonial exploitation and
imperialist
predominance.
Hence, their efforts are
doomed to failure.
87. My delegation considers that the international community must express its resolute support for the freedom
fighters in Zimbabwe, Namibia and South Africa, that
the Security Council must unequivocally condemn the
South African racists for their continued acts of aggres-

sion against the People’s Republic of Angola and apply to
South Africa the sanctions provided for in Chapter VII of
the Charter, and that Member States should increase all
forms of assistance to the Patriotic Front, SWAP0 and
the African National Congress of South Africa, with a
view to strengthening their just and legitimate struggle
for freedom, independence and national sovereignty.
88. We must reject most energetically the electoral farce
orchestrated by Ian Smith and the traitors Sithole, Chirau and Muzorewa for 20 April next. We must also
condemn the shady manceuvres of Mr. Botha and his
Western sponsors. Namibia must be independent. Walvis
Bay must be recognized as an integral part of its territory.
The roster of electors concocted by the racist South African occupation forces must be repudiated as fraudulent
and unusable. Only SWAP0 represents the Namibian
people. The puppets created by South Africa have no
right at all to speak on their behalf. Let us therefore take
the necessary steps to make sure that freedom and independence will be for Zimbabwe and Namibia a radiant
glimmer of coming dawn, and not a twilight curfew.
89. Lastly, I wish to reaffirm the unwavering solidarity
of the Government and people of Cuba-with the Government and people of the People’s Republic of Angola, who
today as in the past are courageously defending their
territorial integrity against the deadly blows of the racist
Pretoria r6gime and, with internationalist zeal, continuing to lend their unconditional, fraternal assistance to the
liberation movements in southern Africa.
The meeting rose at I.15 p.m.

,

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite
1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section,
New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may
be obtained
your
bookstore

LE.3

or

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
write
to: United

DES

NATIONS

Los publications
des Nations
Unies
sont
en vente
dans
les
depositaims
du monde
entier.
Informes-vous
aupres
de votre
B : Nations
Unies.
Section
des ventes.
New York ou Geneve.
KAK

COMO

TfOJISVKTb

CONSEGUIR

HSAAHZlR

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las
buidoras
en todas
pa&s
Unidas,
Secci6n
de Ventas,

Litho

in United

Nations.

New York

OPPAHK

DE

LAS

Price: W.S.

NACIONES

librairies
libraire

et les agences
ou adressee-vous

HAKKK

UNIDAS

en vents
en librerias
a su librero
o dirfjase

1.50

distributors
Nations,
Sales

UNIES

OK’bELWiHEHHhIX

3A4HN

Naciones
Unidas
estin
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

and

y casas distria: Naciones

79-70002--December

1981-2.250
