OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

MEETING:

:;+v

.’..

25 FEBRUARY

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Ptlgt?

. . . , . . , . . . . , . . . . , . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative of
Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13801);
(b) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative of
Morocco to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13802) . , . . . , . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . , , . . . . , . , . . , , , . . . . . , , . .,. . , . .

4
1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2200)

S/PV.2200

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2200th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 25 February 1980, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Peter FLORIN
(German Democratic Republic).

Presenf: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2200)

I. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13801);
(b) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Morocco to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13802)
The meeting

was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation In the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13801);
(b) ,Letter dated 15 February 1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13802)

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from
Russian): In accordance with the decisions taken at the
2199th meeting, I invite the representative of Jordan
to take a place at the Council table, I invite the
representatives of Cuba, Egypt, Israel, Morocco, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Yugoslavia to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber, I invite the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a place at
the Council table and I invite the Acting Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People to take the place
reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nuseibeh
(Jordan) took a place at the Council table, Mr. RoaKouri (Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Blum
(Israel), Mr. Filali (Morocco), Mr. Mansouri (Syrian
Arab Republic) and Mr, Kornutina (Yugoslavia) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber,
Mr. Terzi (Palestine
Liberation
Organization) took a place at the Council table and
Mr. Kane (Acting Chairman of the Committee
on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palcsfinian People) took the place reserved for hitn at the
side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
I wish to inform the members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Pakistan and Viet Nam in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in conformity with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bouzarbia
(Algeria!,
Mr. Naik (Pakistan)
and Mrs. Nguyen
Ngoc Dung (Viet Nam) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
The first speaker is Mr. Clovis Maksoud, permanent
observer of the League of Arab States, to whom the
Council has extended an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
4. Mr. MA’KSOUD: I wish to express to you
Mr. President, and to the members of the Council the
appreciation of the Arab League for the invitation to
address the Council on an issue of profound concern
to the Arab nation, to the League and the Arab peoples.
I wish to take this opportunity to express to you, Sir,
our esteem for your friendly country and people,
with whom the Arab people have close relations, and
for you personally because of the exemplary manner
in which you are fulfilling your responsibilities.
5. The report of the Security Council Commission
established under resolution 446 (1979) makes it very
clear, and indeed incontestable, that Israel’s policy
of colonization has largely contributed

on it as provided in the Charter, in as much as the
colonizing policy of Israel is deemed objectively a
serious threat to peace in the region, as is spelled out
in paragraph 57 of the Commission’s report, which
states:

“to a deterioration of the situation in the occupied
territories and that it is incompatible with the pursuit
of peace in the area” [S/13679, para. 451.
That is reiterated in one form or another in every paragraph of the report’s conclusions, as, for instance,
when it states that Israel’s settlement policy is

“In view of the magnitude of the problem of
settlements and its direct effect on the over-ah
deterioration of the situation in the occupied territories and, therefore, its implications for peace in
the region, as well as for international peace and
security, the Security Council should keep the situation under constant review.”

“incompatible with the pursuit of peace in the area
and that it is bound to lead to a further deterioration
of the situation in the occupied territories” [ibid.,
pm-a. 511.

6. I shall not belabour the evidence that has been
submitted to the Commission and to the Council. It
is conclusive, irrefutable and complete. If Israel had
sought to challenge the evidence submitted to the
Commission, it had every opportunity to do so. If it
had been able to disprove the evidence or at least some
of it, it had every opportunity to do so. If it had any
justification for modifying the conclusions, it had at all
stages of the Commission’s work every opportunity
to do so. I refer the Council to paragraphs 15, 19,
23, 38 and 39 of the Commission’s report. Instead,
Israel refused to collaborate with the Commission,
obstructed its tasks and challenged its mandate. It did
so because Israel considered that, since it could not
answer the mounting criticism, it would wait for the
moment when the Council convened to attack the
credibility of this body, to heap insults on it-and on
the United Nations as an organization-and to pursue
diversionary tactics while accusing the Council of
using them. Was that clever? Perhaps. Was it dangerous? Of course. Why?

9. Hence, we end up with an annual or a semiannual exercise in which the Council deals with such
a grave threat to peace by merely expressing concern
or deploring it, while Israel proceeds, in the mean
time, to establish new settlements, to expand existing
ones and to introduce new laws permitting settlement
not only around the Arab Palestinian towns and cities
but within them.

7. What the Council is witnessing is an evolving
pattern in the treatment by Israel of the Council’s
functions and deliberations and, ultimately, of its
mandate. Knowing in advance what built-in constraints
exist in view of the veto power of the United States,
or the threat of its use, Israel hardens its position,
considering each remark critical of its behaviour
indicative of enmity. Israel is further undertaking to
create a situation in which the United States would
function in the light of its convenience rather than its
convictions. When that is achieved and then communicated, or at least hinted at, the thrust of what
ought to be done will be deflected to what can be
done. When Israel, in view of the particular role of
the United States in this case, finds that the United
States has defined the parameters of its flexibility on
issues pertaining to the question of Palestine, or any
phase of it, then it reverts to its studied contempt
of what takes place in the Council.

10. There has been a universal awareness of the
dangers inherent in Israel’s policy of creeping annexation. The vivisection of the Palestinian body politic
is pursued so systematically that Israel shows no signs
of relenting in or abandoning this expansionist process.
Even Israel’s use of such terms as “Jews’ right to
settle” in the “land of Israel” carries ominous signs
of the realization of a design of annexation. The term
“land of Israel” has no legal or political meaning
except in the lexicon of Israel and of the Zionist
movement. It includes the territories occupied in the
West Bank and Gaza. If-as the Mayor of Al-Khalil
(Hebron), Mr. Qawasma, whom the Israeli authorities
have prevented from attending the Council’s meeting,
said-Israel asserts the rights of Jews to settle in
Hebron, why not apply the same right to the Palestinians to settle in their homes-homes in the literal
meaning of the term: in Jaffa, Lydda, Safad, Acre,
Haifa, and so on? The pious protest of Israel that the
international community’s preventing Jews from
settling wherever they want is racist could be a valid
protest if it were not for the Israeli record replete
with the institutionalized exclusion of Palestinian
Arabs from their homes inside usurped Palestine, or
what is called Israel. The racist entity not only resorts
to double standards, it is blind to any standard of
values except its own. Preventing Israelis from settling
in Hebron is, according to this lopsided logic, racist;
but forcibly preventing Palestinian Arabs from
returning to their homes inside Israel is a matter of
course.

8. In general, what ought to be done in the light of
the evidence becomes a question of how best to
accommodate the position of the United States and
reconcile it with the collective judgement of the international community. The issue then becomes whether
to deplore or to condemn Israel’s settlement policy,
not whether to condemn Israel and impose sanctions

11. The Security Council and various other United
Nations bodies are by now familiar with the semantic
acrobacy resorted to by Israel to shield its colonizing
pursuits. It would therefore serve no useful purpose
to analyse them. For many years it has been possible
to discern a measure of permissiveness in dealing
with Israel, especially in many Western societies.
2

What may be termed the guilt complex of many
Western States has been manipulated by Israel to
insulate it from questions. Sceptical remarks about its
aggression, expansionism, colonization and violation
of human rights and United Nations resolutions have
been treated by Israel as lingering anti-Semitism. To
shield its colonizing policy from scrutiny, it has
resorted to a form of intellectual terrorism and
diplomatic blackmail.

15. Tomorrow, 26 February, while this body is
deliberating on the colonizing policy in the occupied
krritOrieS
and is hearing elaborate evidence on the
scope of the threat that this policy constitutes to the
Peace of the region, an exchange of ambassadors
between Israel and Sadat’s Government will take
place. What a travesty, and how ironic!
16. It has often been said by some of our American
friends that the Camp David agreementsand the subsequent treaty between Israel and President Sadat will
render Israel more amenable to the international
standards of behaviour; the so-called peace treaty will
constrain Israel to give up the pursuit of its expansionist objectives. “Give it a chance,” apologists for
the treaty said. But since the treaty was signed on the
lawns of the White House, with unprecedentedfanfare
and false euphoria, Israel-as the Commission’sreport
details and underlines-has establishednew colonies,
pursued more vigorously its annexationist policies and
initiated programmes, policies and legislation that
would make the so-called autonomy talks a mockery
even for those who are engagedin negotiating it,

12. In the West generally, and more recently in the
United States, public opinion has been silenced, Israeli
apologists and Zionists have threatened to mar the
reputation of any person who dares shed light on the
behaviour pattern or policy of Israel. The United
Nations itself has not been spared this conjured wrath.
However, as evidence of Israel’s aggressiveness,
expansionism, racism and colonization has become
more clear, visible and unmistakable, Israel has
termed every criticism of its behaviour an act of
endangering its security. The colonial settlements
have thus been explained either as the fulfilment of
metaphysical aspirations and theological tenets or as
security measuresfor Israel. Which Israel? Israel never
answers because the self-perception of Israel is that it
is a State that is still becoming rather than a State that
is. Hence, what many tend to treat as the existing State
of Israel is, for Israel, the embryo of the State to be.

17. The Camp David agreements and the so-called
autonomy negotiations constituted-instead of incentives that would inhibit and restrain Israel’s propensity
for aggression,expansion and colonization-a licence
for Israel to intensify its annexationist policies, as we
have witnessedin south Lebanon and in the WestBank
and Gaza. What did the other signatoriesof the Camp
David agreementsdo about theseIsraeli transgressions
that took place after the signing of the agreements,
after the signing of the so-called peace treaty? True,
they protested and even said that the settlementswere
illegal. But the process continued uninterrupted. It
was and remains a pathetic sight: Israel defiantly
implanting new colonies, mutilating the body politic of
the areas it occupies and creating the new facts to
ensure that at the terminal point of the so-called
autonomy negotiations there would not be any viable
entity to enjoy even the municipal level of administrative authority these autonomy negotiations envisage.

13. Unless this reality is grasped, Israel’s behaviour
pattern and its colonizing policies will not be clearly
understood or adequately dealt with. The reality is
that Israel considers all investigations of its settlement
policies, all criticism of its colonizing process, all
condemnations of its contempt for the United Nations
Charter, resolutions and activities to be mere interruptions of its grand design to annex the occupied territories in their entirety and destroy whatever potential
existsfor the exercise of Palestinian self-determination.
The reality is that Israel’s appetite for the territories
in Gaza and the West Bank has not been quenched.
What Israel wants is for its plans of ,annexation to go
unchallenged and uninterrupted. If that is not possible,
then it wants to create new facts, create new colonies,
break the framework of the Palestinian entity and
emasculate the world body so far as that body’s ability
and, later on, its will to come to grips with the very
essence of Israel’s objectives are concerned.

18. It was pathetic to see our leading Arab State’s
authorities incapable of using Egypt’s great leverage
to arrest the settlements policies by merely stating
that negotiations would stop if the implantation of
settlementsdid not stop. The diplomatic day-dreaming
generated by the Camp David agreements cornered
both Egyptian andUnited Statesdiplomacy andcaused
its dysfunctioning becauseof the studied intransigence
of a pampered Israel more eager to pursue what it has
set out to achieve than to cater to ego trips of its
cosignatories.

14. Therein lie the dangers inherent in the Camp
David agreements. We have witnessed the way in
which Israel, in pursuit of its contempt of the authority
of the Council and its challenge to the deliberations
taking place in the light of the Commission’s report,
is interjecting the Camp David agreements and the
so-called autonomy negotiations as a bar to this body’s
fulfilling its responsibilities. Maliciously and erroneously, Israel describes the negotiations it is undertaking with Egyptian authorities and the United States
as the only “serious” ones. What is taking place here
is consequently unworthy of a response.

19. The equation that governs the interrelations of
the three parties to the Camp David agreementsis not
of major concern and relevance to the deliberations
of the Council. What is relevant is that Israel and, to
a lesser extent, both the other partners seek to render
the mechanism of the’ Camp David agreements an
3

alternative vehicle to the United Nations. True, this
attempt will not succeedbecause the so-called peace
treaty has become a step away from peace instead of
the promised step towards peace. Yet what must be
pointed out here is that the modalities which the Camp
David agreements introduced have been aimed at
undermining the credibility, the mandate, the authority
and the effectiveness of the United Nations and, most
recently, of the Security Council. This is too grave
a precedent to be allowed to go unnoticed and undealt
with.
20. We are being told that the United States did
declare these settlementsillegal. The Egyptian declaration considered them to be in violation of the spirit of
the Camp David agreements. What was done? The
United States did not stop its arms supplies to Israel;
it did not freeze the financial assistanceprogrammes,
which amount in their aggregateto nearly half a billion
dollars for the settlement programme that Israel is
carrying out in the occupied territories. Egypt’s President could not wait; he did not postpone his decision
to send an ambassador; instead, he expedited the
exchange and lost the last of his leverages-if indeed
he had ever intended to use any.
21. What is germane to the issue before this body
concerning the Camp David agreements is that the
parties involved are eager to convince the world community that they are seriously dealing with the Palestinian question. Unfortunately, there are people in
the United States, and to a much lesser extent in
certain countries of Western Europe, who believe
that this can be so. Israel and President Sadat are,
each for their own reasons, hoping that those people
will keep this illusion. Israel resorts to insulting the
United Nations and the Security Council-as its
representative did last Friday when this series of
meetings opened.
22. Why has the League of Arab States vigorously
opposed the Camp David agreements and, subsequently, the so-called Sadat-Israel peacetreaty? The
aspects which are most germane to the deliberations
here are those related to the so-called “autonomy”
talks.
23. Autonomy is, as is well known, an administrative
formula and has no legal, constitutional or political
meaning or connotation. Autonomy as an objective is
therefore pre-emptive of sovereignty. It forecloses
the Palestinians’ right to an independent State, and,
by implication, it denies the Palestinians the right
to national self-determination.
24. When the end result of negotiations is stated to
be autonomy, even if it is described as full autonomy,
then the Camp David agreements constitute a clear
negation of the Charter and of all the United Nations
resolutions that have spelled out clearly and precisely
the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people.
Then all statements to the contrary are designed to

distract us from and to cover up the real plan to deny
the Palestinians not only their right to statehoodbut
also their existing status 0%peoplehood. That is the
licence which the Camp David agreements gave Israel
to proceed with the colonizing process which the Corn.
mission’s report rightly concluded constituted a threat
to peace in the region. How?
25. By confining the target of negotiations to the
objective of autonomy, the parties to the Camp David
agreements have acceded to Israel’s plan of keeping
sovereignty over the West Bank and Gaza pending,
The deliberate equivocation on this central question
at best puts the occupying Power on an equal footing
with the Palestinian people in staking a claim to
sovereignty over Palestinian territories. Israel’s
military occupation gave it a logistic, strategic and
administrative advantage in making functional its claim
to exercise the prerogatives of sovereignty. Israel has
confiscated and annexed more than 30 per cent of the
West Bank. So, even when the option of autonomy
is being dangled, it covers less than 70 per cent of the
occupied territories, and in a region criss-crossedwith
military and paramilitary settlements that renders
meaningless whatever may be the outcome of the
autonomy talks, making it an insult to international
intelligence.
26. Therefore we see how the establishment of new
settlements, the control over water resources andthe
various annexationist measures can go hand in hand
with the so-called autonomy negotiations which the
United States is sponsoring and which Egypt’s rulers
eagerly pursue. It is clear, in our view, that what the
Council is dealing with today is something more than
what the Commission’s report concludes and recommends. It has to deal with the Zionist ideology
which has made Israel the main cause of instability
in the region and the serious threat to peace it constitutes.
27. The Council must ask itself: is it enough to express
concern about Israel’s obvious violations? Is it enough
to deplore? Is it enough to condemn? Should not this
body begin to think of imposing the sanctions that will
deter Israel from the pursuit of its ignoble expansionist
and colonizing objectives? Until when must Israel be
treated as an exception to the rules of law, both civil
and international? Does not the Council realize that,
like all racist entities, Israel considers itself answerable
to nobody, while the world must consider itself
accountable to it? Is it not time that Israel’s occupation
of a privileged position be terminated? No privilege
is enjoyed except at the expense of denying somebody his rights. For how long can Israel’s racist
privileges be tolerated when that means denying the
Palestinian people their natural and national rights?
28. Those questions can no longer remain unsnswered. The challenge& they pose can no longer
remain pending. The United States, the super-Power
that underwrites-at times against its convictions and,

timately, its interests-the policies and objectives of
raeI, should no longer provide the ultimate protective
.ver for an Israel playing havoc with the chances
r a genuine, just and comprehensive peace in the
gion. We say that because many member States of
e ‘Arab League have close and friendly relations
.th the United States, but are alarmed at the level of
:liberate inconsistency between utterance and
:rformance when it comes to United States policies
rncerning Israel’s obvious violations. By diluting
e resolutions that articulate the real consensus of
is body, the United States serves notice on Israel
at it can pursue its objectives without fearing the
rnctions necessary to make it comply with the
inimum standards of international behaviour.
?. We in the Arab League are conscious of the
screpancy that exists between the political conve.ence of the United States-especially during
ection years-and the diplomatic convictions which
3 not differ substantially from the conclusions of
le report, That is why the Arab Summit Conference,
hich met in November in Tunis, coupled with its
:vere censure of United States policies in the Middle
ast took a decision to intensify the Arab campaign of
Iformation and awareness among Americans on the
:al issues involved in the Middle East conflict-the
ssumption being that, although greatly disappointed
rith United States policies on those issues, we have
ot reached either disillusionment or a state of rupture
I our communications,
0. We are stating this because we know that the
rincipal cause of Israel’s capacity to defy the internaonal consensushas been the United States’ reluctance
3 draw the logical conclusions from its own assesslent and evaluation of the Israeli violations and
olonizing policies. In addition to finding itself boxed
1 by the mechanism of the Camp David agreements,
le United States has given a dispensation to Israel to
reject every minute and minor compliance with the
ictates of the international will as a major concession
r “sacrifice”. That is how the partial withdrawal from
&-tai is being projected, and thus Israel is able not only
3 buy time but also to concentrate on intensifying its
oIonizing policies in the West Bank and Gaza, as the
‘ommission’s report confirms.

1. The cycle that allows Israel to get away with its
‘iolations and contempt of the international consenUS cannot remain unchecked, The clear-cut nature
14 the Commission’s report, its conclusions and its
ccommendations render imperative the need to
bpose on Israel the necessary sanctions to make it
lesist from the pursuit of policies that threaten the
beace and stability of a very vital region,
Z.

The PRESIDENT (inrerpretation from RusThe next speaker is Mr. Falilou Kane, Acting
Jhairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
nalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. I invite
tirn to take a place at the Council table and to make
tis statement.
ian):

33. Mr. KANE (Acting Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People) (interprerarion from French): First
of all, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, and
all the members of the Council for allowing me to
speak in this debate in my capacity as Acting Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
34. May I also most warmly congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of this important
organ of the United Nations. I am sure that your
experience and talents as a seasoned diplomat will be
of the greatest use to us in this debate. We are
fortunate indeed that this debate is being held under
your presidency, because the German Democratic
Republic, your country, has always supported the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People in its efforts to promote a
just solution of the question of Palestine.
35. I should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Jacques Leprette, for the
admirable way in which he conducted the Council’s
business during the month of January, a particularly
difficult period.
36. Once again the Council must deal with Israel’s
serious violations of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people and the threats that those violations
constitute to international peace and security. The
Government of that country has just authorized Israeli
citizens to settle in the very heart of the Arab city of
Al-Khalil, which is in the Arab territories illegally
occupied since 1967. This new violation of international law by Israel is further proof of that country’s
determination to defy our organization by continuing
its settlement policy in the illegally occupied Arab
territories. That policy is meeting with almost unanimous condemnation within the international community. Even the countries regarded as staunch friends
of Israel have declared that such a policy is in flagrant
viotation of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of
12 August 1949’ and a serious obstacle to peace.
37. It is because the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
considers that Israel’s affronts to the Organization
cannot continue without gravely endangering international peace and security that it believes the latest
events in Al-Khalil call for careful consideration by
the Council and the subsequent adoption of effective
measures, In this respect Israel’s refusal to authorize
the mayor of Al-Khalil to respond to the Council’s
invitation is deplorable. In the Committee’s opinion,
that act is an implicit admission of guilt, for why else
should Israel so fear the testimony of the Mayor of
Al-Khalil?
38. On 22 March 1979the Council, following repeated
infringements of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian

people by Israel, decided to establish a commission
of inquiry “to examine the situation relating to settlements in the Arab territories occupied since 1967,
including Jerusalem” [resolution 446 (1979)]. In spite
of the innumerable obstacles which Israel sought to
place in its way, that Commission was able to discharge its mandate and in July 1979 to submit a first
objective and precise report to the Council [S1134.50
and Add-l].

39. The Committee, which Israel has boycotted as it
did the Commission, must once again condemn the lack
of co-operation on the part of the Israeli authorities
with the members of the Commission. By that
attempted boycott Israel seeks to discredit the results
of the Commission’s work. However, no one is deceived by this sleight of hand. If the Israeli leaders
are really sincere when they state that the settlements
do not constitute an obstacle to peace, what have they
to fear from a commission of inquiry? One must admit
that, if they had nothing to hide, if they did not openly
violate human rights in the occupied territories, they
would have no difficulty in receiving the Commission.
40. I should like to take this opportunity to pay a
well-deserved tribute to the representatives of
Portugal, Bolivia and Zambia for the quality and the
thoroughness of their two reports. Their concern to
seek the truth impartially was borne out by the en‘deavours they made to obtain the points of view of
all the parties concerned, including Israel. It is not their
fault if Israel has chosen to boycott all the efforts
of various bodies of the United Nations to shed light
on the treatment of the populations of the occupied
Arab territories.
41, Israel has on various pretexts boycotted the work
of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population
of the Occupied Territories, the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People and the Commission established under resolution 446 (1979). Therefore, it has become clear that it
is not those United Nations bodies that are partial but
Israel, which fears the truth may come to light.
42. The consideration in July 1979 of the first report
of the Commission gave the members of the Council
the opportunity to realize that Israel was undeniably
violating the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people by implementing what the report described as
a wilful, systematic and large-scale process of establishing settlements in the occupied territories. That
report showed clearly that the policy followed by
Israel in the occupied Arab territories was aimed at
effecting radical and irreversible demographic,
cultural, social and religious changes.
43. The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, which had constantly
been providing proof that Israel’s policy in the
occupied Arab territories was designed to deny the

Palestinian people its right to self-determination and
sovereignty, could not but express its approval of the
conclusions in the Commission’s report.
44. The Committee had also noted with satisfaction
that the Council had, in its resolution 452( 1979),almost
unanimously endorsed the recommendations of the
Commission and called upon the Government and the
people of Israel, on an urgent basis, to cease the
establishment, construction and planning of settlements in the Arab territories occupied since 1967,
including Jerusalem. Unfortunately, we are bound to
observe that Israel took no notice of that resolution.
On the contrary, it has stepped up its violations of the
national rights of the Palestinian people by authorizing
the establishment of new settlements, by arresting
eminent Palestinians, including the Mayor of Nablus,
who were “guilty” of expressing the feelings of their
people, and, finally, by exercising harsh repression
with the aim of dissuading the Palestinian people
in the occupied territories from exercising the right
freely to express its opinion, which is conferred upon
it by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
45. The conclusions contained in the Commission’s
second report are quite edifying in this respect. Since
the adoption of resolution 452 (1979), the Commission
has noted that the Israeli authorities have confiscated
40,000 dunums of privately owned lands in order to
allow for the expansion of settlements in the West
Bank. Those authorities have extended and
strengthened existing Israeli settlements. They have
lifted all legal restrictions on a massive transfer of the
Israeli population in the occupied territories by
authorizing Israeli citizens to acquire land in those
territories. Thus, at this time, the Government of
Israel has, using many different pretexts and specious
arguments, confiscated 31.4 per cent of all land in the
West Bank.
46. It is daily becoming clearer that Israel’s policy
in the occupied Arab territories is one of gradual
annexation through the continued Judaization of
the demographic, economic, cultural and religious
character of those territories. Thus, the Holy City
of Jerusalem has now been surrounded by Jewish
districts with the clear objective of separating it from
the rest of the West Bank and accentuating its Jewish
character. However, because Jerusalem is the meeting
ground for the three great monotheistic religions, it
should be able to preserve its unique historical and
religious character. At the last meeting of the Council,
the representative of Morocco, speaking on behalf of
the Islamic Group, said how ardently the Moselm
world aspired to seeing the city of Jerusalem returned
to Arab sovereignty.
47. Another aspect of the Israeli policy of settlement
in the occupied Arab territories is the implementation of all kinds of economic, legislative or financial
measures aimed at inducing the Arab inhabitants to
abandon their traditional occupations and leave their

b

homeland. That applies to the Israeli Government’s
measures aimed at reducing the water resources of the
Palestinian population. Such measures can obviously
have only disastrous effects on the agricultural
activities of that population. If the Council does not
act swiftly and firmly, the Arab inhabitants are
threatened with progressive ruin and are in danger of
being forced to abandon their land to the Israeli
settlers.
48. The violations by Israel of the rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination and national
sovereignty are nothing new, but they are a constant
source of concern to the international community and
they raise serious doubts among the friends of Israel
about that State’s desire for peace. Indeed, recent
events in Al-Khalil have shocked international public
opinion. By deciding to promote settlement in that
holy city despite the protests of the Arab population,
Israel is in danger of exacerbating tension in the area
and causing bloody confrontations.
49. What is happening today in Al-Khalil is not, in
the Committee’s view, an isolated event. In fact, it is
one of a series of systematic violations of the Charter
and of the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949’. It is a
deliberate decision to destroy the identity of the Palestinian people and to deprive it of its most fundamental human rights, Above all, the intention is to
transform the West Bank into a bantustan, making the
Palestinians strangers in their own land, and covertly
to annex Arab lands.
SO. Israel, in this field, is following in the footsteps
of South Africa, whose infamous policy of bantustanization is designed to strip the indigenous populations
of their most sacred rights. Just as it has rejected the
policy of bantustanization, the international community will oppose any application of a similar policy
in Palestine.
51. The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People has given me a
mandate to express its deep concern to the Council.
Indeed, it is the duty of the Security Council, as the
main organ for the maintenance of international Peace
and security, to take the required decisions, in accordance with its powers under the Charter, in order to
put an end to the Israeli policy of covert annexation
of Arab territories. In this respect, the Committee
feels that the Council must resolutely condemn the
latest measures taken by Israel in Al-Khalil and
reaffirm that the Israeli policy of establishing settlements in the Arab territories occupied since 1967 is
illegal and is an obstacle to the attainment of a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.
52. The Committee also feels that the mandate of
the Commission must be extended so that it may keep
the Council informed of developments in this field.

53. The members of the Council, who have often
expressed their concern about the violations of human
rights in Africa, in Latin America and in other parts of
the world, should understand that the question of
Palestine is of the same nature, that the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people cannot be continually violated, while the Council is reduced to
impotence, and that international peace and security
cannot be perpetually threatened by the actions of a
Member State of the United Nations, a Member
which, furthermore, was entirely the creation of the
Organization.
54. The non-aligned countries, at their last summit
conference in Havana, had occasion to consider the
question of the blocking of the Council where the
recovery by the Palestinian people of their inalienable
rights was concerned. Those countries intend to bring
the matter to the General Assemblyin special session
if the Council continues to be reduced to impotence.
As the Chairman of the Commission, Mr. Mathias of
Portugal, stated last Friday:
“We wish to continue to believe that it is possible
for reason and common senseto prevail. That, in the
ultimate analysis, is the messagewhich we bring to
the Council.” [2199th meeting, para. 29.1
55. If Israel has lost its reason and flung aside all
restraint, the Council, which is the body responsible
for the maintenance of peace and security throughout
the world, must fully assumeits responsibilitiesunder
the relevant provisions of the Charter. It is to be
hoped, however, that wisdom will prevail and that, in
the face of the persistent and flagrant defiance of this
body by Israel, the Council will finally be able to take
specific and effective measuresto find a way out of
this situation, which seriously harms the prestige of
the Organization.
56. Mr. ESSAAFI (Tunisia) (interpretation from
The situation in the occupied Arab territories
was already considered by the Council in March and
July of last year, in the light of the incontrovertible
facts of which it was informed, particularly those
contained in the first report of the Commission established under resolution 446 (1979). Nevertheless, the
situation has deteriorated considerably and has taken
on alarming proportions which justify these meetings
of the Council and necessitateimmediate andeffective
action, on its part.
French):

57. My delegation is aghastandfilled with indignation
at the intolerable actionsof the Israeli Government and
by the heavy exactions it makes daily from Palestinians, Such facts have been duly reported by the
representative of Jordan and the representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, who have proved,
with facts and figures as corroboration, the senousness and the extent of the repressive poltcy of the
occupying Power. Their statements,which have,been
reliably documented, have given us a complete ptcture

of the present situation, a gloomy picture, which
illustrates the expansionist policy of Israel and reveals
its designs, which are dangerous for the region both
in the long term and in the short term.

to the obstinate determination of the occupying Power
to continue its repressive policy, despite its having been
condemned by the international community and despite
the resolutions of the United Nations.

58. A number of these designs were unmasked in the
Commission’s second report, which the Chairman of
the Commission, Ambassador Mathias of Portugal
presented in such a clear and eloquent fashion at the
Council’s last meeting. The part of the report describing
the way in which the situation has developed since
the adoption of resolution 452 (1979) provides us with
new facts, all equally serious, that cannot but once
again arouse the anxiety and indignation of the international community.

65. Israel has deliberately chosen to be ostracized
by the international community. The number of countries that condemn it, that have rejected it or broken
off diplomatic relations with it, is very eloquent in
this respect. In this, only South Africa can be compared
with Israel.
66. I should like to pay a tribute to the members of
the Commission for their skill and objectivity and the
remarkable work they have carried out in order to
serve truth and justice, despite Israel’s complete
refusal to co-operate with them and despite its
deliberately negative attitude, which should be
resolutely condemned. To justify that attitude, an
attitude which is hardly surprising to us, Israel bases
its argument on its non-recognition of resolution 446
(1979). Thus, it accepts or rejects resolutions according
to whether or not they suit it, and tramples underfoot Article 25 of the Charter. That is further proof of
the total contempt in which Israel holds the Organization and of the need for the Council to ponder the
inevitable conclusions that arise therefrom.

59. First, the Israeli occupation authorities have
proceeded to confiscate further private Arab land
amounting to several thousand hectares to permit the
expansion of the settlements already in existence.
60. Secondly, the decision taken by the Israeli
Government in September last authorizes Israeli
citizens to acquire land in occupied areas belonging
to Palestinians, who, in the grip of terror, have no
choice but to submit and comply.
61. Thirdly, the intensive exploitation of water
resources by the occupying authorities and their
diversion of other traditional water resources in the
occupied territories exclusively to serve Jewish
settlers have brought the Arab inhabitants and landowners to the brink of ruin and destitution, since
they are deprived of the means of irrigating their farms
and their plantations and are thus forced either to
leave or to suffer the humiliation and degradation of
working as hired hands on their own land.

67. Since the Commission’s second report was
placed before the Council further serious events have
occurred in the occupied Arab territories. As an
example, let me mention only what happened recently
in the Arab city of Al-Khalil. In addition to the decision of the Israeli Government to authorize
Israelis to settle in the very heart of that Arab city,
for days its population has been subjected to a
particularly stringent curfew. Collective sanctions
have been imposed on item because of the murder
of an Israeli soldier. Thus it has been subjected to
extreme brutality and most inhuman treatment by the
occupying military authorities.

62. Fourthly, the planning, construction and establishment of fresh settlements of the kind contained in
the master plan established by the World Zionist
Organization [see S/13582 of 22 October 19791-a
plan whose existence has been corroborated by
various sources-is now being carried out by the
Israeli Government.

68. Who can forbear thinking of similar treatment
meted out by the Nazis to Jews during the Second
World War? The similarity is striking. It is repugnant
and sad. To the credit of the Jews, there are, fortunately, here and there, and in Israel also, some
who have branded the Israeli Government with infamy
for its policy of settlement in occupied Arab territories
and its behaviour towards the Palestinians, The Chief
Rabbi of Great Britain, Emmanuel Jakobovitz,
echoing others equally anxious about the future of
Israel, such as Nahum Goldmann, has urged the
Government of Israel to give up its expansionist
policy and recognize a free and independent Palestinian State as its neighbour. A few days ago, in London,
he stated:

63. Furthermore, the Israeli authorities do not shrink
from deviating from their own laws and infringing on
the legality of the institutions of their own country,
as has been shown by the case of the colony of
Qaddum, which the High Court of Justice of Israel
declared illegal. Despite the verdict of the High Court,
the Israeli authorities decided to shift the settlement
a Iittle, though their action remained illegal.
64. Those facts, which are listed in the Commission’s
report are in themselves extremely enlightening as to
the purposes, whether covert or overt, of the resolutely expansionist policy pursued by the Government
of Israel, a policy that both scorns and spurns international conventions. Furthermore, the Commission’s
conclusions and recommendations leave no doubt as

“The key to peace in the Near East cannot be
found in Sinai but rather in the relations between
Israel and the Palestinians. It is precisely there
that we are going to win or lose, because it is there
that the fate of Israel will be decided.”
8

Should we regard that declaration as a diversionary
tactic to distract international attention from other
events, such as we were accused of by the representative of Israel on Friday last? Of course, Israel will
never think that the time is ripe to consider the situation prevailing in the occupied Arab territories,
because its conscience is not easy. Far from it.

73. This is, indeed, a weighty charge-sheetof actions
that are contrary to the provisions of the Charter,
the most fundamental principles of international law
and the most elementary standards of international
morality. Consequently, it is necessary,indeed urgent,
that the Council put an end to those actions. It is high
time for it to take specific and effective stepsaimed at
Putting an end to that policy of fairs accomph and
to those actions that threaten international peace and
security.

69. The policy of the Israeli Government is a colonialist policy in its most reprehensible form, because
it is not aimed only at enslaving a people and exploiting
it but also at expelling it from its country and taking
its place. This policy is designed to turn that people
into a stateless group of refugees doomed to eternal
exile, for ever cut off from its roots and its homeland.
Even worse, the Palestinians who live in the
occupied territories are subject to daily harassment
and extortion, which affects their national character
and is harmful to their religion and its Holy Places,
the purpose being to destroy their identity and to cast
them into the melting-pot of ubiquitous Judaism. Those
who refuse to bow are expelled, and the rest are
enslaved.

74. The representative of Israel has claimed that the
Present debate is designed to impede the peace
efforts. We are all aware that nothing could impede
the achievement of peace more than the continued
policy of his Government and its repressive practices
within the occupied Arab territories. We cannot
over-stress the reason that has led to such a situation,
namely, that the Palestinians,relegated as they have
been to the status of refugees for decadesnow, have
had their most fundamental and legitimate rights
denied them.
75. Since the necessary reparation of this flagrant
injustice is at the heart of any solution to the problems
in that area, it is clear that half-measures are not
enough to ensure respectfor the aspirationsof the Palestinian people. That people, which has long suffered
from oppression and injustice, aspires only to peace,
genuine peace, a peace based on justice and dignity,
a peace that will restore to it its national rights and
enable it to live as a free and sovereign people among
all the other peoples in that area.

70. Furthermore, humiliation is visited on the Palestinian not only as a person but also as a believer
because he is the impotent witness of the desecration
of the Holy Place, the great Al-Haram Al-Ibrahimi
Mosque. That is in addition to the damage done by the
Israelis to the Holy Places of Jerusalem in order to
serve an unbridled Judaization and it affects what is
most profound and most sacred not only to the inhabitants of the occupied Arab territories but also to the
hundreds of millions of Moslems throughout the
world. It affects both their faith and their spiritual
heritage.

76. The PRESIDENT (interpretafion from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

71. Is this a policy of peace? Israel is doing everything it can to prevent the coming of peace. A just and
equitable peace that takes account of the rights of the
Palestinian people to self-determination and independence in a free and sovereign State has been
deliberately thwarted by the Israeli Government. The
only choice open to the Palestinian people is that of
struggling by every means in its power to recover its
sovereignty and its dignity.

77. Mr, KOMATINA (Yugoslavia): I should like to
thank the Council for having offered me this opportunity to set forth the views of my Government concerning the negative consequencesof the measuresand
actions taken by the Israeli Government against the
populations of the occupied Arab territories.
78. It gives megreat pleasureto greet you, Mr. Pddent, as the representative of the German Democratic Republic, with which my country has been
developing friendly relations and all-round cooperation, and to wish you every success in dtsthe responsible function of President of the
Council for the month of February.

72. The situation is extremely alarming. AS has been
frequently demonstrated an official policy of colonization has been unremittingly pursued by Israel since
1967. Israel is implacable in the way it constantly
pursues the modification of the legal status, the geographical nature and the demographic composition
of the occupied territories. New colonies have been
set up. More lands, including the most fertile areas,
have been illegally expropriated. Water resources
have been diverted in order to quell a PoPulatron
that is doomed to despair, Palestinians who are daily
expelled from their homeland or arbitrarily detained.
All this is done in contempt of the numerous resolutions of the United Nations and of international law,
in particular of the fourth Geneva Convention of lg49g
to which the State of Israel is a party.

charging

79. The consideration of this problem by the Council confirms the fact that the crisis in the Middle East
is continuing with relentless intensity and that new
foci of crisis are constantly emerging in the area, thus
the possibility of a wider conflict. This
confirms the fact that peaceand stability in this region
can be achieved only through a comprehensive
settlement of all aspects of the,crisis in the Middle
increasing

9

East, and especially the solution of the Palestinian
question, on the basis of the creation of a national
State of the Palestinian people. Any other approach
not only does not solve but exacerbates the crisis in
its entirety and postpones its solution.

violating them, nor can they be derived from some.
thing contrary to them. There is, consequently, a0
need to emphasize in particular that such acts per.
petrated by an occupier or committed during occupy.
tion are null and void.

80. The problem under consideration in the Council
has assumedadded significance in the present complex
relations characterized by general and disquieting
international tension, The ever more frequent cases
of military intervention and interference in internal
affairs, of various forms of attack on the freedom and
independence of sovereign States, in particular of the
non-aligned countries, and the unabated arms race and
the intensification of great-Power and bloc rivalries
threaten the very foundations of the system of international relations based on the principles of the
Charter and constantly instigate various forms of
usurpation of the rights of sovereign countries and
peoples. All the greater, therefore, is the responsibility
of the Council, and of us all, for creating conditions
that would put the Middle East problem on a track
leading to a genuine comprehensive settlement.

83. The documents of the United Nations are replete
with data illustrating the negative policy and practices
of Israel in the occupied territories. This is also proved
by the most recent findings contained in the report
of 4 December of the Commission established under
resolution 446 (1979) and by the data embodied in the
report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Populs.
tion of the Occupied Territories3 which was adopted
at the thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly,

81. The world Organization and its organs, the
Security Council in particular, have been compelled
for a number of years to deal with problems resulting
from the internationally prohibited actions and acts by
the Israeli authorities against the populations of the
occupied Arab territories. As has been many times
established, the policy and practice of Israel, in addition to its permanent aggression against sovereign
Arab States, a policy and practice of establishing
illegal settlements in the occupied territories, of
perpetrating acts of denationalization, of exploiting
natural resources and of destroying historical and
cultural wealth, amount actually to a systematic and
persistent attempt at altering the geographical,
ethnographic, economic, religious, cultural and
historical characteristics of the occupied territories
and their inhabitants. That practice has been known
from the time of colonization. However, it is also
known that that policy has been defeated in the past
and that therefore all protagonists of such a policy
should take this fact into account.
82. The actions of the Israeli occupation authorities
cannot be characterized otherwise than as a flagrant
violation of the rules of international law-of rules,
principles and norms that Israel committed itself to
observe by its signing or accepting them. By its
membership in the United Nations, Israel has
assumed the obligation to respect the Charter and the
decisions of the world Organization; it has also signed
the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.In spite of this,
we are witnesses to constant violations and total disregard of the principles and provisions of those documents. The actions of Israel are contrary to the provisions of The Hague Convention of 1907,2which laid
down the legal foundations of international law for the
peaceful settlement of disputes. It has never been
possible to ensure the application of the rules of law by

84. It is also proved beyond any doubt by the most
recent example of Al-Khalil (Hebron), the caseof the
Mayor of Nablus and others. All this shows that Israel
continues to pursue its policy
of occupation and
annexation as well as the systematic expulsion of a
whole people from its homeland. All this is aimedat
consolidating its occupation in the Middle East and
legalizing a policy offairs accornplis in order to prevent
the Palestinian people from realizing its legitimate and
inalienable rights. The settlement of the Middle East
crisis as a whole is thereby indirectly impeded.
85. The position of Yugoslavia concerning the Middle
East crisis is well known, It is founded on three basic
principles, which have also been approved by the
international community: first, the total withdrawal of
Israel from all the Arab territories occupied in the
1967 war; secondly, the realization of the inalienable
national right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination, including the right to return and to
establish its own State, with the Palestine Liberation
Organization as its sole legitimate and internationally
recognized representative; and thirdly, the right of
all the countries and peoples of the region to a secure
and independent development. This is, in our view,
the only realistic and internationally acceptable
platform for achieving a just and lasting peace in the
region, and any delay in actions and measuresfor
its realization could have serious consequencesfor
international peace and security.
86. In this sense, we are all responsible for what
emanates from the unsolved Middle East crisis. Any
further delay in solving this question is tantamount
to complicity in depriving of its rights a people which,
by the high level of its national consciousnessandits
constructive contributions, has become an equal
member of the international community. The denialof
the national right of the Palestinian people to its
homeland is contrary not only to the norms of international law, but also to the principles on which are
based the whole international community and Peace
and security in the world. The international cemmunity must put a stop to such recidivist actionshY
Israel, as they constitute the naked use of force and

undermine the very foundations of international relations. That Israeli policy has been condemned
repeatedly within the United Nations and by the decisions Of numerous international gatherings, especially
those of the non-aligned countries, which have given
the broadest support to the Arab peoples and countries in their struggle for the realization of their legitimate rights and have become their allies,
87. Any further continuation of its policy of violence
provides one more proof of Israel’s lack of readiness
to comply with the resolutions of the United Nations
on a peaceful, just and lasting settlement of the crisis
in the Middle East. It should also open the eyes of
those on whom Israel relies in its intransigence and
defiance of the international community, Hence, the
need for all members of the Council to take immediately the necessary measures for checking such a
policy. It is necessary to prevent the continuation
of all activities designed to deprive the occupied territories of their national identity, having in mind, in the
first place, Jerusalem, with its cultural and religious
pluralism.
88. We therefore fully agree with the report of the
Commission that the Council should take effective
measures to prevail on Israel to cease the establishment of settlements in the occupied territories and to
eliminate the consequences of such measures and
actions, considering them null and void. We also agree
with the need to examine within the United Nations
all the possibilities for taking effective measures to
prevent Israel from exploiting the natural, geographical, cultural and other resources that it has
usurped as a result of its occupation. All these actions
should be placed within the framework of general
efforts to achieve a peaceful, just and lasting peace in
the Middle East, to realize the legitimate national
rights of the Palestinian people and to eliminate all
the consequences of occupation and aggression.

92. First of all, I should like to express my congratulations to YOU, Sir, on your accession to the
presidency of the Council for this month. The longstanding friendly relations between our countries, as
well as your deep experience and high qualifications,
assure USthat you will conduct the work of this Council in a very efficient manner,
93. Allow me at the sametime to pay due respect to
Your predecessor, the representative of Prance,
Mr. Leprette, for the efficient manner in which he
presided over the work of the Council last month.
94. This is not the first time that the Council has been
seized of the question relating to the Israeli Zionist
POky of settlement in the occupied Arab territories,
and it will certainly not be the last. Indeed the Council considered the subject in the past and adopted
resolution 446 (1979), in which it established a threemember Commission to examine the situation relating
to the settlements in the Arab territories occupied
since 1967, including Jerusalem. The Council met in
July last year, considered the first report of that
Commission and consequently adopted its resolution 452 (1979). In that resolution the Council, which
reflects international opinion, called upon “the
Government andpeople of Israel to cease,on anurgent
basis, the establishment, construction and planning
of settlements in the Arab territories occupied since
1967, including Jerusalem” and requested the Commission to continue its work.
95. What we are now facing is a situation in which
the Israeli authorities are in total defiance of this
resolution and other previous ones. The occupying
authorities do not hide their policy of continuing their
planning for more expansion and more settlementsin
the occupied areas. I need no more evidence than the
conclusion reached by the Commission, as stated in
paragraph 45 of its second report, that
“ , , , the Commission has detected no evidence
of any basic positive change in Israel’s policy with
regard to the construction and planning of settlements in ,the Arab territories under occupation,
particularly in the West Bank of Jordan. On the
contrary, the Commission is of the view that that
policy has largely contributed to a deterioration of
the situation in the occupied territories and that it is
incompatible with the pursuit of peace in the area.”

89. Yugoslavia has been in solidarity with the victims
of aggression from the very outset-with all the Arab
countries and peoples, particularly the Palestinian
people-proceeding from the assumption that lack of
freedom in any part of the world threatens freedom
everywhere. Together with the other non-aligned countries, we have consistently advocated a peaceful,
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the
Middle East crisis on the aforementioned internationally accepted bases. We shall support every action
of the Council towards that end.

96. My colleagues from Jordan and the Palestine
Liberation Grganization have given the Council the
details [2199th meeting] about the recent events in
Al-Khalil, and I need not repeat what they have said.
What I want to state, and indeed to emphasize, is
that the actions taken by the occupying authority
are contrary to, and in violation of, all internattonal
laws and standards of conduct. They are also against
basic human rights. Nobody in the world except the
Zionist authorities applies collective punishment,
against the whole population of a town, for an un-

90. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from RusThe next speaker is the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

sian):

91. Mr. MANSOURI (Syrian Arab Republic):
I thank you very much, Mr. President, for having
given me the opportunity to speak in the Council.
11

specified murder committed by someone unknown.
That in itself is a violation of all international law
and treaties, It is a flagrant violation of the duties of
the occupying authorities, as defined by the Geneva
Conventions. Furthermore, one wonders about the
Israeli authorities’ claim to recognize the “historical”
rights of a few Jewish families to return to Al-Khalil,
under the pretext that they lived there 50 years ago,
when, at the same time, those authorities shamelessly
deny the same right of millions of Palestinians to
return to their homeland, where they lived for
centuries. Could that be called justice and equal treatment for equal human beings?Or is it something else?
I leave it to everyone’s logic and conscience to judge.
97. We share the view expressed by the Commission in its second report that the Israeli Government
has to bear responsibility for the settlement programme, which is in fact in the process of implementation and was prepared as a plan by the World Zionist
Organization-a plan to build 46 new settlementsin the
years 1979 to 1983. There is no doubt that what is
going on in Al-Khalil and other areas in the West Bank
is nothing more than the implementation of that plan.
98. We urge this body to consider carefully the
recommendations of the Commission and to adopt
effective measures to prevail on Israel to cease the
establishment of settlements in the occupied territories and to dismantle the existing settlements
accordingly. Unless Israel is forced to comply with
the Council’s resolutions and unless it gives up the
policy of occupation and expansion and the Zionist
plan for supremacy in the Middle East, security and
peace in that area, and in the world, will face a grave
threat,

the Commission has dealt with briefly in paragraphs42
to 44, inclusive, of its report. We think that the Coun.
cil should extend the mandate of the Commission aad
ask it to submit a new report on developments,
regardless of the fact that such a report will certainly
not solve the problems of the Middle East. We all
know that peace and stability in the Middle East
cannot be achieved if the essential requirements for
such peace and stability are not fulfilled; and those
requirements are: first, that there must be a total
Israeli withdrawal from all Arab territories Occupied
since 1967, and, secondly, that the Palestinian people
should be able to exercise their inalienable rights,
including their right to self-determination and to a
sovereign, independent State in their homeland,
101. We consider that all that is happening in the
Middle East is outside the framework of the United
Nations and, consequently, that it will not lead to any
peaceful settlement in that area. We consider the
Camp David agreements and the so-called peace
treaty between Israel and Egypt, and any other agreements that may emerge out of them, to be null and
void. Furthermore, we regard the denial of the Palestinian people’s inalienable rights an insult not only
to that people but to the Arab nation and to the United
Nations itself as well.
102. We call upon those who are impeding the fulfilment of this aim to seize the opportunity and cometo
recognize the reality of the existence of the Palestinian people and its right to self-determination.
103. Finally, in paragraph 54 of its report the Commission recommends that the Council

“adopt effective measures to prevail on Israel to
99. I should like to draw the Council’s attention to the
cease the establishment of settlements in occupied
territories and to dismantle the existing settlements
following points. First, the Israeli media have reported
time and again that General Sharon, Minister of
accordingly.”
Agriculture, has submitted to the Israeli Cabinet a
plan involving the establishment of four new settle- We feel that no measures could be effective in this
ments in the occupied Golan Heights. Secondly, situation except the application of Chapter VII of the
according to the Israeli newspaper Hu’aretz of 29 July Charter-and indeed it is high time to apply that
1979, the Israeli Minister of Education and Culture Chapter.
assured the “Council for the Israeli Settlements in the
Occupied Golan Heights” that his Government con- 104. The PRESIDEN:T (interpretation from Russiders the Golan Heights to be an indivisible part of siun): The next speaker is the representative of Cub
Israel. Thirdly, it is clear that Israel persists in its I invite him to take a place at the Council table andto
attempts to change the demographic composition of make his statement.
the Golan Heights, in contravention of United Nations
resolutions and the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, 105. Mr. ROA-KOURf (Cuba) (interpretation @In
as well as of other relevant conventions and regula- Spanish): Comrade President, I should like first of all
tions. In our view, this persistence confirms the to thank you and, through you, the members of the
systematic expansionist nature of a premeditated and Council for giving me the opportunity to take part is
organized policy by Israel.
the Council’s deliberations in my capacity as Chairman
of the Non-Aligned Group in the United Nations.
100. We feel that the Council should keep the matter I should like also to congratulate you most warmly
under constant consideration and that it should take the on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
necessary measures to keep the investigations going for this month. We are certain that your well-known
as a matter of importance-and especially the inves- diplomatic qualities of prudence and wisdom will
tigation of the problem of the water resources, which make it possible for the Council to carry through to

a SUCCeSSfUl conclusion its consideration of the matter
now before it-the claim for the exercise by the heroic
Palestinian people of its inalienable rights.
106. In its resolution 452 (1979), the Council calls
upon the Government and people of Israel to
“cease, on an urgent basis, the establishment,
construction and planning of settlements in the
Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
Jerusalem,”
Today we are meeting once again because the Zionist
authorities of Israel not only ignored that resolution
at the time but also continue to violate the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people in all the occupied territories and, most recently, in Al-Khalil. The fact that
they have changed the Arab name to “Hebron”
clearly shows the colonialist aims of Mr. Begin’s
henchmen.
107. On the other hand, it is worth remembering
that that haughty attitude on the part of a State which
claims membership in the United Nations and which
owes its very existence to General Assembly resolution 181(II) still persists in the main because the Council has been prevented from adopting the measures
provided for in the Charter and has taken no action on
Assembly resolutions 31120, 32140 and 33128 concerning the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.

monstrosity, whose sole aim is to impose the Zionist
State’s domination on the territories it has illegally
occupied since 1967, gives every detail, coldly
calculated to the last Israeli pound, of how the foreign
land is to be usurped and “de-Arabized” inch by inch,
As we fathom the motives and thoughts of those
calculating land-grabbers, we cannot but identify them
with the sinister desire for Leberwuum.
111. The.facts speak for themselves, Since 1967the
Israeli occupation authorities have implemented a
policy of depriving the Arab and Palestinian inhabitants of Gaza and the West Bank of their land
through the compulsory purchase of land and the
multiplication of Israeli settlements.The Government
of Israel has provided many material incentives for
settlers, including water, electricity, telephone service,
building materials and equipment, and means of
transport. Despite the shamefaceddenials of the Tel
Aviv Government, people are well aware of the close
co-operation between the military occupation forces
and the ultranationalist settlement group Gush
Emunim, and others of that ilk.

108, The international community must not forget
that peace in the Middle East can be attained only
through a comprehensive agreement, including, among
other things, the withdrawal of all Israeli troops from
the Arab and Palestinian territories occupied by Israel
since the act of aggression of 1967, recognition of the
inalienable right of that people to national sovereignty
and independence, and the right of the Palestinians to
return to their homes and their right to enjoy their
properties, in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
109. In looking at the situation in Al-Khalil we must
stress that we are not dealing with an isolated or
fortuitous incident. It is not by chance that the rights
of the Arab and Palestinian people in that plot of land
are being flouted and trampled under the heel of the
conqueror; rather it is the result of premeditated and
far-reaching actions that have been repeatedly condemned by the Palestine Liberation Organization, the
Non-Aligned Movement and the international community .
110. Less than a year ago, the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People alerted world public opinion and the United
Nations to the existence of a “master Plan” for t.he
development of settlements in the occupied ter&orles
of Gaza and the West Bank of the Jordan, drawn up
by Matityahu Drobles of the World Zionist Organization [see S/13582 of 22 October 19791. That
13

112. During the last 13 years a classic pattern of
colonial domination and exploitation has been established. That policy, should it persist in the future,
will reduce the territories’ economyto almostcomplete
dependence on the occupying Power, even after the
occupation ends. Add to that the constant interference in-indeed, suppression of-the so-called selfgovernment of those territories, the policy of systematic repression applied againstthe Arab population
-curfew, torture, demolition of buildings, arrests,
expulsions-and one will have an accurate picture of
Israel’s objective: the integration manu militari of the
occupied territories of Gazaand the West Bank of the
Jordan.
113. The fact that all that is taking place in explicit
violation of the fourth Geneva Convention and of the
relevant United Nations resolutions does not seemto
upset the digestion of some members of the Council
who are determined to run counter to the tide of
history.
114. The Sixth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Havana
in 1979 reaffirmed that nojust solution to the problem
of the hiddle East could be found or peace restored
to the region until a number of basic principles were
simultaneously applied in their entirety. Among them
were the following:
“All measurestaken by Israel in the Palestinian
and Arab territories sincetheir occupation, including
all arrangements, constructions, modifications *and
alterations designed to transform the pohtlcal,
cultural, religious, physical, geographic and demographic features, are illegal and null and void; and
“The establishment of colonies (settlements) in
the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied

bers of the Council not to continue disregarding the
just claims of the Palestine Arab people oppressed
by Israeli occupation. The vindication of its inalienable right to sovereignty, freedom and independence
is in their hands. The non-aligned countries and the
overwhelming majority of the Member States hope
that the Council will take the measures provided for in
the Charter and without delay and in all justice carry
out its fundamental responsibility to the community of
nations.

by Israel constitutes an illegal act which is null and
void and is an obstacle to peace. For this reason,
such colonies must be dismantled immediately and
no new ones allowed to be established.“4
Further,
“The Conference vigorously denounced Israel’s
exploitation of the natural resources of Palestine and
the occupied Arab territories and its violation of
the Hague and Geneva Conventions, and called
upon all States to take the necessary measures to
prevent any co-operation with Israel which might
enable it to continue its illegal exploitation of
those resources or obtain illicit profits from such
exploitation.

116. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Russian): The next speaker is the representative of Israel.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
117. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Reference has been made
this afternoon by various speakers to the Council’s
invitation to the Mayor of Hebron, Mr. Fahd Qawasma,
to participate in this debate.

“The Conference condemned Israel’s persistent
violation of the fundamental rights and freedoms of
the inhabitants of the occupied Palestinian and
Arab territories. It likewise condemned Israel’s
persistent policy of colonization and expulsion of
the indigenous Arab population; its alteration of the
physical, cultural, religious and demographic
features of the occupied territories; the destruction
of Arab homes; and the confiscation of Arab prop
erty in violation of the fourth Geneva Convention . . .

118. The members of the Council will wish to know
that Mr. Qawasma requested last week that he be
permitted to travel to Amman and then to proceed
from there to New York. On the morning of Friday,
22 February, Mr. Qawasma was informed that on this
occasion his request could not be granted.
119. That took place many hours before the Tunisian
representative made his request to the Council
concerning Mr. Qawasma. Accordingly, on Friday
afternoon here in New York, many hours after
Mr. Qawasma had been notified that his application
had been declined, it must have been clear to the
representative of Tunisia and all those behind him
that they were purposely engaged in a transparent
exercise of duplicity in the knowledge that Mr. Qawasma would be unable to come to New York.

‘L
.

.

.

“The Conference affirmed that the restoration of
Jerusalem to Arab sovereignty is an indispensable
condition for a durable peace . . .
“The Conference denounced the Zionist and
racist policy pursued by Israel, which is stubbornly
continuing to ignore the decisions of the international community and maintaining its military
occupation, engaging in terror and brutal oppression
against the Palestinian people . . .

“The Conference condemned the threat by the
United States to use the veto in the Security Council against any resolution concerning the implementation of the Palestinian people’s inalienable
national rights.‘ls

120. As I indicated in a letter to the SecretaryGeneral this morning, although Israel is under no obligation whatsoever to permit the residents of Judaea,
Samaria and the Gaza District to travel abroad, its
liberal policy in administering these territories has also
found expression in consistently facilitating free
movement of the local residents abroad, including
movement and travel to Arab countries which regard
themselves as being in a state of war with Israel.
Mr. Qawasma himself has been the beneficiary of this
liberal approach on numerous occasions and has been
permitted to travel extensively to various Arab countries, as well as to Europe and the United States.
However, the purpose of his intended trip on this
occasion would have been to lend support to Israel’s
avowed enemies in their ongoing and concerted
campaign of incitement and vilification and in this way
to aid and abet them in their unrelenting political
warfare against my country [S/13824, paru. 41,

115. As Chairman of the Group of Non-Aligned
Countries in the United Nations, I appeal to the mem-

121. I should like to make one or two further observations.

“The Conference invited the Security Council
to meet its responsibilities by imposing on Israel
the sanctions provided for in Chapter VII of the
Charter . . .
“The Conference expressed its regret that the
Security Council has not yet taken any decision
concerning the General Assembly recommendations . . .

14

122, As is well known, our enemies regard Judaea
and Samariaas territories “occupied” by Israel, as
the representative of Tunisia, for instance, stated
hereagainthis afternoon. According to their argument,
sinceIsrael is an “occupying Power”, it is bound by
the provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention of
1949,

international law without at the same time being
prepared to abide by the duties flowing from international law, Reciprocity is, as we all know, a cardinal
principle and cornerstone of international law.
Regrettably, lack of reciprocity, and duplicity, are
the guiding principles of Israel’s enemies in their
attitude towards my country.

123. The least one can expect is that those espousing
suchviews should make an effort at consistency. If
indeedIsrael’s conduct in Judaea and Samaria is
subjectto the fourth Geneva Convention, as is asserted
by them,I would invite our adversaries to indicate
underwhich provision of that Convention they claim
the existenceof a duty for Israel to permit travel
abroadfor the residents of Judaea and Samaria. In
fact, they know full well that there is no provision
in the Geneva Convention requiring that the movementof the local population outside the territories be
permitted.As I have already mentioned before, Israel
asa rule facilitates such movement in both directions,
includingmovement to Arab countries that regard
themselvesas being in a state of war with Israel. In
particular,Israel facilitates pilgrimages to Mecca and
familyvisits in both directions. However, this liberal
policy of Israel’s cannot serve as justification for
demands
to be made on Israel in excess of the provisionsof the Geneva Convention.
3
124, The only logical construction that Lan be placed
onthe request by Tunisia that the Council invite the
Mayorof Hebron is, therefore, that the representative
ofTunisia,as the representative of the Arab States on
theCouncil, no longer regards Judaea and Samaria as
territories“occupied” by Israel. It is somewhat bizarre
thoughthat such a significant shift in Arab foreign
policyshould have been announced in such a roundabout way. I therefore invite the representative of
Tunisiato state plainly and clearly that his country,
andthe other countries he represents here, no longer
regardIsrael as an “occupying Power” in Judaea
andSamaria,and I assure him that the implications of
sucha statement will be given earnest consideration
by my Government,

126. In their statements and letters to the Council,
Arab representatives and their supporters have
made a concerted effort to distort and misrepresent
the questions concerning Hebron.

125. The question of the invitation of the Mayor of
Hebronagain highlights the duplicity and hypocrisy of
the Arab States, characteristics of their approach
towardsIsrael ever since our accession to statehood
ia 1948.In the last 32 years, Arab Governments have
violatedevery conceivable universal treaty, convention, Charter principle and requirement in relation to
Israel.The explanation offered by them has been that
theyregard themselves as being in a state of war with
Israel.This, incidentally, has not prevented them from
systematicallyviolating even the laws of war in respect
OfIsrael. But while they piously claim for themselves
theprivileges of the international law of war, they seek
to impose on Israel the duties that go even beyond
thoseof the international law of peace. They should,
of course, remember that no State can invoke in its
favour benefits deriving from certain provisions of

127. Hebron has always been a central link in the
unswerving attachment of the Jewish people to its
homeland. The Hebrew Patriarchs were buried almost
4,000 years ago in the Cave of Machpela in Hebron,
and ever since that time their burial ground has been
hallowed and venerated by the Jewish people. Apart
from two short periods following expulsions by the
Romans and the Crusaders, Jews lived continuously
in the city for almost three millennia. In, recent
centuries, it was a community consisting largely of
pious scholars and students,This peaceful and defenceless Jewish community was massacred by an Arab
mob in 1929,when the forerunners of the present PLO
terrorists turned their fanatical hatred against it. The
attackers did not spare women, children, or the
elderly. They destroyed Jewish houses, razed
synagogues and burned sacred Torah scrolls. In 1948,
with the invasion and illegal occupation of Judaea and
Samaria by Jordan, the entire region became Judenrein, and any Jewish presence was prohibited.
128. On 5 June 1967, King Hussein spurned an
official message from Israel delivered through the
United Nations intermediary in which he was invited
to stay out of the six-day war which began that day.
Instead, the Jordanian occupiers of Judaeaand Samaria
opened fire all along the armistice lines with Israel and,
as a result of their renewed aggression, lost control
of Judaea and Samaria. Since 1967, experience has
shown that Jews and Arabs can live together peacefully in Hebron and elsewhere with a modicum of
mutual accommodation and without encroaching on
each other’s rights.
129. The enemies of peace and reconciliation, whose
aim is to torpedo any peaceful Arab-Israel coexistence,
have deliberately created incidents in Hebron and
elsewhere in order to further their belligerent designs.
130. What happened in Hebron on 30 January is a
prime example of their despicable modus operandi.
On that day, Yehoshua Sloma, a young theological
student in neighbouring Kiryat Arba, was fatally
wounded while shopping in a market at the centre of
Hebron. As a result, a curfew was imposed by the
authorities on the immediate area of the crime. The
purpose of the curfew was to facilitate the search
for those responsible for the murder. Contrary to
allegations made here, the curfew was not imposed on

15

the population as a form of collective punishment,
and the greater part of the city as well as the bulk of
its population were not affected. The curfew was lifted
every day in order to allow residents in the curfew
area to shop for food, In the city as a whole, except
for the limited curfew area, life went on as usual, It
is complete nonsense to suggest that food did not reach
the city and its residents. Incidentally, the assertion
made by the representative of Tunisia to the effect
that the curfew is still in force is absolutely untrue.
It was lifted more than two weeks ago. Apparently
news of this kind does not reach the representative
of Tunisia with the same rapidity as that relating to
Mr. Qawasma’s travel plans.

135. Those are the facts. But how many States in this
Organization care about the facts?
136. In the light of all the above I repeat that this
debate and the elements being injected into it are
nothing but an attempt by the enemies of peace ta
frustrate the peace process and to divert attention
from the real threats to international peace and
security. The whole exercise is transparent, and the
racism being displayed with regard to Hebron is
monstrous.
137. The members of the Council surely cannot let
this pass without reneging on the primary responsibility entrusted to them for the maintenance of international peace and security in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter. This debate
flies in the face of the Council’s mandate and all that
the Charter stands for.

131. I should add that during the curfew Moslem
religious observances were carried on as usual in all
parts of the city, except in the mosque erected over
the Cave of Machpela, known as the Mosque of
Abraham, on the edge of the curfew area.

138. We reserve our right to speak again to address
ourselves to other aspects raised in the course of
this debate.

132, It has been falsely reported to the Council that
hundreds of residents were detained by the authorities.
To be sure, some suspects were detained for investigation, but their number was limited. Most of them
were released immediately, and all were released as
soon as their investigation was completed. Reports
that Arab residents were driven from their homes attest
only to the unbridled fantasy of their authors.

139. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The next speaker is the representative of Jordan,
upon whom I now call.
140. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): I shall not be drawn
into engaging in calculated tactics of diversionary
calumnies, extraneous, peripheral and diabolical
irrelevancies, particularly when they are directed
against me, as happened last Friday. For that is
precisely what the Israeli representative would want
me to do.

133. Another recent incident in Hebron has been
distorted and twisted in a way typical of the mendacious propaganda techniques of the Arab rejectionists. Arab youths started hurling rocks at Jewish
worshippers who had prayed at the Cave of Machpela.
One of the rocks hit an elderly Arab man in the eye
and blinded him. As often occurs in rejectionist
propaganda, this innocent victim of Arab religious
intolerance was touted as an example of so-called
Israeli brutality.

141. Last year, Mr. Blum awarded me what he
called a very low credibility rating. I am glad I was
not running for any office. Besides, he did not attribute
that rating to any of those credible specialized agencies
in the business such as the Gallup Poll, the Harris
Poll, the CBS-New York Times random polls or any
other polls. I am not aware that the United Nations
has a set-up for such an evaluation. But I do know
that the Security Council, which does not engage in
popularity polls but in the serious and judicious
assessmentof situations affecting peace, security and
the survival of nations, endorsed all the facts and
figures which we presented in March 1979 on the
magnitude of the Israeli despoliation of the occupied
Palestinian and other Arab territories, not only after
examining all the documentation presented to it but
also after dispatching a Council Commission that
examined the situation in the area.

134. It has also been falsely alleged that the rights of
Moslems to worship at the Mosque of Abraham have
been revoked. The arrangements to facilitate
worship by Moslems and Jews remain unchanged.
These arrangements were brought to the knowledge
of the Council by my predecessor in his letter dated
1 November 1976 [S/12223]. Under these arrangements, Moslems are able to pray in their area 24 hours
a day, every day of the week. Jews are able to pray
in their areas on weekdays and on the Jewish Sabbath
as well as on Jewish holidays, in accordance with
accepted hours of prayer. It should be noted that on
Fridays-the Islamic special day of prayer-Moslems
are able to pray throughout the whole day. Jews,
on the other hand, are limited to evening prayers to
greet the coming Jewish Sabbath. These arrangements
were established with the greatest consideration for
Moslem religious sentiments and without affecting or
infringing on Moslem rights, That these arrangements
have been working to the satisfaction of all sides in
itself refutes the burden of the charges in the “information” supplied by the Islamic Conference.

142. The Commission’s findings, endorsed unanimously by the Council in resolution 452 (1979), were
practically identical with the facts and figures that we
had presented-namely, an Israeli colonization of the
occupied territories, up to a year ago, in the magnitude
of more than 27 per cent of the total area. If ratings
of credibility are to be set by independent and objective
16

-.-

inquiry, then the rating of my Government, on whose
behalf I spoke, was an unmitigated 100per cent, And
that applies equally to my colleagues who presented
their facts and figures in the complaint.

techniquesapplied by aruthless and heedlessaggressor
while the world watched with incredulity, ambivalence
and murky vision,
149. Today the international community has no
excuse for either ambivalence or masterly inaction.
Will the world watch with indifference the systematic
cannibalization of the Palestinian homeland and
people while the evidence of it is massive, incontrovertible and officially conceded as such by the
Israeli hierarchy responsible for that act of national
genocide perpetrated against the Palestinian people?
The question is: to be or not to be, and any other
language would be evading or sugar-coating the
basic issue of Palestiniansurvival.

143: If I were in the representative of Israel’s place,
my only recourse would have been to withdraw from
the credibility race, for he must have found himself
in a terribly untenable and discredited situation, and
that is hardly edifying to any self-respecting individual.
14.4, TO my astonishment-or was it astonishment?the Israeli representative attempted last Friday to cast
aspersions on our updating of the already established
facts and figures. The 27.1 per cent Israeli colonization
had jumped to 31.4 per cent. In a six-month period,
April to October, land confiscations were the equivalent of 15per cent extra, not to mention the substantial
increases between October and today,

150. A few days ago His Majesty King Hussein paid
an official visit to Romania, after which a joint cornmuni@b was issued that dealt with various aspects
of the current international situation, PresidentNicolae
Ceaugescuand King Hussein, in their deliberations on
the Middle East, rearmed the fact that the serious
situation prevailing in that area stemmed from the
continuance of Israeli occupation of the Arab territories since 1%7and Israel’s refusal to abide by United
Nations resolutions. The communiquC likewise
assertedthat the Palestinianquestionwas at the core of
the conflict in the Middle East. The two leaders were
in agreement that a solution must be achieved by
immediate and total Israeli withdrawal from all the
Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
Jerusalem, and recognition of the national rights of
the Palestinianpeople and their right to self-determination and to decide their own future, including the
creation, within the framework of Security Council
and General Assembly decisions, of an independent
State.

145. The position of the Israeli representative is, to
say the least, truly pathetic as he is assigned the task
of reconciling the irreconcilable, of refuting in this lofty
hall what his superiors not only concede but publicly
profess to be their official policy-namely, colonization
of the whole of Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied
lands. Should he not ask his Government to instruct
him as to how he and his Government should confront
this fundamental dichotomy before the Council and
stop engaging in sophistry and perjury?
146. The facts of the case are as simple as they are
awesome. Subsequently to resolutions 446 (1979) and
452 (1979), which had forcefully warned Israel of the
disastrous consequences of its colonization policy, the
occupation authorities went full speed ahead in confiscating additional lands and water, thereby augmenting their seizures to a stunning 1.7 million dunums
in Jerusalem and the West Bank alone out of a total
area of 5.5 million dunums. That makes an Israeli
confiscation of almost one third of the tiny remnants of
the Palestinian homeland. And where did we get our
figures? From official and unofficial Israeli sources,
from the very people whose lands, property and water
have been foreclosed and from the landscape of the
Holy Land itself, which is the victim of ruthless
emasculation, despoliation and plunder.

151. The communiqu6 expressedthe profound concern of the two leaders resulting from the illegal praCtices that Israel was perpetrating in the occupied Arab
territories and, in particular, the policy of colonization
and the violation of the historical and cultural legacy,
as we11as the racist Israeli practices against the Arab
civilians and their expulsion from their lands, with a
view to altering the demographic composition of the
occupied lands.
152. The CommuniquBcalled for the intensification
of the efforts to bring about a just and lasting solution
to the problem of the Middle East, with the PafiiCiPation of all the parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation Organization, within the framework
ofthe United Nations andon the basisOf it!? reSOhtiOnS.

147. What we are talking about here is the very
survival of the Palestinian people in their ancestral
homeland. We are not engaged in any exercise of selfflagellation or scourging.
148. In the past, the Palestinian people found themselves in dizzying whirlpools and twisters; they were
subjected to calculated and prearranged acts of aggression-including, incidentally, what happened in l%7designed to bring about their uprooting and eventual
perdition; and they were faced with deception,
concealment and the widespread application of
organized violence before and after the emergence
of the racist Israeli entity. These were the tools and

153. Regarding the international arena, the two
leaders stressedthe necessityof respecting the sovereignty and national independence of all States and
refraining from interfering in the internal affairs of
States, directly or indirectly. The two leaders also
expressed their concern over the division of the world
into “spheres of influence”-+ division that does not
17

_.

serve the common interests of the States of the world,
and I mean all the States of the world.

of an unspeakable explosion in the years or decades
to come.

154. The Romanian-Jordanian communique emphasized the imperative of strengthening international
solidarity and detente and of striving towards the
limitation of armaments. It also stressed the importance
of strengthening unity of action among the non-aligned
States and the States of the developing world. And
last but not least, the communique stressed the
necessity of supporting the United Nations as the
most efficacious framework for finding solutions to
international disputes.

159. Now, even though I had promised myself not to
become involved in a discussion on distortions and
irrelevancies, I feel that I must make a few remarks
in answer to what the representative of Israel hastold
the Council today.
160. The representative of Israel has shed crocodile
tears over the sad riots that engulfed the whole of
Palestine, including Hebron, in 1929. The old generation knows what was behind that, but we should ask
this: Who ignited that conflagration, the first of its
kind to happen after centuries of coexistence between
the Jewish and Palestinian inhabitants in peace and
tranquillity? The rioting was ignited by provocative
and aggressive armed attacks carried out by fanatic
Zionist gangs against Al-Buraq Al-Sharif, the western
wall of the Al-Haram Al-Sharif area.

155. This is the official position of Jordan on the
Middle East situation, the crux of which is the restoration of Palestinian national rights. One cannot very
well uproot the majority of the 4 million Palestinians,
strangle the remnants in what is left of their homeland
and continue relentlessly to do more of the same and
then expect the vast masses of our turbulent region to
forget the burning centrality of their concerns and
concentrate instead on the geo-political or geostrategic dimensions in the grandiose designs of the
game of nations. Perhaps Israel regards itself as a
super-Power and could devote a good deal of its attention to this problem. This is the legitimate concern of
the super-Powers, and all that the smaller nations can
do is to be consistent in their assessment of the situation, declare what they think is right or wrong,
depending on the situation, and give whatever considered opinion they believe would be conducive to
concord, world peace, justice and harmony.

161. An international committee of the League of
Nations was set up at the request of the British
Government to investigate the situation. It was
presided over by a former Swedish Minister for Foreign
Affairs and it concluded categorically that it was the
Zionists who had started the attack and tried to violate
the accepted status and proprietary rights of the area.
I might remind members of the Council that, on the
basis of documentation, that committee came to the
conclusion that the entire area, the pavements and
the properties, belonged to the Palestinians rather
than to the Israelis, even though it conceded to the
Israelis the right to worship at the Wailing Wall.

156. No nation, including the super-Powers, has a
penchant for world destruction, and it is our duty as
non-aligned nations, wherever and whenever we can,
to urge all sides to put out the fires that will inevitably
engulf us all. We have no presumptions or claims other
than to ensure the very survival of the Palestinian
people.

162. With regard to the Holy Places, I am sure that
representatives will find in the records of the United
Nations that the Arab States then directly concerned
gave a solemn pledge to permit unlimited accessto all
the Holy Places, even during the armistice agreement and before the achievement of peace. It was the
Israelis-as the records, which I am willing to produce,
demonstrate-it was the Israeli representatives who
refused and requested that the question be deferred.

157. If there has been a diminution of the effectiveness of the United Nations, believe me, it is the result
of the consistent and persistent audacious Israeli
defiance of United Nations injunctions, the Charter and
the rule of law. Such an attitude can only be contagious, particularly if the United Nations fails to do
anything about it. The Israeli aggressors must be made
fully aware that they cannot with impunity destroy the
very fabric and foundations upon which the United
Nations has been built. Indeed, such defiance
exemplified by a deliberate, calculated and selfconfessed crime, should disqualify Israel from
membership of an esteemed world body for which it
has nothing but disdain.

163. Why did the Israelis request that the question
be deferred? Because they did not wish to repatriate
the refugees to their homes in West Jerusalem andthey
did not wish to restore electricity to what remained
of our part of Jerusalem. They refused to restore the
water supply and the people of Jerusalem spent six
months almost without water except for that stored in
wells. They preferred all that cruelty to performing
their religious worship. If they had attached any
importance to questions of religion, they would
certainly have made things work. We were more than
willing to do so, and we so declared openly, as the
records of the United Nations will show.

158. We have to face the fact that the Palestinian
and Arab peoples of the occupied territories represent
the most elemental imperatives of survival. Shall we
watch them go down the drain? If we do, then we
would merely be postponing the inevitable: the horrors

164. The representative of Israel has made a mistake
regarding the holiest Islamic shrine, namely the AIHaram Al-Ibrahimi Mosque, which was ,built more
18

than 1,000 years ago-possibly 1,300 years ago. The
Israeli representative must be made to understand
that Abraham, through his son Ishmael, is the forefather of all the Arabs. Moreover, Abraham is
venerated by all Moslems as the father of all prophets,
It is &i integral part of our religion. The point that
1made last Friday was that not since the Middle Ages
had the adherents of one religion converted the Holy
Place of the adherents of another religion into something other than what it was, as the Israelis have done
on a sizeable and substantial scale in the Al-Haram
Al-Ibrahimi Mosque. They have literally transformed
it into a synagogue.

hands. It was then that the Jordanian army entered,
in the dawn of 18 May. They entered the city because
they wanted to stave off the genocide and uprooting
which had befallen their Palestinian brethren elsewhere. Was that occupation-or was it an imperative
and humane act of salvation? Would anybody in the
world have been happy if 80,ooOhelpless civilians
with no armed force whatsoever, except the few rifles
and bullets that they had bought on the black market
at extremely high prices which would have ruined
even the richest country in the world, had run out of
ammunition? What else could the people of Jerusalem
have done but send a delegation of their national
committee to ask for assistancefrom the Jordanian
army?

165. The representative of Israel has again talked
about the illegal Israeli occupation of what he illegally
called Judaea and Samaria. Of course we have all
become accustomed to wily Israeli distortions concerning Jordan. Even though it is repetitious on my
part to reply, I feel in duty bound to do so at this
moment.

168. Of course, the representative of Israel has
always alleged that Jewish religious siteswere deliberately destroyed in the Jewish quarter. Incidentally,
60 per cent of the Jewish quarter in the Old City of
Jerusalem is owned by Palestinian Arabs, A month
or two before the end of the Mandate, the Israeli
forces planted 1,000 of Israel’s troops in the Jewish
quarter, against the specific pleas-I repeat: against
the specific pleas-of the Jewish inhabitants of that
quarter. They did not want that quarter to be the
scene of fighting. But the fighting which Israel started.
resulted in the unfortunate destruction not only of
Jewish sites but, equally of Islamic and Christian
sites. One of them-the Al-Haram Al-Sharif areatook years to repair.
169. I think that I taxed the Council’s patience
sufficiently with my long statementon Friday. I would
not wish to repeat what I said then; I wish to make
only one or two comments in conclusion.
170. With regard to the Mayor of Hebron,
Mr, Qawasma, in a senseI feel relieved-and I really
mean this-that the Israeli authorities have denied
him permission to come to New York and testify
before the Council. We know that if he had come
here, he would not have been allowed to return to his
homeland. We would much rather have him there as
the Mayor of Hebron than have him come here and
find himself in the position of a refugee-another
refugee, to be added to the 2 million that the Israelis
have uprooted from their homes.

166. As is well known, the Jordanian army was
stationed in the whole of Palestine-and I repeat, in
the whole of Palestine, including Haifa, Tel Aviv and
the heart of Jerusalem-throughout the Second World
War as part of the allied effort and forces. It could
have remained there. It was in charge of the Alamein
camp, one of the most strategic posts in Jerusalem.
It was in charge of Katamon and it was in charge of
all the strategic spots, both in Jerusalem and in the
rest of Palestine. It could have remained there. But
out of deference to the United Nations resolution on
the creation of a Palestinian Arab State alongside rt
Jewish State, with a corpus sepurutum for Jerusalem
[resolution 181 (IZ)], it withdrew promptly and to the
last soldier on 14 May 1948, upon the termination of
the British Mandate. Contingents of Jordanian troops
-and believe it or not, there were no more than
600 riflemen-heeded the urgent pleadings of the
80,000 or so crowded and beleaguered people of
Jerusalem, of West Jerusalem as well as the Old City
because the uprooted inhabitants of West Jerusalem
had taken refuge in the Old City. Those people had
been subjected for three days and nights on end to
incessant attack and bombardment in the Old City,
in which the Israelis used tanks, rockets and every
weapon that they had in their possession. One Will
find this in the memoirs of all the older generation of
Israeli leaders.

171. The rejection of a Council reqUeSt
iS Of COUm
much more an affront to the Council, the highest
executive organ of the United Nations, than an affront
to the Arab States which the representative Of Israel
calls the rejectionists and the haters of peace. What
peace? The Israelis have already devoured 31 per cent
of the land, If this question is again brought before
the Council two years from now, the figure may well
have increased to 50 per cent.

167. When Mr. Ben Gurion was trying to defend
himself concerning what he did in the case of Jemsalem, he said that they had sent their best forces,
namely the Palmach, to try to wrest in from the
FalestiniaIl Arabs, but they could not. But the PoPulation ran out of ammunition on 18 May. They did not
have a single bullet. We used to pay a shilling in those
days for a bullet. And the last attack by the Israeli
aggressors, even though this was recognized as a Part
of the Palestinian Arab State, was turned back bY
whatever dynamite the Palestinians still had in their

172, So let the aggressorexplain to the Council what
his Government’s plans are for the future Of the pdestinians, What are its calculations? Into what sea
does it want to throw the Palestinians?
19

173. The PRESIDENT (interprefation from Russiarz): I now call on the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization.

Moslem Caliph who looked for that Rock of Moriah
on which Abraham almost offered up his son as a
sacrifice. On that rock-which was at that time a real
garbage dump-the Caliph ordered the erection of one
of the most beautiful mosques, a mosque which still
stands today, a mosque that the Zionists are trying,
with their excavations, to demolish. Again, it was the
Moslem rulers who ordered the building, in Hebron
on the Macphela Cave, of the large Al-Ibrahami
Mosque. That was done out of veneration, not out of
contempt. So if anyone has been keen on venerating
the Patriarchs, starting with Abraham, it has been the
Moslems-beginning with those who came to Jerusalem and to Hebron in the seventh century.

174. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
Listening to twisted logic-especially when it is used
by racists-is sometimes an interesting exercise. Over
the weekend I watched a seven-hour film on something
called “Our Hitler”. In that film, the spirit of Hitler
apparently says, “If it were not for Hitler, there would
not have been a State of Israel”, or “Greater Israel”,
or something like that. That is the twisted logic of the
racists and fascists. I say “twisted” because we have
just heard the representative of the Zionist racists
state that the enemies of Israel refer to the West Bank
and Gaza as “occupied territories”. But I think that
the entire international community has repeatedly
asserted that those territories that have been occupied
since 1967are illegally occupied. Are we to understand
from the statement of the representative of the Zionist
racists that the world is the enemy of Israel? Or is
he confirming the fact that Zionism is the enemy of the
world and that the Zionists are the enemies of the
world? That is the kind of twisted mentality which
the Zionist racists have.

177. We have been told that a theological student
was assassinated in Hebron. Perhaps he was a theological student-but he was in Hebron, on a spot that
had been arbitrarily confiscated from its own people.
There is every indication that he was one of the
soldiers of occupation. As I said in my statement on
Friday, the soldiers of occupation are legitimate
targets for the legitimate resistance of the people
under occupation.
178. My colleague from Jordan has already explained
what happened in 1929. I would only repeat what
I said the other day. Why did all this happen in 1929,
after centuries during which Arabs and Jews, and
Christians, Moslems and Jews, had not only coexisted
but lived together? I come from Jerusalem and at my
age I have had personal experience of living together
with my Jewish and Moslem friends. We all went to
school together. We had our youth group. What
brought us to this situation of hostility? It was the
Zionist plan to uproot us and evict us from our homes
that made enemies of us.

175. The representative of the Zionist racists stated
also that Israel was under no obligation to permit the
free travel of the Mayor of Hebron. On 10 December
1948 the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was
adopted. Article 13, paragraph (2), of that Declaration
reads as follows: “Everyone has the right to leave any
country, including his own, and to return to his
country”. Does that not apply to Israel? Does that not
apply to the forces of occupation? Does that not apply
to a Palestinian who is living under foreign occupation
and domination? Mayor Qawasma wanted to leave his
country, his town, to come here and respond to an
invitation from the Council, and then, of course, to
return to his country. Yet we are told that the forces
of occupation are under no obligation to permit him to
travel. Naturally-for in the territories under occupation, 2 million Palestinians have been taken hostage.
The world talks about 5 hostages or 50 hostages. But
there are 2 million Palestinians who have been living
as hostages for years. The Security Council and the
rest of the international community have not raised the
same hue and cry about them; they have not expressed
their determination to put an end to that situation,
Yet, 2 million Palestinians are held hostage by the
Zionist movement and its supporters-particularly
the United States-in order to achieve their aim.
And that aim can be achieved in only one way: through
genocide, the physical elimination of the Palestinians.

179. And, now, why prevent Qawasma from coming
here? All he would have done here in the Council
would have been to testify about what exactly
happened in Hebron, why it happened and maybe to
express the aspirations of his own people. But then the
Commission established under resolution 446 (1979)
was not permitted to investigate the situation there nor
was the elected Mayor permitted to come here. And
we are told that we are enemies of Israel. Again,
I repeat: it is Zionist Israel which is the enemy of the
world, of peace and of religion.
180. Mr. ESSAAFI (Tunisia) (interpretution
from
French): I should like to go back to some remarks that
the representative of Israel attributed to me and speak
of two points that he presented differently from the way
in which I presented them.

176. We have been told that the Jews have an
unswerving attachment to the Holy Land, be it Hebron
or Jerusalem. No one denies that. The Holy Land is
venerated not only by Jews, but also by Christians and
Moslems. I do not claim that I can give lessons in
history, but I would say this: after the Moslem conquest of Jerusalem in the seventh century, it was the

181. First of all, the invitation to the Mayor of AlKhalil was extended by the Council. Confusion is
deliberately being sown by the representative of Israel
when he refers to the Geneva Convention which we
cited in our statement in speaking about Israeli
Government repression of the Arab population in the
20

occupied territories. The invitation sent to Mayor
Qawasma is quite a different matter. The Mayor has
been prevented from coming here to participate in a
discussion that concerns precisely the situation
prevailing in the occupied Arab territories, Elsewhere
we spoke of how the Geneva Convention had been
violated by the Israeli authorities and described at
length the behaviour of those authorities towards the
Arab population. When he speaks of duplicity, I think
that all of us here are aware of the announcement
of the Reuters despatch made by ,therepresentative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization, who reported
that the Mayor was being prevented from joining
us here in New York. The duplicity is not on our side;
it is on the other.
182. Statements about the curfew were also attributed
to me. The representative of Israel claims that I said
that the c&few was still in force. I shall read out the
paragraph as I said it to the Council, and the record
is there to prove who is telling the truth and who is
distorting it. I said:
6‘
for days the population [of this town] has
been ‘subjected” -1 repeat “has been subjected”to a particularly stringent curfew. Collective sanctions have been imposed on them because of the
murder of an Israeli soldier.” [See para. 67 above.]
I said “a e’tP sournise” in good French and everyone
understands that that does not mean the curfew is
necessarily still in force, as the representative of Israel
has claimed, I should like to leave it to members to
draw the appropriate conclusion; and the text is available to them.
183. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from RusThe representative of Israel has asked to
speak in exercise of his right of reply. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

186. Let me address myself tonight only to one or
two Points raised in what he erroneously termed a
statement, He asked-rhetorically, I presume-who
started the pogroms of 1929. The answer is simple:
they were started by the same people who started the
riots of 1920 and the riots of 1936. More specifically,
all those riots and acts of violence were started by
the notorious Haj Amin Al-Husseini, the so-called
Grand Mufti of Jerusalem, who, during the Second
World War, having first participated in the abortive
pro-Nazi coup d’e’tat of Rashid Ali Al-Khailani in
Iraq, then escapedto Nazi Germany, where he actively
participated in the extermination of Jews, He was
wanted as a war criminal in Nuremberg after the war,
SO that man and his supporters instigatedthe riots and
the pogroms of 1929.To the present day heremains the
mentor of the terrorist organization known as the
PLO.
187. The representative of the PalestinianArab State
of Jordan tried again to explain away the illegality of
the Jordanian aggression of 1948. We have been
through this before, but I have no choice but to set
the record straight again.
188. With the termination of the Mandate over Palestine on 14 May 1948, the armies of seven Arab
States,including the Transjordan Arab Legion, illegally
crossed the international boundaries in clear violation
of general international law and in breach of the
Charter, which prohibits the use or even the threat of
force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State. The armed aggressionOF
those Arab armies was aimed at crushing the fledgling
State of Israel, and the Governments which dispatched
them had the effrontery to makeformal announcements
of their illegal action to the Security Council.

sian):

189. Referring specifically to the communicationSent
by Transjordan to the Council, the representative Of
the United States stated in the Council that the position of the Ring of Transjordan was characterizedby:

184. Mr. BLUM (Israel): We have been maintaining
all along that the debate staged here, like those staged
last March and July, has as its primary purpose the
obstruction of the peace process in the Middle East.
If there was any need for evidence to substantiate
this fact, it was amply provided today in the statement
of the observer of the new League of Arab States,who
openly lamented the conclusion of the peace treaty
between Egypt and Israel and the various steps taken
to normalize the relations between the two COuntflesWe should all be grateful to Mr. Maksoud for having
so unambiguously clarified the anti-peace objectives
of the sponsors of this debate.

“a certain contumacy towards the United Nations
and the Security Council . . .
“*..

185. As I stated earlier this afternoon, I shall ask
to be allowed to speak again. I shall then take the
opportuni,ty to expose again the lack of credibihty of
the representative of the Palestinian Arab State of
Jordan.

“Therefore, here we have the highest type of
evidence of the international violation of the law:
the admission by those who are committing this

“The contumacy of that reply to the security
Council is the very best evidence of the illegal
purpose of this Government in invading Palestine
with armed forces and conducting the war which it
is waging there. It is against the peace; it is not on
behalf of the peace. It is an invasion with a definite
purpose.
‘L. . .

violation.”
21

[302nd meeting, pp. 41-43.1

The representative of the United States also stated on
that occasion that the communications sent to the
Council by Transjordan and by the other Arab countries whose armies had invaded Palestine

Quarter of the Old City with mortar shells and seized
the eastern part of the city, including the historic
walled section which contains religious shrines holy
to Jews, Christians and Moslems.

“are the,best evidence we have of the international
character of this aggression”. [Ibid., p. 41.1

194. Between 1948 and 1967 Jerusalem was a city
cut in two by barbed wire and minefields. In flagrant
violation of the 1949 General Armistice Agreement,
Jordan barred access by Jews to their Holy Places
and cultural institutions. Further, the Jordanian
Government began to eliminate systematically every
trace of Jerusalem’s Jewish past. Fifty-eight synagogues-some of great antiquity, like the 700-year-old
Hurva Synagogue-were wantonly destroyed and
desecrated. Those that were not razed to the ground
were converted into toilets, stables and henhouses
filled with dung-heaps, garbage and carcasses. In the
process, hundreds of holy Torah scrolls and books,
reverently preserved for generations, were plundered
and burned to ashes. On the Mount of Olives, a
hallowed spot for Jews for centuries, 38,000 of the
50,000 tombstones in the ancient Jewish burial ground
were torn up, profaned, broken into pieces and used
as flagstones, steps and building materials for public
latrines and Jordanian army barracks. Large areas of
the cemetery were levelled and converted into parking
areas and gas stations. Through the devastated
remains of the graves, the Jordanian Government cut
an asphalt road to provide a short cut to a new hotel
built irreverently on the top of the Mount of Olives,

190. The representative of the Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic told the Council on the same occasion that the purpose of the armed intervention in the
internal affairs of Palestine was [“to destroy the
State of Israel by force of arms and to bombard the
peaceful cities of Israel under the pretext of restoring
order” [307th meet&, p. 131.
191. The representative of the Soviet Union pointed
out, again on the same occasion, that:
“The USSR delegation cannot but express surprise at the position adopted by the Arab States in
the Palestine question, and particularly at the fact
that those States-or some of them, at least-have
resorted to such action as sending their troops into
Palestine and carrying out military operations aimed
at the suppression of the national liberation
movement in Palestine.” [2991h meeting, p. 7.1
Incidentally, the Soviet representative who made that
statement was none other than Mr. Andrei Gromyko,
and the national liberation movement he was referring
to is none other than Zionism, the national liberation
movement of the Jewish people.

195. During that entire period, as these foul acts of
desecration were being perpetrated against placesholy
to the Jewish people, the world remained silent. When,
may I ask, was there a Security Council meeting while
synagogues were burned, Jewish graves defiled and
Jewish shrines closed off?

192. The violation of the international boundaries of
Palestine by the Arab armies having constituted an
act of armed aggression, the consequent illegal occupation by them of any territory previously forming part
of the Mandated Territory of Palestine could not
give rise to any legitimate claim of sovereignty+us
ex injuria non oritur.
Thus the purported “annexation” of Judaea and Samaria by Jordan in 1950 was
in violation both of general international law and of
the Israel-Jordan General Armistice Agreement of
194g6. It is not without interest to note in this connection that even the Arab League in 1950 threatened
Jordan with expulsion from its ranks because of that
purported “annexation”.

196. We have on previous occasions had opportunities to expose the machinations of the so-called
Palestine Committee, whose total partiality is now
notorious. For years now it has been disseminating,
as a pliant tool of the terrorist PLO, the latter’s lies
and fabrications. Since its former Chairman has
departed from the scene, its Acting Chairman has been
carrying the torch of mendacity or, I should perhaps
say, the torch of acting mendacity. Since he is a newcomer to his noble post, letd&nereveal to him that the
mere rehearsal of falsehoods does not turn them into
truths. We have duly noted his singular contribution
to world culture in his attempt to erase the name of
the city of Hebron, by which it has been known for
the past 3,000 years. His Cuban colleague managed to
outdo him by suggesting that Israel is trying to change
the name of the city. Perhaps he could tell us what the
name of the city is in Spanish. Is it possible that his
purpose here today has been to position himself so as
to improve his chances of being elected the next
Chairman of the Palestine Committee?

193. The representative of the Palestinian Arab State
of Jordan also referred to the wanton destruction by
the Transjordan Arab Legion of the Jewish Quarter in
the Walled City of Jerusalem. Jordan stands condemned as the first country in modern history to
bombard the Holy City. It will be recalled that it was
Jordan which, intent on destroying the new-born State
of Israel and on unlawfully grabbing territory for
itself, attacked Jerusalem in 1948, in clear defiance
of the principles of the Charter. It placed Jerusalem
under siege and opened fire on its inhabitants and on
its historic and religious sites. Jordanian forces
attacked and destroyed the densely populated Jewish

197. With the participation of Yugoslavia and Cuba
in this debate, we have been witnesses once again to
22

a remarkable spectacle. That spectacle has repeated
on numerous occasions in the past and has
reduced debates such as this to a Punch-an&Judy
show. The nature of the relations between these two
COUntI%?s at present iS common knowledge and
requires no elaboration. Indeed, they continue to
jockey for position and vie for leadership of different
segments within the non-aligned group. The competition between them is totally unconnected with the
subject of the present debate. But if one of them
chooses to leap into this debate, the other automatically
feels obliged to follow suit.

“Under nine years of Assad’s rule, the Syrian
People have experienced increased hardships and
the continuous deterioration in their living conditions.

itself

“In the absenceof genuinedemocratic processes,
rampant practices of corruption, extortion and
bribery have remained unchecked,
“Many patriotic Syrians, civilians and military
alike, who have criticized these policies or
opposed the practices of the Assad rbgime have
been silenced by arrest and incarceration. Amnesty
International has documented the many violations
of the human rights of political detaineesin Syria,
including the use of torture and the denial of the
prisoners’ right to a fair trial and open hearing,

198. With regard to Cuba, it is an affront that that
country should have the gall to venture any opinion
in public about “occupied territories”, for here we
have a country which has been ever ready over the
last two decades to put itself militarily and politically
at the disposal of one particular super-Power. It has
been ever ready to do that super-Power’s dirty work
and assist on its behalf in the occupation of countries in various continents. Indeed, so long as it has
Soviet troops on its shores, it might itself be regarded
as an occupied country. Furthermore, as a country
which was so aptly described in Le Monde of Paris
on 16 February 1979 as a “tropical gulag”, Cuba is
scarcely qualified as an arbiter on anything which
touches on fundamental human rights and the dignity
of man. Cuba would thus be better advised to set its
own house in order than to preach to others.

“It is the combination of these heightened tensions, increasing frustrations and the intensified discontent which ignited the recent wave of terrorist
actions in Syria. While regrettable in their futility
and directionless impact, these acts must however
be understood as mere reactions to the systematic
violence which the Assad rigime daily inflicts on
the Syrian people.
“While he held meetings to purportedly ‘listen
to the people’, Assad at the same time ordered a
military crackdown on dissenters.Public executions
have served to create a climate of fear in order to
discourageother types of dissentagainstthe regime.

199. It is extraordinary that Syria should have the
temerity to participate in this debate while it continues
to occupy a very large part of Lebanon. The motives
behind the recent Syrian moves in Lebanon were, at
the beginning, a little obscure. They have, however,
become abundantly clear in the last few days. The
remarkable announcement that Syria might withdraw
its troops from Lebanon was nothing but a trick
designed to guarantee its permanent occupation of that
country. There already have been numerous reports in
the media, corroborated by information from intelligence sources, indicating that such Syrian troop
movements as have taken place were nothing but the
regroupment by Syria of its forces with the aim, inter
alia, of better deploying them for a strike against
Israel. Moreover, in recent days it has emerged that
the object of the proposed defence agreement with
Lebanon is to turn the latter into a Syrian protectorateIn the short term, the proposed agreement will allow
Syria almost complete freedom of movement throughout Lebanon. It will also free Syria from its dependence on a mandate from other Arab countries to
maintain its occupation forces in Lebanon. Thus, in
the long term, it will enable Syria to realise its longstanding dream of incorporating Lebanon into a
Greater Syria.

“The undemocratic and bankrupt character of
the Syrian regime is clear.”
The man who spoke these words is none other than
the former Syrian Ambassador to the United Nations.
He said them in the course of the press conference
which he held in this very building on 27 December
1979,when he announcedhis resignation out of disgust
with the regime which he was required to represent.
201. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The representative of Jordan has asked to speak
in exercise of his right of reply. I now call on him.
202. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): I should like to make
a few remarks in passing, reserving my right to make
a more detailed refutation of the Israeli flagrant distortions which we have just heard.
203. The professor of law who today engagedin the
defence of lawlessnesshas once again indulged in the
usual distortions and misrepresentations with which
the Zionist movement has, since its inception, tried to
brainwash and mislead the world
204. He started his statement by asking a very
legitimate
question. He said: “Why is it that we have
brought the question of colonization once More before
the Security Council?” Our answer is very simple

200. In conclusion, I should like to recall some of the
words recently used by a prominent Arab diplomat to
describe the internal situation in Syria. He said:
23

refugees under General Assembly resolution 194
(III)? As we all know, not a single refugee was enabled
to return to his home. In the meantime, what the
Israelis did was to destroy hundreds and hundreds of
not only Palestinian Arab villages and towns but also
hundreds of holy sites throughout the length and
breadth of Palestine.

indeed, Not only was the debate called at our request
and behest, it was mandated by the Council itself when
it established the Commission of inquiry and decided
in one of the provisions of its resolution to keep the
situation under constant review. I need hardly repeat
that, since the Commission was established, the rate of
colonization has reached epidemic levels. It is indeed
a cannibalization of the Palestinian people, and the
Israelis are in a hurry to do it as quickly as they
possibly can. Therefore, the least that the Council
should do is to see whether its resolution has been
observed, or defied according to Israel’s custom, The
updating of information on events and the confiscation
of land clearly show the terrifying acceleration of
Israeli colonization.

208. As for the Act of Unity which we had between
the East Bank and the West Bank in 1950,it specifically
provided that that unity should in no way prejudice
the ultimate solution of the Palestine problem and that
the inhabitants of both banks of the River Jordan would
work together in concert for the restoration of full
Arab rights by all legal and legitimate means and in
accordance with United Nations resolutions.

205. In passing, I would again repeat that the riots of
1929 were ignited by Zionist hooligans. I remember
that very, very well. They attacked the Al-Buraq
area, the western wall of the Al-Haram Al-Sharif area,
to us the holiest place in Jerusalem. That led to widespread rioting throughout the length and breadth of
Palestine. It was then that the Palestinian Arabs
realized, after the normal and cordial relationship that
they and the Jews had had, that the Jews there were
out to uproot us. And that was the cause of the rioting,
as was proved by the international committee to
which the League of Nations assigned the task of
investigating the rioting.

209. Again, the representative of Israel spoke about
the aggression of the Arab armies. Let me remind him,
and let him deny it if he can, that even before the
end of the British Mandate, before the British army
had withdrawn from Palestine, Israel had pre-empted
the solution in accordance with United Nations decisions by occupying almost four fifths of Palestine.
The entry of the Arab armies, or small contingents of
Arab armies, was designed to rescue the remnants of
the civilian population who had survived massacres
such as the Deir Yassin massacre, in which 250 men,
women and children were butchered and thrown into
wells. The perpetrator of that heinous crime, the
leader, was none other than Menachem Begin, with his
Irgun. The Arab Legion did not enter Palestinefor any
purpose other than to stave off further genocide of
the Palestinian people, at the request and pleading
of the beleaguered Palestinians. They did not set one
foot on the territories that were earmarked for the
Jewish State. It was the other way around. It was the
Israelis who, even after the end of the Mandate, continued their aggression and their massive attacks
against the Arab quarters and against the Arab towns
and villages, as I stated earlier.

206. We are accustomed to the Israeli representative
referring to the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan as the
Palestinian State of Jordan. Now, he must be made to
understand that Jordan is Jordan, and Palestine is
Palestine. Jordan is an independent sovereign State, a
Member of the United Nations. The Palestinian Arab
State has not been created becausethe Israelis aborted
its creation by their notorious Delep plan in 1947 and
1948, though pretending to pay lip-service to and
acquiescing in General Assembly resolution 181 (II).
I distinctly remember that two or three d?ys after the
declaration of the Partition Plan my own quarter in
Jerusalem was subjected to a massive organized
military attack, which included artillery and the
destruction of dozens of housesover the heads of their
inhabitants. In those early days we did not have even
a revolver with which to defeud ourselves, let alone
a rifle. We could not have started fighting the Partition Plan even if we had wanted to, because we did
not have the means to do so. We simply said that we
would not welcome the dismemberment of our own
country. That is a legitimate position that every country
in the world that faces dismemberment normally

210. The representative of Israel spoke about holy
sites. Let me remind him-and the records are here at
the United Nations and in books-that hundreds of
Christian and Islamic sit,es were destroyed by the
Israelis during the period 1947to 1967, and more were
destroyed thereafter. As for the Jewish cemetery
to which he referred as dating back hu.ndredsof years,
it is common knowledge that that cemetery, on Mount
Scopus, was leased to the Jews, whom we regarded
as co-religionists, a mere 100 years ago by the Islamic
Foundation. And the period ofLhe lease was 100years,
which expired 10years ago. And what did we do then?
We kept the cemetery as it was, except that an outside
company built an hotel and it was essential that a little
road be built to make it accessible to the people.
I would not like to mention the name of the company,
but it was its suggestion.

takes.

207. As I have said, Jordan is Jordan, and Palestine
is Palestine, and the creation of the Palestinian Arab
State is clearly delineated in the maps attached to
resolution 181(II), which the Israeli Foreign Minister,
in order to deceive and to obtain Israel’s admission to
the United Nations, himself pledged to abide by and
respect. And what of the repatriation of the Palestinian

211. Now, what did the Israelis do? The representative of Israel is probably not aware that they had
24

desecrated a more than l,OOO-year-old Arab Islamic
cemetery, the Mamillah cemetery, which is one of
the most cherished Islamic sites in the whole of
Jerusalem. I think that anybody who has served in the
American Consulate in Jerusalem could testify that that
cemetery, in which are buried some of the greatest
men, thinkers, writers, theologians, scholastics,
warriors and heroes, has been turned into a park on
which dogs trample every day. I think that persons in
the American Consulate can see that with their own
eyes every day. This is where we see cemeteries that
have been desecrated: not a lOO-year-old cemetery
that was leased from the Moslem Foundation, but that
Mamillah cemetery which goes back more than
1,000 years.

out of step and who blames the whole platoon, saying
that he is marching correctly and that the others are
out of step. Does he think anybody can believe him?
No one believes him.
218. He madeoutrageous accusationsagainsta whole
number of countries to which I will not refer because
they can answer for themselves. Today, he even read
out a long qUOtaiiOn from a statement by a man who
betrayed his country and his Government. I despise
traitors, and I despise the methods whereby people
read Out quotations from statementsby traitors. Any
revQlUtiOnsifts out people who cannot standthe strain,
and he has taken advantage of that, It is shameful,
simply shameful. He found it appropriate to take a
quotation
from a statement made by a traitor and to
insult the Head of State of the Syrian Arab Republic.
I did not expect him to go so far.

212. In conclusion, I turn to the claim of the Israeli
representative that the representative of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People has changed the name of Hebron
into something else. It so happens that Al-Khalil is the
Arabic name for the city of Hebron and means “The
Beloved of the Compassionate”, namely, “The
Beloved of God”. It is a term of veneration, and has
been known for almost 1,400 years as Al-Khalil, in the
same way as Jerusalem is known as Al-Quds, “The
Holy”.
If it is known in English as Jerusalem and
Al-Khalil is known in English as Hebron, it does not
mean that the names have been arbitrarily changed.
It is a term of veneration.

219. He is being criticized here not because Israel
has formed itself into a State. The United Nations
created that State. That is not what Israel is being
criticized for. That is not the question. The question
under discussion is the situation in the territories
occupied by Israel, and that is the question that he is
not answering but it is the one that he should answer.
He is doing wrong by compelling the Council to take
up secondary matters. If he really thought he was in
the right he would have allowed the Council Commission to visit his country to see what the situation was
and to speak about it. What is he so afraid of? Something must be wrong, somethingthat he does not like.
He must be afraid of something. How can we believe
after that that he is in the right? Are we to believe
him and not the Commission that submitted the
report? The Commissionconsistedof highly respected
representatives from Portugal, Zambia and Bolivia.
We have no reason not to believe the Commission.
On the contrary, none of the membersof the Commission is partial in respect of Israel or of any other side.
Why did Israel not grant them access?There must
be something wrong. Let him answer that question.
Why did Israel not allow the Mayor to come here at
the request of the Council? The answer he gave does
not satisfy anybody. What sort of an answer is it? NO
answer at all. If the Mayor had comehere and spoken,
then the representative of Israel could have said that
he told lies about suchand such, that the true situation
is such and such, and the Council would have understood where the truth lay.

213. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from RusThe representative of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics has asked to speak in exercise of
his right of reply, and I now call on him.
sinn):

214. Mr. KHARLAMOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): I only wish
to make a few comments. There will still be enough
time for replies later.
215. The logic of the representative of Israel is not
only strange, it is insulting. It is insulting to the
Security Council and to everybody here who is trying
to make a contribution to the matter under discussion
and to discuss the matter correctly.
216. At the last meeting, the representative of Israel
called the Council a Council that is blinkered and does
not want to see the truth. It is really difficult after
that to have a conversation with him.

220. The representative of Israel mentioned other
issues too; in particular, he insulted Cuba and Yugoslavia. They can answer for themselves. I shall not
refer to that. I just wanted to say one thing: if Israel
had had the same relations with its neighbours and
with other countries as the Soviet Union has, let us
say, with Cuba, then Israel’s policy would never be
the subject of discussionhere in the Council.

217. Today he has made his colleagues work better,
I think, than last time, They have chosen quotations
for him, excerpts, notes and other printed matter.
He is trying to divert our attention from the matter
under discussion, to the past, forgetting that we are
not talking now about the 1920sor 194Os,but about the
situation that now prevails in the territory occupied
by Israel. He should not try to get away with that if
he wants to help the Council to find a correct solution.
He knows that he is acting like a soldier who is

221. The PRESIDENT (inrerpretation frunz Russian); The representative of Israel has asked to be

25

allowed to speak in exercise of his right of reply, and
I now call on him to resume his place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

Arabs from these areas who OCCUPY leading positions
in Jordan today are too numerous to mention. They
constitute Jordan’s economic, administrative and
intellectual elite.

222. Mr. BLUM (Israel): As regards the Tunisian
representative’s statement about the curfew, we have
checked the verbatim record in English and it says:
“For days its population has been subjected to a
particularly stringent curfew”. [Para. 67 above.] In
English, at least, this implies that he thinks the curfew
is still going on.

226. It is an irrefutable, fact that Jordan is the Palestinian Arab State on the territory of the former
Palestine Mandate, just as Israel is the Palestinian
Jewish State in the same area. Those who would
challenge this fact have an obvious political axe to
grind or, as they would prefer, to wield.

223. It is indeed ironic that the representative of the
Palestinian Arab State of Jordan should challenge the
fact that his country is the independent Palestinian
Arab State established on 80 per cent of the area of
the former Palestine Mandate. Mr. Nuseibeh himself
is the quintessence of this thesis. He embodies it in his
very person, for here we have the son of a well-known
Jerusalem family serving as the Ambassador of Jordan
to the United Nations. Is he going to tell us that he is
not a Palestinian Arab? By challenging my thesis, does
he mean to imply that his loyalties to Jordan are
questionable? Or is he some form of diplomatic mercenary, a Palestinian Arab merely in the employ of the
Jordanian Government? I challenge Mr. Nuseibeh to
tell the Council how many other Palestinian Arabs,
like him born in the area of Mandated Palestine west
of the Jordan River, are Jordanian Ambassadors
throughout the world today, such as Abdullah Salah
in Washington, Tahir Al-Ma& in Paris and Nabih
Al-Nimr in Bonn? Is he going to tell us that none of
them is a Palestinian Arab, that they have gone through
some extraordinary metamorphosis-or are they all,
like Ambassador Nuseibeh, diplomats of convenience?
224. Let me remind the Jordanian representative of
the record. Between 1922and 1946 Transjordan was
an integral part of the Palestine Mandate. In 1946 it
became the independent Palestinian Arab State in that
area. When King Abdullah came to the Jericho Conference in December 1948, attended by Palestinian
Arabs west of the Jordan River, he was crowned
“King of Palestine”. Abdullah in fact wanted to rename
his country the “Kingdom of Palestine”. King
Hussein in his memoirs indicates clearly that Transjordan was arbitrarily siphoned off from the rest of
Mandated Palestine. Crown Prince Hassan of Jordan
stated unambiguously in the Jordanian National Assembly on 2 February 1970: “Palestine is Jordan and
Jordan is Palestine. The nation is one and the land is
one.”
225. In the period of the Jordanian occupation of
Judaea and Samaria, that is, from 1948 to 1967,
400,000 Palestinian Arabs from those areas moved to
the area east of the River Jordan, which they regarded,
as a matter of course, as the Palestinian Arab State
on the territory of the former Palestine Mandate.
As is also well known, the Arab residents of Judaea
and Samaria are citizens of Jordan. The Palestinian
26

227. I will not compete with Mr. Kharlamov either
in logic or in standards of courtesy. Mr. Kharlamov
was rude enough last Friday to burst into my remarks
and accuse me of uttering what he so felicitously
termed “idiocies”. He was unable to control himself
just at the moment when I suggested that there was
a distinct convergence of interests between the initiators of the present debate and those who would try
to divert attention from Afghanistan.
228. At the time I was speaking I, for one, was still
unaware of the fact that his country was intensifying
its use of heavy armour and aircraft against the civilian
population of Kabul and other cities in occupied
Afghanistan and that that may have been t,he immediate cause of the Soviet representative’s inability to
“keep his cool”. Incidentally, was it not revealing
that Mr. Kharlamov was also exercising his right of
reply on behalf of Syria?
229. While I was not familiar with the developments
in Kabul last Friday, I was familiar with the description of Mr. Kharlamov’s Foreign Minister’s visit to
Damascus given by the head of the terrorist PLO to
the Kuwaiti newspaper Al-Hudaf on 14 February. He
said explicitly that Mr. Gromyko had visited Damascus
last month in order to co-ordinate a confrontation
against a “definite” Israeli attack on Syria.
230. Even though it comes from the mouth of a
seasoned liar, we can regard Arafat’s account as
accurate, given his familiarity with Soviet leaders.
Moreover, A&at’s account this time has a distinct
ring of truth about it. Council members will recall that
in 1967 the Soviet Union helped to precipitate the
Six-Day War by making precisely the same empty
allegations against Israel. When the then Prime
Minister of Israel invited the Soviet Ambassador to
visit the north of the country and see for himself the
hollowness of the charge, the latter refused, in conformity with the Soviet doctrine that if the facts do not
conform to the charge, so much the worse for the facts.
231. Mr. Kharlamov also suggested that if my country had with the Soviet Union the kind of relationship
which Cuba enjoys with it, we should not have to come
before the Council. I quite agree with him. If we became a satellite of the Soviet Union, the Soviet veto
would be made available to us. That is what he evidently meant.

The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Russian): I now call on the representative of Jordan, who

240. As I said earlier, Palestine is Palestine ‘and
Jordan is Jordan. If one-wants to see the Palestinian
Arab State, one need only look in the records of the
United Nations: it is delineated in the maps attached
to the relevant resolution.

232.

has asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
233. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): I realise that we
have detained the Council until a somewhat late hour
and I shall therefore make a very few, brief remarks.

241. Mr. KHARLAMOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): I very much
regret that I must again take up the time of members
of the Council.

234. If the alien Mr. Blum is castigating me for being
a Jerusalemite, I should like to tell him that my family
has been there for 1,400 years of uninterrupted habitation. It is an honour which he cannot claim. The fact
that I am an ambassador of Jordan-and I could have
been an ambassador of Syria, of Algeria or of Tunisia-is becauseI am a fervent believer in Arab unity.

242. First, I should like briefly to refer to the interpretation of what I said in my previous statement. I do
not take back a single word of what I said. But my
neighbour to the right, in his statement a few moments
ago, made my words even stronger than they were. If
he wants them to sound that way, then we will
let it stand.

235. Our unity was disrupted by a secret agreement,
the Sykes-Picot agreement, which was made behind
our backs and which vivisected the territorial integrity of the overall Arab homeland. Indeed, I have
written a book on Arab nationalism which shows and
proves what is natural, namely, that Arab unity is our
ultimate aim. I think that our vivisection is the reason
that a person like Mr. Blum can make all his distortions
and tell his lies.

243. Secondly, in my previous statement I said
something like this: If Israel had relations like those
we have with Cuba, then we would not need to be
discussing this matter here. And I would add something to that: if Israel had relations with the Palestinians, if it were to allow the Palestinians to have their
own national State, if it were to establish friendly
relations with them, the Council would not be meeting
now and wasting so much time in discussing this
question.

236. Is it any surprise that not only I but many others
are ambassadors of Jordan? It simply proves that
when we made an act of unity it was not a Jordanian
occupation of Palestinian territory-it
was unity in
full equality and full sharing and participation. Indeed,
I would add that half the Jordanian Cabinet consisted
of Palestinians.

244. With regard to the word “satellite” which my
neighbour to the right used, I find it very difficult to
sort out his country’s relations with its sponsors.
I do not know who is the satellite and who is the master
among those who give billions of dollars of armaments
to his country. He is obviously in a much better position to judge that than I am.

237. As I said earlier, the Act of Unity stipulated
specifically that that unity, in which all citizens would
live in dignity and equality, was contingent upon
and without prejudice to the fulfilment of all the Palestinian Arab rights, including, of course, the creation
of the Palestinian Arab State.

245. I come now to my last point. We know better
than he does what our State should do. We know
when to send our Foreign Minister, Mr. Gromyko,
to another, friendly State. It is not up to Israel to
decide, or to make an evaluation of the visit of our
Foreign Minister to Syria.

238. If I serve any country, it is my duty and it is
my honour because the whole area is my homeland.
It has been so for most of the 1,400 years of our
history. And we shall make sure that it is restored to
its unity.

The meeting

239. The Israeli representative talked about the
British Mandate. Let me remind him that, illegitimate
as the Declaration was-emanating as it did from a
single person, Balfour-it was the British Government
itself which in 1923 requested the League of Nations
to exclude the area to the east of the River Jordan from
the aggressive and inimical application of the Balfour
Declaration. It is the result of that aggressive and
inimical application-the uprooting of the Palestinian
people-that we are discussing here today.

rose ar 7.55 p.m.

NOTES
vol. 75, p. 287.
for International Peace, The Hague
Conventions
and Declarations
of 1899 and 1907 (New York, Oxford
University Press, 1915).
3 A/34/63 1.
4 A/34/542, annex, sect. I, para. 102 f and g.
sIbid., paras. 110, 111, 126, 128, 130, 132and 133.

I United Nations, Treaty
2 Carnegie Endowment

6 Oflcial
Supplement

27

Records
No. I.

Series,

of the Security

Council,

Fourth

Year,

Special

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
world. Consult
COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout
the
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLKATEONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agenccs depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressesvous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Genbve.
KAK
HsAfLRHR

IIOJIS’IHTh
OpraHll3~r(lIH

H3J4AWW

OPl-AHH3AI&HH

06’beAHHeHHblx

OI3I~EUHHEHHIaIX
HauHR

YOKWO

KyIYKTb

HAlWH
B

3nnax
H aremcmax
no ncex paRonax
stnpa. XasoAme
cnpasxn
a*uteY
~HIIXKHOM btara3wte
HIGH m*wfe
no anpecy : Oprawxaaunft
WaqHR, Cerqwfl
no npostame n3nannR,
HblO-HOpK
Km
Xetxeea.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

KHWKtIbIX

06 n3Ilattxfrx

Mara-

n

06’benHHeHHblK

UNlDAS

Las publicaciones
de Ins Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccih de Ventas,
Nucva York o Cinebra.

Lhho in United Nations,

New York

oo4ao

83-61462-August

l986-2#
