United Nations

A/52/PV.88

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-second Session

88th plenary meeting
Friday, 26 June 1998, 11.40 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Udovenko

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ukraine)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Boyd (Panama),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 11.40 a.m.
Agenda item 95 (continued)
Macroeconomic policy questions
(c) Science and technology for development
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
Members will recall that the General Assembly, at its 86th
plenary meeting on 2 June 1998, decided to reopen the
consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 95 and to
consider the sub-item directly in plenary meeting.
In connection with this sub-item, the Assembly has
before it a draft resolution issued as document
A/52/L.75/Rev.1.
I now give the floor to the representative of Pakistan
to introduce draft resolution A/52/L.75/Rev.1.
Mr. Kamal (Pakistan): The informatics revolution
which started some years ago has now gained a momentum
of astronomical proportions. It is radically transforming all
areas of human activity. The entire decision-making and
strategy-planning processes of Governments and the private
sector depend heavily today on information and
communication technology. Information technology has thus
become the lifeblood of our domestic and global markets.

98-85502 (E)

While this revolution constitutes one of the greatest
opportunities in human history, it also poses
unprecedented challenges. One of these is the year 2000
(Y2K) problem. The very first minute of the new
millennium will bring the world face-to-face squarely
with the challenge of this global virus, crawling forwards
and backwards into the deepest nooks and crannies of our
worldwide network of computers.
Considering the enormity and complexity of the
Y2K problem, our response has to be predicated on a
certain set of basic assumptions. First, the problem has
wide implications, not just for computers, but indeed for
all equipments which use embedded chips. Secondly, the
omnipresent nature of these embedded chips makes it
virtually impossible to correctly fathom the full degree of
the problem or even to identify all the affected sectors.
Thirdly, this is a problem which is global in nature and
its solution will have to be found globally, without
making any distinctions based on per capita computer
projections. Fourthly, the deadline of 31 December 1999
is totally immutable, so that all corrective action will have
to be completed before that deadline — in fact, much
earlier. Fifthly and finally, this challenge, because of its
very global nature, presents an opportunity for
international collaboration in seeking an international
response to an international problem.
It is for these reasons that the United Nations has
come into play in trying to resolve this problem. Action
in the United Nations on Y2K is subdivided into two
distinct parts. In the first place, action has to be taken

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
within the secretariats of the United Nations system, not
just in New York, but also at all the other main United
Nations stations, in order to ensure compliance. In the
second place, action has to be coordinated globally in the
Member States.
Under the auspices of the Ad Hoc Open-ended
Working Group on Informatics and its task force, action
started within the United Nations Secretariat last year. We
hope that the United Nations system will be compliant well
in time, before the dawn of the new millennium. However,
the second area of action in the Members States is much
more complicated. The States Members of the United
Nations are at various levels of development. Some have
millions of computers and billions of embedded chips in
use; others count them in hundreds only. But both face the
same challenge because of the deep interconnections in the
global network of computer links.
While many Member States have already started
systematic efforts to address the need for Y2K compliance,
there are many others which are not yet fully aware of the
nature and magnitude of this international problem.
Awareness and action levels have not attained the required
stage or speed necessitated by the deadline of 31 December
1999. Given the importance that deserves to be attached to
this problem, action is now being brought before the
General Assembly.
Pakistan has the honour to present the draft resolution
contained in document A/52/L.75/Rev.1 The draft resolution
is the result of wide consultations and is action-oriented and
forward-looking. It not only highlights the gravity of the
Y2K problem, but calls specifically on Governments to
attach due priority to national action and global
cooperation. It calls upon the Economic and Social Council
to prepare guidelines at its forthcoming substantive session
to enable Member States to address the diverse aspects of
the problem. It requests the Secretary-General to ensure
compliance within all parts of the United Nations system;
and it calls for a monitoring and reporting system within
the United Nations, so that action is completed well before
the deadline.
While the draft resolution requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure that the United Nations system closely
monitors actual and potential sources of funding to support
the efforts of the developing countries and countries in
transition to address the Y2K problem, it also expresses its
appreciation at the establishment of a Trust Fund by the
World Bank to assist in the efforts to resolve the problem

2

88th plenary meeting
26 June 1998
with substantial voluntary contributions from Member
States.
We hope that the draft resolution will be adopted by
consensus. The Pakistan delegation will continue to hold
itself in readiness to be of all assistance in this Y2K
endeavour, as it has done in all aspects of the vitally
important subject of informatics.
Mr. Sklar (United States of America): I am pleased
to express the support of the United States for the draft
resolution on the global implications of the year 2000
problem. In a world vastly dependent upon electronic
systems for the processing and exchange of financial and
other data, it is imperative that nations address the year
2000 problem now. Those which fail to do so risk serious
disruption to critical business and government functions.
And with the inflexible deadline of 31 December 1999
fast approaching, there is truly no time to waste. Probably
no other issue that has come before this body is of such
common interest to all Members, large and small,
developed and undeveloped. We are all dependent upon
a solution to this problem, and we are all interconnected.
This is an international problem that has implications
for every nation. More than any other technological
challenge we face, the year 2000 problem highlights the
interconnectedness of today’s world. Year 2000-related
system failures in key areas such as international
telecommunications, banking and transportation in any
one country could have effects on many other countries.
Nations not only need to address the problem within their
own borders but must share information and expertise on
possible solutions internationally. The need for this kind
of cooperation was one of the key reasons we worked
hard to raise the issue at the recent Birmingham G-8
Summit, and why we were so pleased to work closely
with the United Nations Working Group on Informatics
on the year 2000 resolution. We also look forward to the
elaboration of guidelines for Member States, to be set out
by the Economic and Social Council at its upcoming
substantive session.
The draft resolution recognizes that the problem
affects more than just large mainframe systems.
Electronic devices with date-sensitive microprocessors or
embedded chips are also at risk. Unchecked, this “growth
industry” of the problem has the potential to cause
failures in everything from manufacturing equipment to
traffic signals. We believe that, in addition to dealing with
system challenges, countless countries need to pay close
attention to this important aspect of the year 2000

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
problem. This was brought home to me personally when I
asked how I should deal with the two portable computers
I use every day, and it was simply suggested that the
problem is so complex that I should be prepared to throw
them into the wastebasket next year and buy new units to
replace them.
We also encourage every nation to examine its year
2000 readiness, and not just in governmental systems.
Government officials should be making inquiries on the
status of preparations in the private sector, especially with
regard to key infrastructure areas, including energy,
telecommunications, transportation and financial institutions.
Member States should appoint national year 2000
coordinators at the highest level. We have already done so.
A coordinator can help countries raise awareness of the
problem among public and private sector organizations.
Finally, we encourage every nation to think about
contingency plans for critical business processes as we
move towards the new millennium. By this fall, we will
have reached a point where, despite all of the best efforts
to prepare, some systems for which no year 2000
remediation efforts have begun will not be ready by 1
January 2000. We encourage nations to develop
contingency plans for those critical business processes that
are most at risk of experiencing failures.
Both my delegation and I, personally, would like to
thank Ambassador Kamal for his extraordinary leadership
and for leading the Working Group on Informatics and to
thank him and the Group for all their hard work on this
important draft resolution and for raising the level of
awareness of the year 2000 problem generally within the
United Nations.
Mrs. Djatmiko-Singgih (Indonesia): The global
implications of the year 2000 date conversion problem for
computers are a matter of deep concern, particularly to
developing countries. On behalf of the Group of 77 and
China, I should like to say that we expect that, with the
consensus adoption of this draft resolution, we will be able
to assist developing countries with their limited capacity to
absorb and comprehend, let alone apply, the new
information technology such as that relating to the year
2000. We therefore support the draft resolution and extend
our heartfelt appreciation to Ambassador Kamal for his
invaluable efforts in coming up with this very important
draft resolution.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.

88th plenary meeting
26 June 1998
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/52/L.75/Rev.1.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/52/L.75/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/52/L.75/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 52/233).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
I shall now call on those representatives who wish to
explain their position on the resolution just adopted.
I should like to remind delegations that explanations
of vote or position are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Thorne (United Kingdom): I have the honour
to make this statement on behalf of the European Union.
The Central and Eastern European countries associated
with the European Union — Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia — and the associated
country Cyprus, as well as the European Free Trade
Association countries members of the European Economic
Area, Iceland and Norway, align themselves with this
statement.
The European Union welcomes the adoption of
resolution 52/233, on the global implications of the year
2000 date conversion problem for computers. This issue
has, we believe, potentially far-reaching implications for
the effective operation of Governments, companies and
other organizations worldwide. The European Union had
already placed the issue on the agendas of last
December’s meeting of the European Council in
Luxembourg and April’s second Asia-Europe Meeting
(ASEM II) in London. We are pleased to see that the
problem is now being addressed in the United Nations.
The European Union believes that the priority of the
United Nations system in this area should be to ensure
that the computer systems within United Nations control
are millennium-compliant. This resolution asks the
Secretary-General to adopt a plan of action and to report
back to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session on
the implementation of that plan. In the context of the
Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Open-ended
Working Group on Informatics, Member States have been
assured by the Secretariat that computers throughout the
United Nations system are already millennium-compliant.
The European Union hopes that the Secretariat will take

3

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
the opportunity of the report to the fifty-third session to
place these assurances, and the basis for them, on the
record.
The United Nations system has a further responsibility:
to raise awareness of this problem and the potential means
of addressing it. The United Nations Web site, and that of
the United Nations Development Programme, already
contain useful information. This work should be pursued
with a view to ensuring the widest possible dissemination.
The resolution also calls on the Economic and Social
Council to prepare a series of guidelines on which Member
States might draw in addressing the problem. The European
Union will be ready to work positively in this regard at
next month’s substantive session of the Economic and
Social Council.
The European Union believes that the primary
responsibility for addressing the year 2000 date conversion
problem rests with national Governments and the private
sector. But if these efforts are to be successful, a
collaborative approach will be required. Key actors will
include the Bretton Woods institutions, in particular the
World Bank, and the myriad companies which make up the
private sector of the global economy. It is gratifying to see
that in this resolution the United Nations is taking up its
share of the responsibility. We should not lose sight of this
responsibility in the short time available before the deadline
of December 1999.
Mr. Tchoulkov (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): The Russian delegation joins other
delegations in welcoming the adoption of resolution 52/233.
We find it to be balanced as a whole and feel that it
reflects our shared concern at the year 2000 problem.
We believe that the electronic interdependency of the
States Members of the United Nations in today’s rapidly
growing information-based society is an important element
of the world economy. As members are aware, this question
received very serious consideration at the recent meeting of
the Group of Eight in Birmingham. It is our view that with
respect to resolving the year 2000 problem, which could
have a negative impact on the smooth functioning of the
global informational infrastructure and on the world
economy as a whole, the United Nations has responded
rapidly to the situation. We believe that this redounds to the
credit of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group on
Informatics of the Economic and Social Council and its
Chairman, Ambassador Kamal.

4

88th plenary meeting
26 June 1998
In conclusion, I should like to inform the Assembly
that in the Russian Federation this question is also
receiving very serious consideration and that the
Government has already adopted a resolution on resolving
the year 2000 problem.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have heard the last speaker in explanation of vote.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (c) of
agenda item 95?
It was so decided.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The General Assembly will now consider the reports of
the Fifth Committee on agenda items 17 (g), 114, and
114, 153 and 157 together; 116, 118, 122 (a) and (b), and
123 and 159 together; 124 (a), 125 to 127, 129 to 132,
136 to 142 (a), 143 and 161.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Djamel Moktefi of Algeria, to introduce the reports
of the Fifth Committee in one intervention.
Mr. Moktefi (Algeria), Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee (interpretation from Arabic): I have the
honour to present today the reports of the Fifth
Committee on the deliberations of its second resumed
fifty-second session. The Fifth Committee held its second
resumed session for a period of three weeks, from 11 to
29 May 1998 and on 26 June 1998. The Committee held
10 plenary meetings, and negotiations were carried out
through numerous informal consultations.
The following is a brief report on the result of the
work of the Fifth Committee at its second resumed fiftysecond session.
Regarding agenda item 17 (g), entitled “Appointment
of members and alternate members of the United Nations
Staff Pension Committee”, the report of the Fifth
Committee is contained in document A/52/676/Add.2,
whereby the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the nomination of Mr. Mochamad Slamet
Hidayat, of Indonesia, as a member of the United Nations
Staff Pension Committee, for a term of office beginning
on the date approved by the General Assembly and
ending on 31 December 2000.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

88th plenary meeting
26 June 1998

With regard to item 114, entitled “Review of the
efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of
the United Nations”, the reports of the Committee are
contained in documents A/52/746/Add.2, A/52/746/Add.3
and A/52/955. Under this agenda item, the Committee took
action on five questions: three decisions, namely the
guidelines on internal control standards, the strengthening
of external oversight mechanisms and the reports of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services, and two resolutions
concerning the gratis personnel provided by Governments
and other entities and the proposed United Nations Code of
Conduct, which was also considered under agenda items
153, “Human resources management,” and 157, “United
Nations reform: measures and proposals”.

Regarding item 124 (a), on the United Nations IraqKuwait Observation Mission, the report of the Committee
is contained in document A/52/933. The Committee
recommends to the Assembly the adoption of the draft
resolution contained in paragraph 9 of the report, which
was adopted by the Committee without a vote.

Concerning item 116, entitled “Programme budget for
the biennium 1998-1999”, the report of the Committee is
contained in document A/52/744/Add.3. In this report, the
Committee recommends to the Assembly the adoption of
the draft resolution contained in paragraph 8, in connection
with the Development Account, which was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.

With regard to item 126, entitled “Financing and
liquidation of the United Nations Transitional Authority
in Cambodia”, the report of the Committee is contained
in document A/52/934. The Committee recommends to
the Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution
contained in paragraph 6 of the report, which was adopted
by the Committee without a vote.

With regard to item 118, entitled “Joint Inspection
Unit”, the report of the Committee is contained in
document A/52/842/Add.1. The Committee decided to defer
consideration of the item to its next resumed session, to be
held from 17 to 21 August.

Concerning item 127, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Protection Force, the United Nations
Confidence Restoration Operation in Croatia, the United
Nations Preventive Deployment Force and the United
Nations Peace Forces headquarters”, the report of the
Committee is contained in document A/52/935. In this
report, the Committee recommends to the Assembly the
adoption of the draft decision contained in paragraph 6,
which was adopted by the Committee without a vote.

Concerning item 122 (a), on the financing of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, the report
of the Committee is contained in document A/52/931. In
this connection, the Committee decided to recommend to
the Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution contained
in paragraph 8 of the report, which was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
With regard to item 122 (b), on the financing of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the report of the
Committee is contained in document A/52/932. In this
connection, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.5/52/L.52 by a vote of 89 to 2, with 1 abstention.
Concerning items 123, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission”, and 159,
“Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola”, the report of the Committee is contained in
document A/52/547/Add.2. In this report, the Committee
decided to recommend to the Assembly the adoption of the
draft resolution contained in paragraph 7 of the report,
which was adopted by the Committee without a vote.

Concerning item 125, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara”, the report of the Committee is contained in
document A/52/843/Add.1. The Committee recommends
to the Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution
contained in paragraph 6 of the report, which was adopted
by the Committee without a vote.

With regard to item 129, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Operation in Mozambique”, the report of
the Committee is contained in document A/52/936. The
Committee recommends to the Assembly the adoption of
the draft resolution contained in paragraph 7 of the report,
which was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
Regarding item 130, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus”, the report
of the Committee is contained in document A/52/937. The
Committee recommends to the Assembly the adoption of
the draft resolution contained in paragraph 8 of the report,
which was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
With regard to item 131, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia”, the report
of the Committee is contained in document A/52/938. The
Committee recommends to the Assembly the adoption of

5

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

88th plenary meeting
26 June 1998

the draft resolution contained in paragraph 6 of the report,
which was adopted by the Committee without a vote.

the draft resolution contained in paragraph 6 of the report,
which was adopted by the Committee without a vote.

Concerning item 132, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Mission in Haiti”, the report of the
Committee is contained in document A/52/939. As
indicated in this report, the Committee recommends to the
Assembly the adoption of the draft decision contained in
paragraph 6, which was adopted by the Committee without
a vote.

With regard to item 141, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Support Mission in Haiti”, the report of
the Committee is contained in document A/52/845/Add.1.
The Committee recommends to the Assembly the
adoption of the draft resolution contained in paragraph 6
of the report, which was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.

With regard to item 136, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan”, the
report of the Committee is contained in document
A/52/844/Add.1. The Committee recommends to the
Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution contained in
paragraph 6 of the report, which was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.

Concerning item 142 (a), on the financing of the
United Nations peacekeeping operations, the report of the
Committee is contained in documents A/52/453/Add.3 and
Add.4. In addendum 3, the Committee recommends to the
Assembly the adoption of two draft resolutions and two
draft decisions, which were adopted by the Committee
without a vote. In connection with addendum 4, regarding
the support account for peacekeeping operations, the
Committee recommends to the Assembly the adoption of
the draft resolution contained in paragraph 7, which was
adopted by the Committee without a vote.

Concerning item 137, entitled “Financing of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible
for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31
December 1994”, the report of the Committee is contained
in document A/52/726/Add.1. As indicated in the report, the
Committee adopted an oral decision to defer consideration
of the item to its next resumed session, to be held from 17
to 21 August.
Regarding item 138, entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina”, the report of
the Committee is contained in document A/52/690/Add.1.
The Committee recommends to the Assembly the adoption
of the draft resolution contained in paragraph 6 of the
report, which was adopted by the Committee without a
vote.
With regard to item 139, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Transitional Administration for Easter
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium”, the report of the
Committee is contained in document A/52/940. The
Committee recommends to the Assembly the adoption of
the draft resolution contained in paragraph 6 of the report,
which was adopted by the Committee without a vote.

Concerning agenda item 143, entitled “Report of the
Secretary-General on the activities of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services”, the report of the Committee
is contained in document A/52/846/Add.1. The Committee
recommends to the Assembly the deferral of the
consideration of this item to its next resumed session, to
be held from 17 to 21 August. This oral decision,
proposed by the Chairman, was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
Finally, concerning agenda item 161, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic”, the report of the Committee is
contained in document A/52/942. The Committee
recommends to the Assembly the adoption of the draft
resolution contained in paragraph 7 of its report, which
was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of
procedure, I shall take it that the Assembly decides not to
discuss the reports of the Fifth Committee that are before
it today.
It was so decided.

Concerning item 140, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Preventive Deployment Force”, the report
of the Committee is contained in document A/52/941. The
Committee recommends to the Assembly the adoption of

6

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
Statements will therefore be limited to explanations of
vote or position.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

88th plenary meeting
26 June 1998

The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been made
in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant official
records. May I remind members that by paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401 the Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered in
a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote
only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in plenary
meeting unless that delegation’s vote in plenary
meeting is different from its vote in the Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that we
are going to proceed to take decisions in the same manner
as was done in the Committee, unless the Secretariat is
notified otherwise in advance. This means that where
separate or recorded votes were taken, the Assembly will
do the same.
I would hope that the Assembly will proceed to adopt
without a vote those recommendations that were adopted
without a vote in the Fifth Committee.

Agenda item 17 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other appointments
(g) Appointment of members and alternate members
of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee
Report of the Fifth
(A/52/676/Add.2)

Committee

(Part

III)

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
In paragraph 4 of its report, the Fifth Committee
recommends that the General Assembly appoint
Mr. Mochamad Slamet Hidayat as a member of the United
Nations Staff Pension Committee for a term of office
beginning on 26 June 1998 and ending on 31 December
2000.
May I take it that the General Assembly appoints that
person?

It was so decided.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly
to conclude its consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda
item 17?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 114 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (Parts III and IV)
(A/52/746/Add.2 and Add.3)
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will first take a decision on the three draft
decisions recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 10 of part III of its report (A/52/746/Add.2).
We turn first to draft decision I, entitled “Guidelines
for Internal Control Standards”, which was adopted by the
Fifth Committee without a vote. May I take it that the
General Assembly too wishes to adopt the draft decision?
Draft decision I was adopted.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We turn next to draft decision II, entitled “Strengthening
of external oversight mechanisms”, which the Fifth
Committee adopted without a vote. May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft decision II was adopted.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We turn now to draft decision III, entitled “Reports of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services”, which was adopted
by the Fifth Committee without a vote. May I take it that
the General Assembly wishes to adopt the draft decision?
Draft decision III was adopted.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of Part IV of its report (A/52/746/Add.3). For
the present, the text of this draft resolution will be found
in document A/C.5/52/L.55.

7

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

88th plenary meeting
26 June 1998

The draft resolution, entitled “Gratis personnel
provided by Governments and other entities”, was adopted
by the Fifth Committee without a vote. May I take it that
the General Assembly too wishes to adopt the draft
resolution?

The draft resolution is entitled “Development
Account”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/234).
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/235).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
agenda item 114.

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
I call on the representative of Indonesia, who wishes to
speak in explanation of position on the resolution just
adopted.

Agenda items 114, 153 and 157 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Human resources management
United Nations reform: measures and proposals
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/955)
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
decision recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph
6 of its report.
The draft decision, entitled “Proposed United Nations
Code of Conduct”, was adopted by the Fifth Committee
without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly too
wishes to adopt the draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
agenda items 114, 153 and 157.

Mr. Atiyanto (Indonesia): Before we conclude our
consideration of this agenda item, permit me to state that
the Group of 77 and China agreed to join the consensus
on this resolution since it clearly spells out the regrettable
quality of documents A/52/758 and A/52/848. In this
regard, the documents did not fully respond to the
requirement of resolution 52/12 B and did not provide
substantive information or clear direction to enable the
General Assembly to take a final decision on this
important issue at this time.
Therefore, we would like to take this opportunity to
once again underline the importance of the provision we
have just adopted, requesting the Secretary-General to
submit to the General Assembly no later than 31 July
1998, during the third part of its resumed fifty-second
session, through the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, the detailed
report on the sustainability of the Development Account,
the modalities of its implementation, the specific purposes
and the associated performance criteria for the use of
resources requested in its resolution 52/12 B and decision
52/477, including the elements as contained in operative
paragraphs 4 (a), 4 (b), 4 (c) and 4 (d) of this resolution.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Secretariat has taken due note of the observations of
the representative of Indonesia.

Agenda item 116 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 1998-1999

Agenda item 118 (continued)
Report of the Fifth
(A/52/744/Add.3)

Committee

(Part

IV)

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 8 of part IV of its report.

8

Joint Inspection Unit
Report of the Fifth Committee (Part II)
(A/52/842/Add.1)

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
decision recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph
5 of part II of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft decision
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
agenda item 118.

88th plenary meeting
26 June 1998
Thirty-one years have passed since the Israeli
aggression against Arab territories, and Israel continues to
occupy Arab territories in defiance of General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions and in disregard of the
rights of the indigenous population and the will of the
international community, which calls upon Israel to
withdraw from these Arab territories.
Mr. Mirohammad (Islamic Republic of Iran): As
the representative of Syria has done, we would like to put
on record our position that the expenses of this mission
should be borne by the aggressor party.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 122.

Agenda item 122
(b) United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in
the Middle East
(a) United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/931)
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report, entitled “Financing of the United
Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East: United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/236).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
I call on the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic,
who wishes to make a statement in explanation of position
on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Sulaiman (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from Arabic): My delegation wishes to express its very
strong reservations about the resolution just adopted. Since
international law demands that the aggressor country
assume the cost of its aggression, Israel should do so. Yet
it still refuses to withdraw from the occupied territories in
compliance with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 425 (1978) and in contravention of the
principle of non-acquisition of territory by force.

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/932)
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 14 of its report, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East:
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”.
A separate vote has been requested on the first
preambular paragraph and on operative paragraphs 3, 4,
5 and 16 of the draft resolution.
I shall now put to the vote the first preambular
paragraph and operative paragraphs 3, 4, 5, and 16, on
which a single separate vote has been requested.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Chile, China, Colombia,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Guyana, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,

9

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe

88th plenary meeting
26 June 1998
Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe

Against:
Israel, United States of America

Against:
Israel, United States of America

Abstaining:
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Monaco, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovakia, Spain,
Sweden, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela

The draft resolution was adopted by 109 votes to 2
(resolution 52/237).

The first preambular paragraph and operative
paragraphs 3, 4, 5, and 16 were retained by 68 votes
to 2, with 41 abstentions.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in
paragraph 14 of document A/52/932 as a whole.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Guyana,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Lithuania,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Syrian Arab

10

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
I shall now call on those representatives who wish to
make statements in explanation of vote.
Mr. Sklar (United States of America): I wish to
take this opportunity to explain the vote of the United
States delegation on the resolution entitled “Financing of
the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle
East: United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”.
I seek the Assembly’s indulgence in making this
explanation, as my delegation had previously explained its
position when this issue was voted upon in the Fifth
Committee last month. However, I believe it is important
to reaffirm our position so that it can be better understood
by all delegations present today, and since it is a matter
of principle.
Our opposition to the present resolution is based on
its relationship to last year’s resolution (resolution
51/233), which we opposed and which is not a consensus
resolution of this world body. We remain deeply
concerned about paragraphs 7 and 8 of that resolution,
which decided that costs of $1,773,618 — which
stemmed from the incident at the United Nations
headquarters of the Force at Qana on 18 April 1996 —
should be borne by Israel. We believe that United Nations
resolution 51/233, and those portions of the current
resolution which refer to it, jeopardize important points of
principle for United Nations operations and politicize the
work of the Fifth Committee.
The use of a General Assembly funding resolution
to pursue claims against a Member State is not correct
procedurally. Since shortly after the inception of the
United Nations, the procedure which has been followed
is that the Secretary-General presents and pursues
settlement of the Organization’s claim against a State or
States. This procedure was first begun in 1946 in the
Middle East and continues today for peacekeeping-related

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
damage claims in the Balkans. Using a funding resolution
to legislate settlement is inappropriate. It also politicizes the
work of the Fifth Committee and should be avoided in the
future.
Because of our concerns, the United States worked in
good faith to find a compromise during the recently
concluded resumed session of the Fifth Committee, similar
to our efforts last year when this issue first arose. We
sought a consensus text that did not set an undesirable
precedent, or raise issues of the legality of the Committee’s
action or politicize the technical tasks assigned to the Fifth
Committee.
As we said at the Fifth Committee meeting last month,
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) is
an organization which is implementing a difficult and
important mandate. We strongly support it in its attempts to
fulfil that mandate. We regret that a consensus text without
politicization on renewing the funding for UNIFIL could
not be achieved.
Mr. Atiyanto (Indonesia): The member States of the
Group of 77 and China are deeply concerned that, despite
our continued and sincere wish to take action by consensus,
the General Assembly has once again taken a decision on
the financing of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) by vote. It is a matter of principle for
the Group of 77 and China that General Assembly
resolutions and decisions be fully respected.
In this regard, the Secretary-General and the
responsible party should fully implement the provisions of
the resolution that we have just adopted, as well as those of
resolution 51/233, which was adopted on 13 June 1997.
Finally, my delegation would like to thank all the
Member States that supported and voted favourably on the
resolution.
Mr. Najem (Lebanon) (interpretation from Arabic):
The resolution on the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) that we have just adopted merely
reaffirms that it is up to the aggressor, Israel, to fulfil its
international obligations and implement all the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council and the General Assembly.
Our position is based on the idea that the aggressor should
assume full responsibility for its aggression, especially if
that aggression is premeditated and deliberate, runs counter
to the will of the international community and results in
thousands of victims.

88th plenary meeting
26 June 1998
I wish to stress that this does not in any way mean
that Lebanon does not believe in the principle of
collective responsibility. On the contrary, we reaffirm our
solid commitment to respect this principle. However, we
do not wish there to be a precedent set in the history of
this Organization whereby one Member State of the
United Nations undertakes aggression against another
Member State and then shelters itself behind the flag of
the United Nations. The aggressor State should assume its
responsibility for losses caused by its actions.
We do not want a precedent to be established in that
respect, and we do not want to encourage such aggression
in the future. Lebanon believes that Israel’s continuing
occupation of parts of Bekaa and southern Lebanon, its
failure to respect Security Council resolution 425 (1978)
and its daily, repeated acts of aggression are responsible
for the cycle of violence in southern Lebanon and the
problems faced by UNIFIL and the Lebanese civilians in
southern Lebanon. Israel, like other States, must comply
with the will of the international community and abide by
the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, including in particular Security Council
resolution 425 (1978).
I should like, on behalf of Lebanon, warmly to thank
the Group of 77 and China for having adopted the Arab
Group’s position on the financing of UNIFIL. Moreover,
and in the name of my Government, I wish to pay tribute
to the active and pioneering role played by UNIFIL and
to thank all the members of that Force. I should also like
to thank all those States, without exception, that have
supported the financing of UNIFIL, especially in its work
for peace in the region. The presence of UNIFIL in
Lebanon is of great importance.
Mr. Sulaiman (Syrian Arab Republic)
(interpretation from Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian
Arab Republic would like to explain its vote on resolution
52/237, on the financing of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). In adopting this resolution,
the General Assembly has again affirmed Israel’s
responsibility for the expenses resulting from its terrorist
attack on the United Nations headquarters at Qana on 18
April 1996, an attack that was condemned by the United
Nations at the time.
This is the second year that the General Assembly
has considered the consequences of the crime committed
by Israel against UNIFIL in Lebanon. UNIFIL was
originally established as a result of Israel’s aggression
against southern Lebanon. Israel’s aggression against

11

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
UNIFIL added a further crime to its record, which is
replete with crimes, massacres and inhumane practices
against the Arabs of the occupied Arab territories.
Israel’s disregard of resolution 51/233, which required
it to provide compensation — token compensation — for
the damages incurred as a result of its many crimes, should
not be overlooked and allowed to occur with impunity. This
Assembly must hold Israel responsible; Israel must not
remain a rogue State, acting outside international law, as
has always been its practice.
My delegation expects Member States to remember
that the terrorist attack by Israel against UNIFIL resulted in
bloodshed and destruction, the consequences of which are
still apparent at the headquarters of the Force and elsewhere
in southern Lebanon. United Nations soldiers, who come
from various parts of the world in response to the United
Nations call for peacekeeping in Lebanon, are threatened
every time Lebanese civilians, who are trying to defend
their land, children, families and dignity, take refuge in the
headquarters of the Force.
The Syrian Arab Republic reaffirms its consistent
position that Israel should be called upon to pay not only
the costs of its aggression against the UNIFIL headquarters,
where innocent Lebanese civilians sought protection and
refuge; Israel, which took pleasure in adopting a policy of
force, occupation and aggression, is also responsible for
financing the Force completely.
Syria affirms that the adoption of this resolution is a
victory for the principles of right, justice and peace, which
the entire international community, with the exception of
Israel, is working to achieve. Israel, which pays no heed to
the principles and objectives of the United Nations or the
Fourth Geneva Convention in particular, will not even fulfil
the simplest financial obligation provided for in resolution
51/233, which openly called upon Israel to assume
responsibility for the costs of its aggression against UNIFIL
in southern Lebanon.
My delegation thanks all the countries that supported
the resolution. Israel’s responsibility for the financial
obligations referred to in the resolution is clear proof of its
responsibility for the aggression against UNIFIL at Qana in
southern Lebanon.
Mr. Mirmohammad (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation voted in favour of the relevant paragraphs of
resolution 52/237, which has just been adopted by the

12

88th plenary meeting
26 June 1998
Assembly. Furthermore, we believe that the expenses of
the whole mission should be borne by the aggressor.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 122.

Agenda items 123 (continued) and 159 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission
Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola
Report of the Fifth Committee (Part III)
(A/52/547/Add.2)
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 7 of part III of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/8 C).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
agenda items 123 and 159.

Agenda item 124
Financing of the activities arising from Security
Council resolution 687 (1991)
(a) United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/933)
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 9 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution,
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

88th plenary meeting
26 June 1998

Observation Mission”, without a vote. May I consider that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have concluded this stage of our consideration of
agenda item 126.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/238).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 124.

Agenda item 125 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara
Report of the
(A/52/843/Add.1)

Fifth

Committee

(Part

II)

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of part II of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft
52/228 B).

resolution

was

adopted

(resolution

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
agenda item 125.

Agenda item 127
Financing of the United Nations Protection Force, the
United Nations Confidence Restoration Operation in
Croatia, the United Nations Preventive Deployment
Force and the United Nations Peace Forces
headquarters
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/935)
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
decision recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft decision
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have concluded this stage of our consideration of
agenda item 127.

Agenda item 129
Financing of the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique

Agenda item 126
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/936)
Financing and liquidation of the United Nations
Transitional Authority in Cambodia
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/934)
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/239).

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/240).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have concluded this stage of our consideration of
agenda item 129.

13

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

Agenda item 130
Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/937)
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?

88th plenary meeting
26 June 1998
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
decision recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft decision
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
agenda item 132.

Agenda item 136 (continued)
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/241).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
agenda item 130.

Agenda item 131
Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/938)
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?

Financing of the United Nations Mission of Observers
in Tajikistan
Report of the Fifth Committee (Part II)
(A/52/844/Add.1)
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of part II of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
52/229 B).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
agenda item 136.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/242).
Agenda item 137 (continued)
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
agenda item 131.

Agenda item 132
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Haiti
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/939)

14

Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Report of the
(A/52/726/Add.1)

88th plenary meeting
26 June 1998
Fifth

Committee

(Part

II)

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
decision recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph
5 of Part II of its report.
The draft decision was adopted by the Fifth
Committee without a vote. May I consider that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
The draft resolution was adopted by the Fifth
Committee without a vote. May I consider that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/244).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
agenda item 139.

The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
agenda item 137.

Agenda item 140 (continued)

Agenda item 138 (continued)

Financing of the
Deployment Force

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina
Report of the
(A/52/690/Add.1)

Fifth

Committee

(Part

II)

The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of part II of its report.
The draft resolution was adopted by the Fifth
Committee without a vote. May I consider that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/243).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
agenda item 138.

United

Nations

Preventive

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/941)
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
The draft resolution was adopted by the Fifth
Committee without a vote. May I consider that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/245).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
agenda item 140.

Agenda item 141 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Support Mission in
Haiti

Agenda item 139 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/940)

Report of the Fifth Committee (Part II)
(A/52/845/Add.1)
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of part II of its report.

15

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The draft resolution was adopted by the Fifth
Committee without a vote. May I consider that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/246).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
agenda item 141.

Agenda item 142 (continued)
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations
(a) Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations
Report of the Fifth Committee (Parts IV and V)
(A/52/453/Add.3 and 4)
Draft resolution A/C.5/52/L.54
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will first take up the recommendations
contained in part IV of the report of the Fifth Committee
and then the recommendations contained in part V of the
report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the two
draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 10 of part IV of its report and on the two draft
decisions recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 11 of the same document.
Draft resolution I, entitled “Third-party liability:
temporal and financial limitations”, was adopted by the
Fifth Committee without a vote. May I consider that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/247).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
Draft resolution II, entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy”, was adopted by
the Fifth Committee without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/1 B).

16

88th plenary meeting
26 June 1998
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
Draft decision I, entitled “Budgetary requirements for
peacekeeping operations”, was adopted by the Fifth
Committee without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft decision I was adopted.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
Draft decision II, entitled “Death and disability benefits”,
was adopted by the Fifth Committee without a vote. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft decision II was adopted.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 7 of part V of its report.
The text of the draft resolution is contained in
document A/C.5/52/L.54. Entitled “Support account for
peacekeeping operations”, it was adopted by the Fifth
Committee without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/248).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
For explanation of position on the resolution just adopted,
I give the floor to the representative of the United
Kingdom.
Mr. Thorne (United Kingdom): I have the honour
to take the floor on behalf of the European Union, under
agenda item 142, on the apportionment of the costs of
peacekeeping operations.
The Central and Eastern European countries
associated with the European Union — Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Romania, Slovakia, and the associated country Cyprus —
as well as the European Free Trade Association country,
member of the European Economic Area, Norway, align
themselves with this statement.
The European Union welcomed the distribution in
the Fifth Committee, on 29 May 1998, of the paper
containing the requested update of the relationship
between peacekeeping assessment shares of Member
States and their respective per capita incomes. This
information had been supplied earlier, in document

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

88th plenary meeting
26 June 1998

A/47/484, following a request from the General Assembly
in resolution 46/240 of 22 May 1992.

transparency and free access to information by all
Member States.

In that context, the General Assembly also requested
the Secretary-General to report on the anomalies in the
allocation of Member States to the four groups in the ad
hoc peacekeeping scale. The document eventually produced
gave a starting point for the debate on the elimination of
those anomalies.

It is unacceptable to the European Union that
Member States should not be given the full information
which they request, in order to better inform us in our
deliberations on this, or indeed any item before the Fifth
Committee. This is a matter of principle for the European
Union.

As representatives will be aware, as long ago as
January 1996 the European Union put forward in the Highlevel Open-ended Working Group on the Financial Situation
of the United Nations a comprehensive package of
measures aimed at resolving the financial crisis of the
Organization. One of the elements contained in that
package was a call for the revision of the scale of
assessments for peacekeeping operations to make it more
equitable, transparent and automatically adjustable to take
into account altered economic circumstances, while
continuing to take account of the needs of Member States
with below average per capita incomes.

Mr. Hanson (Canada): My delegation has two
subjects which it wishes to address at the present time
under this item. On the first subject, I will speak on
behalf of the delegations of Australia, New Zealand and
my own country, Canada. On the second subject, I shall
pass the microphone to my colleague for a statement on
behalf of Canada alone.

It is because of the importance that the European
Union attaches to this proposal that we asked for the
updated information, which we received. We made that
request in our statement delivered in the first resumed
session of the Fifth Committee, on 10 March, and again in
the Fifth Committee’s formal meeting of 18 May. In the
information note which was issued on 29 May, as an
informal paper rather than as an official conference room
paper, we are provided with useful and revealing
information. We shall need to analyse the data further, and
will revert to it in due course under this, the appropriate
agenda item. However, it is already clear from the updated
information we have now received that the number of
discrepancies in the relationship between peacekeeping
assessment shares of Member States and their respective
per capital incomes has increased. A significant number of
group C countries with above average gross national
product are receiving unwarranted subsidies, not only from
those Member States that pay their assessed contributions
in full and on time, but also from those countries which, if
there were a change in the group system, would more
deservedly benefit from it. This surely indicates the need
for a radical but equitable change to the current system.
It is our firm opinion that this matter should be dealt
with under agenda item 142, where we address the
financing of peacekeeping operations, and as we did in
December 1997 in the context of the allocation to the scale
of Slovakia. In order to do this properly, there must be

With regard to the first subject, many delegations
from time to time have requested that the Secretariat
provide information to the Fifth Committee, whether
orally or in the form of conference room papers; and that
information has been provided. Our delegations, as a
matter of firm principle, have supported the right of each
and every delegation to request information from the
Secretariat and to have it provided to all.
It is a matter of the greatest concern to our
delegations that some members of the Fifth Committee,
whether in their national capacities or as members of the
Bureau of the Fifth Committee, have sought to interfere
with the right of delegations to request and receive
information, and even to engage in prior censorship of
such information. We hope that they are cognizant of the
seriousness of what they have attempted.
There are broader implications which go well
beyond the Fifth Committee. It is not possible to restrict
any of the rights of any delegation or group of
delegations without similarly restricting the rights of all
delegations. We hope that delegations will agree that the
work of the Fifth Committee must be guided by
transparency to enable the General Assembly to reach fair
and logical decisions in the most efficient manner, to
enable the Fifth Committee to serve the Assembly in the
best possible way, and to enable the Fifth Committee to
support the mandated activities of the United Nations in
the best possible way.
Mr. Gibbons (Canada): Our delegation joined
consensus on the resolution entitled “Support account for
peacekeeping operations”. However, we regret that the

17

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
General Assembly is not yet able to fund the establishment
of the rapidly deployable mission headquarters (RDMHQ)
from the support account. We believe that if the United
Nations is to live up to the Charter’s claim of collective
responsibility for dealing with threats to international peace
and security it must improve its capability to act when
required, or it must default on this core responsibility.
In paragraph 81 of its report, document A/50/230 of
22 June 1995, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations urged
“the Secretary-General to develop a rapidly deployable
headquarters team composed of personnel skilled in
essential military and civilian headquarters functions”.
The Committee’s report, and the subsequent General
Assembly resolution, resolution 50/30, were adopted by
consensus.
During July 1996, the Secretary-General instructed the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to implement the
rapidly deployable mission headquarters within the
Department. In his progress report on the standby
arrangements system, document S/1996/1067 of 24
December 1996, the Secretary-General stated that he had
decided to establish the skeleton of an RDMHQ within the
Secretariat to
“ensure that the deployment and initial phases of a
peacekeeping operation receive the necessary
management and guidance”. [para. 13]
Plans to staff the eight posts of the RDMHQ
implementation team with, first, gratis officers and,
secondly, bilaterally funded officers were discarded due to
concerns about equitable geographical distribution of those
eight posts. The third option, a United Nations trust fund,
was instituted in order to raise sufficient funding to
implement and support the activities of the RDMHQ until
more stable, predictable funding could be arranged.
However, the trust fund was never intended to become a
perpetual source of funding for the RDMHQ.
An important development has taken place since the
RDMHQ trust fund was started. Last year, the SecretaryGeneral’s Track 2 reform proposals contained a
recommendation that the Security Council and the General
Assembly should consider measures to enhance the rapid
deployment capacity of the United Nations. This
recommendation was endorsed by consensus in resolution
52/12 B, section C, paragraph 6, which requested the

18

88th plenary meeting
26 June 1998
appropriate organs to consider, as a matter of priority,
specific measures to enhance the rapid deployment
capacity of the United Nations in peacekeeping.
Security Council resolution 1159 (1998) of 27 March
1998 authorized a new United Nations peacekeeping
mission known as the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic (MINURCA). The Secretariat
was instructed to establish a new field mission
headquarters in Bangui and take over authority for the
Mission on 15 April 1998. Because the RDHMQ does not
yet exist, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations had
to assemble an ad hoc headquarters staff on only 19 days’
notice. While they were able to establish the headquarters
as instructed, the entire process would have been greatly
simplified if the RDMHQ had been in existence because
its core personnel would have provided continuity to the
MINURCA planning process which originated in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations some time ago.
Chapter I, Article 1, of the United Nations Charter
states that one of the purposes of the United Nations is to
take collective measures for the prevention and removal
of threats to peace. Peacekeeping is one of the measures
developed to undertake this collective responsibility. One
of the key weaknesses of United Nations peacekeeping
has always been the inability of the Organization to
quickly establish a new field mission headquarters capable
of providing effective control of an operation. The need
to adopt specific measures to improve the Organization’s
capacity to rapidly deploy a new peacekeeping mission
has been identified as a priority recommendation in the
Track 2 reform package and has been endorsed, as I
mentioned earlier, in General Assembly resolution
52/12 B.
The RDMHQ trust fund was intended as an interim
mechanism and not a perpetual source of funds for this
purpose. The Secretariat support account submission
recommended the funding of eight posts for the RDMHQ
implementation team. The Secretariat has also clarified
the specific rule and organizational relationship of the
RDMHQ. Support account funding will ensure that the
eight posts can be staffed on the basis of equitable
geographic distribution without the need to employ gratis
officers. The new MINURCA mission in the Central
African Republic is a perfect example of why the United
Nations still requires this headquarters.
Canada remains committed to the RDMHQ concept
and intends to seek a thorough consideration of this

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
important initiative during the forthcoming post-by-post
review.
Mr. Sklar (United States of America): We would like
to join Canada and then Canada, Australia and New
Zealand and affirm our support for both of the statements
just made by Canada. With respect to the RDMHQ, we will
not comment further since we did express our strong
endorsement for the implementation of this mandated
function during our Fifth Committee comments.
We would like to amplify a little bit upon Canada’s
first statement, which it made for itself, Australia and New
Zealand, on a matter also alluded to in the concluding
remarks of the European Union. During the course of this
year’s Fifth Committee debate, transparency, which must be
the watchword of this Organization, i.e., the ability of any
Member to request information and get it, was aborted and
thwarted, possibly, it seems, by Members in positions of
power in the Bureau of the Fifth Committee. Those in
positions of responsibility have an extra responsibility to
ensure that information requested and prepared will be
transmitted in full and in no way retarded, edited or
censored.
We deplore the action that occurred in connection with
this matter. We urge that it never occur again. Transparency
is the watchword and it applies to all of us, not just on
matters of particular interest to us. In particular, it must
never be thwarted by those in positions of responsibility in
any of our working committees or in the General Assembly.
Mr. Soares (Portugal): Portugal fully agrees and
supports the explanation of vote just made by the
representative of the United Kingdom on behalf of the
European Union. In my national capacity I would like to
add that the attempt to stop the circulation of documents
prepared by the Secretary-General or to restrict the
transmittal of information contained therein to a number of
delegations by members of the Bureau of the Fifth
Committee is unacceptable behaviour which we can only
condemn.
The elimination of parts of documents prepared by the
Secretariat for the information of delegations is a form of
censorship never encountered in the Fifth Committee, which
Portugal denounces and which is not conducive to the
maintenance of a climate of trust among delegations which
is needed to facilitate the taking of decisions by consensus.
Mr. Atiyanto (Indonesia): Let me, if I may, speak on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China. My delegation does

88th plenary meeting
26 June 1998
not intend to debate the statement that has been delivered
by my distinguished colleague from the United Kingdom
on behalf of the European Union, and indeed my
delegation abides by your ruling, in accordance with
General Assembly rules and procedures, not to reopen the
debate.
On behalf of the Group of 77, I would like to place
on record that the Group of 77 and China continue to
believe that this is not the right time to discuss or to
reopen the debate on the issue of the scale of assessments
of peacekeeping operations. I would also like to reiterate
that members of the Group of 77 and China respect the
right of each and every Member State of this
Organization. It is my sincere hope that we will put any
mistrust and misunderstanding aside. It is not in the
interests of the Group of 77 and China to continue the
debate, which could be detrimental to this Organization.
Furthermore, we sincerely hope that all Member States of
this Organization will see the matter with an open mind.
Mr. Herrera (Mexico) (interpretation from
Spanish): Like the delegation of Indonesia, my delegation
believes this is not the appropriate moment to reopen the
debate and the analysis of the peacekeeping assessments.
However, we would like to clarify that if it were ever
decided that this topic should be considered, my
delegation would propose that the nations that have a
great deal of power in this Organization should find this
power reflected in the scale of assessments. Those States
that have greater political power vis-à-vis the rest of the
members of the Assembly should pay more. We believe
that if there have been errors in the present scale of
assessments, then explanation of these errors should be
given. Perhaps we should conduct a review, a review
which should enjoy the support of the consensus of all
Member States.
Mr. Moktefi (Algeria) (interpretation from French):
I apologize for taking the floor. I had not planned to, but
my delegation feels that it now must do so. Without
embarking upon a debate of substance, my delegation
would like to associate itself fully with the statement of
the representative of Indonesia on behalf of the Group of
77 and China.
My delegation profoundly deplores the unfounded
accusations, lacking in impartiality, which have been
voiced today by certain delegations in this plenary session
of the General Assembly, and in the absence of the
Chairman of the Committee. Accusations have been made
against the Bureau in circumstances which do not permit

19

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
members of the Bureau to defend the reasons why they
took certain measures. In order to give a clearer picture of
what happened, allow me to recall certain facts.
Reactions varied when that request for documents was
made during formal meetings of the Fifth Committee. Some
were in favour of issuing those documents, while other
delegations, notably those of the Group of 77 and China,
formally expressed their wish that the debate not take place
at that juncture because the Fifth Committee had a number
of other items on its agenda. Therefore, in the spirit of
achieving a calm working atmosphere in the Committee, the
Bureau — acting fully within its rights — made its decision
on the basis of various statements made by delegations and
on the basis of objective criteria.
I hope that the Chairman of the Fifth Committee will
have an opportunity to give a more detailed explanation of
the circumstances in which the Bureau took it upon itself to
make that decision.
This is why we vigorously and deeply deplore the
unfounded accusations that have been made by some
delegations with respect to the Bureau of the Fifth
Committee.
Mr. Zhang Wanhai (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): The Chinese delegation believes that this is not
the time to discuss the peacekeeping assessment. The
Chinese delegation therefore supports the statement and the
position expressed by Indonesia on behalf of the Group of
77 and China.
Mr. Monayair (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic):
My delegation would like to state very briefly that it
supports the statement made by Indonesia on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China.
Ms. Incera (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish):
My delegation did not intend to take the floor at this stage.
However, having listened to the statements made by a
number of delegations, I must say that their unfair
statements regarding the members of the Bureau are
regrettable, particularly bearing in mind that the Chairman
of the Fifth Committee had already explained what took
place when the relevant document was requested.
My delegation fully supports what the Rapporteur of
the Fifth Committee stated just a few moments ago.
Ms. Buergo Rodríguez (Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): I would like to state very briefly my delegation’s

20

88th plenary meeting
26 June 1998
firm support for the statement made by the representative
of Indonesia on behalf of the Group of 77 and China in
connection with the need for us to bear in mind that we
are not in a position at this juncture to reopen the debate
on the scale of assessments for peacekeeping operations,
which has already been the subject of ample negotiations.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 142.

Agenda item 143 (continued)
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services
Report of the Fifth Committee (Part II)
(A/52/846/Add.1)
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
decision recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 5 of part II of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft decision
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
agenda item 143.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

88th plenary meeting
26 June 1998

Agenda item 161
Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/942)
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/249).
The Acting President (interpretation from Spanish):
We have thus concluded this stage of our consideration of
agenda item 161.
The meeting rose at 1.50 p.m.

21
