S/PRST/2001/38

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 December 2001
English
Original: French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4440th meeting of the Security Council, held on 19 December 2001, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Letter dated 30
April 2001 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2001/434)”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council has considered, during its public meetings of 14
May and 18 December 2001, the report of the Inter-Agency Mission to West
Africa (S/2001/434).
“The Security Council welcomes with satisfaction the above report and
fully supports initiatives taken with a view to implementing its
recommendations. It welcomes, in particular, the establishment of the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa to ensure,
inter alia, the strengthening of harmonization and coordination of the activities
of the United Nations system in an integrated regional perspective and to the
development of a fruitful partnership with the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), other subregional organizations and international
and national actors, including civil society.
“The Security Council emphasizes that greater subregional integration
must remain a key goal for the United Nations system in the search for lasting
solutions to the conflicts in West Africa and to the human suffering to which
these give rise. It stresses the need to further strengthen the capacities of
ECOWAS in the areas which should enable it to act as the engine of
subregional integration and increased cooperation with the United Nations
system.
“The Security Council underlines the importance of taking steps to
develop cooperation and coordination among the intergovernmental bodies and
entities of the United Nations system which can influence the situation in West
Africa, and expresses its intention to consider measures to coordinate its action
with these bodies and entities.
“The Security Council emphasizes the need to maintain regional peace
and stability and, in that connection, welcomes the progress made in the Mano
River Union area. It also emphasizes the need to see to the effective
implementation of the confidence-building and cooperation measures agreed
on by Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone and strongly encourages these three

01-70733 (E) 191201

*0170733*

S/PRST/2001/38

countries to do their utmost to hold a summit meeting of their heads of State
and to ensure its success. It commends the role of the civil society particularly
the Mano River Union Women’s Peace Network for their instrumental role in
facilitating dialogue among the leaders of the region.
“The Security Council also emphasizes the need to strengthen the
capacity of ECOWAS to monitor and to stem the illicit flows of small arms and
the establishment of militia. In this connection it welcomes the extension for a
period of three years, starting on 5 July 2001, of the Moratorium on the
Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light Weapons
in West Africa. It appeals to the international community to provide
appropriate financial assistance to the Programme for Coordination and
Assistance for Security and Development and to the national mechanisms
involved in the fight against the proliferation of small arms in West Africa.
“The Security Council also emphasizes the urgent need to solve the
problem of refugees and displaced persons in the subregion by permitting
voluntary returns as soon as possible, under acceptable security conditions.
“The Security Council reiterates its condemnation of the use, by State
and non-State actors, of children as combatants in violation of the relevant
International Instruments on the rights of the child and the Accra Declaration
on War-Affected Children in West Africa and the related Plan of Action. It
calls for the immediate demobilization of all child soldiers.
“The Security Council welcomes the holding in New York, on 16
November 2001, of the fifth meeting of the United Nations-ECOWAS-Sierra
Leone coordination mechanism and the progress made in the peace process in
Sierra Leone. It appeals to the international community for substantial
financial assistance for the programme for the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants and other peace consolidating activities
in Sierra Leone.
“The Council welcomes the holding of the twenty-fifth conference of
heads of States and of Government of ECOWAS. It pays tribute to that
organization for its major contribution to the restoration of peace, stability,
democracy and development in West Africa.
“The Council will remain actively seized of this matter.”

2
