S/PV.7220

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7220th meeting

Friday, 18 July 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gasana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Rwanda)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Mr. Omaish
Mr. Baublys
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

14-47431 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1447431*

S/PV.7220

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Israel to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: As we meet today, the intensification
of the violence the United Nations was trying so hard to
head off is becoming a reality in and around Gaza. This
is all the more dismaying as it comes so soon after signs
of hope had emerged, specifically the attempt by Egypt
to broker a ceasefire, followed by the United Nations
brokering of a humanitarian pause. For five hours
yesterday, a temporary ceasefire, mostly respected by
all parties, allowed civilians in Gaza to resume some
vital activities to sustain their daily lives. The pause
allowed workers to start some repairs on essential
electrical and water infrastructure. In Israel, civilians
were largely spared rocket fire for the same period.
The Secretary-General was therefore alarmed when
militants resumed the firing of projectiles out of the
Gaza Strip after the expiration of the lull, frustrating
our hopes that the humanitarian pause would be the
beginning of de-escalation. It pains us that the muchneeded reprieve was so short.
Shortly after the rockets fired into Israel marked
the end of the humanitarian pause, Prime Minister
Netanyahu announced the launch of a ground operation
into Gaza. To our knowledge, the Israeli Defense Forces
2/20

18/07/2014

(IDF) has so far conducted four ground incursions
into Gaza and conducted some 90 air strikes, firing
91 missiles, mostly inside the access restricted area,
which has been extended to 3 kilometres. The IDF
at the barrier fired some 357 tank shells, while the
Israeli Navy fired some 150 shells. Since the end of
the humanitarian pause, militants have fired some 127
rockets and 29 mortar shells at Israel. Approximately
20 Palestinian houses were hit. Some 26 Palestinians
were killed and another 116 injured. One IDF soldier
was killed.
The Secretary-General is extremely concerned
that this escalation will further increase the already
appalling death toll among Gazan civilians. Israel
has legitimate security concerns and we condemn the
indiscriminate rocket fire from Gaza into Israel that
ended yesterday’s temporary ceasefire, but we are
alarmed by Israel’s heavy response. The SecretaryGeneral was shocked by the terrible killing by an
Israeli strike of four children on a beach in Gaza City
on 16 July. Three more children from one family were
killed yesterday. No further illustration is needed. The
violence must end.
Since 8 July when hostilities intensified in the leadup to the current escalation, over 2,000 rockets were
fired from Gaza into Israel, of which some 1,100 struck
Israel and hundreds were intercepted by the Iron Dome.
Two Israelis were killed, including one civilian. Twelve
IDF soldiers and 365 Israeli civilians were injured. In
the same period, some 261 Palestinians, a majority of
them civilians, including at least 48 women and over
50 children, have been killed, and over 1,600 have been
injured, as a result of some 1,900 strikes on Gaza from
land, air and sea. Israeli bombardment inflicted damage
to schools, health facilities and water and sanitation
infrastructures. Over 1,800 Palestinian families have
had their homes destroyed or severely damaged.
Since the beginning of the crisis, the SecretaryGeneral has urged regional and international partners to
exert all possible influence to bring about an immediate
end to the suffering and bloodshed. Since the last
briefing (see S/PV.7214) to the Council on 10 July, the
Secretary-General has been in touch around the clock
with world leaders to facilitate united and effective
action to stop the violence in and around Gaza and the
unbearable stress on Israeli families from continued
rocket attacks. We had hoped that the successful
brokering of a humanitarian pause would also help
efforts led by Egypt to facilitate a ceasefire on the basis

14-47431

18/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the understanding of November 2012. The United
Nations has repeatedly expressed our support for all
efforts to put an end to the violence. We appreciate that
Israel accepted the Egyptian proposal for a ceasefire.
However, Hamas tabled counterproposals to the
Egyptian proposal that were in turn not acceptable to
Israel.
The Palestinian Authority has also expressed its
support for a ceasefire, and President Abbas has been
actively engaged with regional and world leaders in an
appeal for an end to the crisis. President Abbas met with
Egyptian President Al Sisi in Cairo yesterday to discuss
the Egyptian proposal. Both Presidents reportedly
agreed on the necessity of an immediate ceasefire
and on the urgency of holding a donors conference to
start rebuilding the Gaza Strip. President Abbas is now
scheduled to arrive in Turkey today for meetings with
Turkish President Gül and Prime Minister Erdoğan to
discuss the situation.
President Abbas has also reportedly indicated
that, in the event of a ceasefire, he would be willing
to redeploy Palestinian Authority forces along the
Philadelphi corridor, between Gaza and Egypt, to
enable a reopening of the Rafah border crossing under
their supervision. That would be a key component of
bringing Gaza back under one legitimate Palestinian
Government, adhering to the Palestinian Liberation
Organization commitments and enabling that
Government to deliver tangible improvements to the
lives of Gazans. President Abbas has further written
to the Secretary-General requesting that Palestine
be placed under an international protection system
administered by the United Nations. The SecretaryGeneral is carefully studying that request.
The international community, including this
Council, has issued numerous calls for an end to violence
and for the protection of civilians. We again call for an
immediate end to the indiscriminate firing of rockets
by Hamas into Israel and Israeli retaliatory action. All
parties must respect international humanitarian and
human rights law. They must be held accountable for
any breaches of those obligations. We also again ask
parties to do their utmost to ensure that humanitarian
assistance continues to reach all those in need. All must
ensure the protection of civilians and the integrity of
United Nations premises and staff. In that regard, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) has strongly
condemned those responsible for placing approximately

S/PV.7220

20 rockets in a vacant UNRWA school in the Gaza Strip
as a flagrant violation of the inviolability of its premises
under international law. The Agency has launched a
comprehensive investigation into that incident.
A ceasefire is indispensable and urgent. Until efforts
to that end succeed, further humanitarian pauses will
remain necessary, and we urge the parties to consider
such windows so that civilians can move freely and
undertake vital activities. The United Nations in Gaza
has been a crucial provider of emergency assistance
to alleviate the humanitarian impact of the escalation.
UNRWA has been playing a lead role in providing
shelter in 43 different facilities to around 47,000 Gazans
who have nowhere else to flee following IDF warnings
to leave their houses before they come under attack.
UNRWA’s capacity is stretched to the limit, raising
fears that further civilians warned of IDF operations
could not be accommodated in terms of supplies.
Unless we address the root causes of the current
escalation, this dreadful violence will recur again
and again. We cannot return to the status quo
ante — a concern that Palestinians and Israelis share.
Core elements of resolution 1860 (2009) remain
unimplemented. Once calm is restored, it is imperative
to immediately tackle the underlying causes. These
include an end to weapons smuggling, the full opening
of the crossings and bringing Gaza back under one
legitimate Palestinian Government adhering to the
PLO commitments.
As for the latter, it is imperative to address the
issue of governance. Tens of thousands of employees
hired after 2007 and working in Gaza are not getting
paid, while over 60,000 employees continue to receive
salaries from Ramallah without performing the essential
governance functions that Gaza so urgently needs. That
is simply not sustainable. The United Nations remains
prepared to help facilitate all efforts in that regard,
in coordination and consultation with all concerned
parties. The parties must seize this opportunity to
not only renew a ceasefire but also to support durable
political, security, institutional and socioeconomic
progress that stabilizes Gaza.
As the Secretary-General has noted, the impact of
the Gaza crisis is starting to be felt within the region.
We would also note that since the 9 July meeting of
the Council on the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006), at least 11 rockets were launched from the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) area
of operations towards Israel in five separate incidents

14-474313/20

S/PV.7220

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

between 11 and 18 July. According to the information
available so far, five rockets hit Israel, while four fell
inside Lebanon and two into the sea. In addition, on
11 July the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) found and
dismantled two rockets set to launch towards Israel.
The Israel Defense Forces retaliated on all occasions
with several rounds of artillery or illumination fire
across the Blue Line towards the launching areas. No
casualties or significant damage have been reported
from either side so far.
In each instance, UNIFIL immediately engaged
with the IDF and the LAF to urge them to exercise
maximum restraint and cooperate with UNIFIL in order
to prevent further escalation and restore the cessation of
hostilities. The Lebanese security forces announced the
arrest of three people in connection with the 11, 13 and
14 July attacks. UNIFIL, in coordination with the
Lebanese Armed Forces, is maintaining an enhanced
operational presence on the ground and has intensified
patrols across the area of operations to prevent further
incidents. The Lebanese Armed Forces have increased
their presence in the area.
On a different front, recent violations of the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement between Israel
and Syria have shown the grave danger that the security
situation continues to pose to stability in the Golan. On
three occasions this month, explosions and rockets from
the Bravo side impacting on the Alpha side led the IDF
to respond with fire to the Bravo side. In a very recent
development, on 15 July Syrian Arab Armed Forces
troops with heavy weapons deployed in proximity to
United Nations observation position 56. The exchange of
fire between the Syrian Arab Armed Forces and armed
members of the opposition resulted in mortar rounds
impacting in the vicinity of the position. Subsequently,
armed members of the opposition approached United
Nations observation position 68 demanding that United
Nations peacekeepers ask the Syrian Arab Armed
Forces to move away from position 56, failing which
they would attack position 68.
The threat by armed members of the opposition was
repeated today, when a United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) patrol escorting a logistic
convoy from positions 60 to 68 was intercepted and
armed members of the opposition handed UNDOF a
written notice threatening to attack operating position
56 if the Syrian Arab Armed Forces did not vacate.
As we speak, the Syrian Arab Armed Forces remain
30 metres to the north and 200 metres to the south of

4/20

18/07/2014

observation position 56. Position 56 is a communications
hub for all United Nations positions south of it. Those
developments seriously threaten the safety and security
of United Nations personnel and have the potential to
jeopardize the ceasefire between Israel and Syria.
While we focus on Gaza today, we must not forget
the bigger picture. The escalation in Gaza has also
had repercussions in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, as clashes have occurred between those
demonstrating in support of Gaza and the Israeli
security forces. Since this morning, restrictions have
been placed on Palestinian access to the holy places in
the Old City of Jerusalem, and Israeli security forces
are heavily deployed. Reported clashes since have led to
several Palestinians being injured. In addition, tensions
persist, including from settler violence, putting a strain
on the much-needed security coordination between
the Israeli and Palestinian security forces. Our appeal
stands to the Israeli and Palestinian leadership to defuse
tensions and act responsibly.
The situation on the ground is ultimately the result
of a collective failure to advance a political solution for
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Temporary fixes will no
longer do. The international community must assume
its responsibility to urgently help restore a serious
prospect for a two-State solution that will bring an
end to the decades-long conflict and occupation. That
is the only way to make a ceasefire last. It is the only
way to break the seemingly endless cycle of attack and
retaliation. It is the only way to ensure a durable peace
for this and succeeding generations of Palestinians and
Israelis.
The Secretary-General is prepared to do his part.
He will leave for the region tomorrow to express
solidarity with Israelis and Palestinians and to help
them, in coordination with regional and international
actors, to end the violence and to find a way forward.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We have called for this
emergency meeting of the Security Council due to the
ongoing crisis faced by the Palestinian people under
Israeli occupation. With every moment that passes,
the life of another Palestinian child, mother or father
is cruelly taken by the Israeli occupying forces in
their murderous rampage of airstrikes and artillery
bombardment against civilian areas, and now a massive
14-47431

18/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

ground invasion of the Gaza Strip, threatening the
safety and survival of the entire Palestinian civilian
population. As we were driving to this meeting, four
more children were killed. I have their names and their
ages, which range from 2 to 13 years: Rizeq Al-Hayek,
aged 2, Sarah Bustan, aged 13, Imad Ilwan, aged 7, and
Qasem Ilwan, aged 4.
Despite the regional and international efforts to
bring an end to the violence and bloodshed, as well as
the siege, isolation and punishment of our people, and
the broad consensus that there is no military solution
to this crisis or to the conflict in its entirety, Israel, the
occupying Power, has intensified its military operations
with the full intention and knowledge that the number
of civilian casualties will mount. In less than 24 hours,
the Israeli assault has killed more than 40 Palestinians,
including many children.
While President Abbas has been continuously
engaged in efforts to secure a comprehensive ceasefire,
including those of Egypt and Turkey, among other
concerned countries in the region and beyond, Israel has
instead chosen to continue waging war on our people.
At the direct command of the highest levels of the Israeli
Government and army, the occupying forces are killing
and injuring hundreds of Palestinian civilians, the
majority of whom are children and women, destroying
homes and infrastructure and displacing thousands
of families. Yet another disaster is being inflicted
on Gaza. It is traumatizing and terrorizing the entire
population, worsening the humanitarian crisis caused
by Israel’s repeated aggressions and illegal eight-year
blockade and sowing widespread distress, resentment
and rage among our people.
That savage Israeli aggression cannot be justified by
any means. It is not self-defence but a vengeful military
aggression, intentionally planned and perpetrated by
the occupying Power against the civilian population
under its occupation. Among the goals of that military
campaign are the destruction of Palestinian unity and
the collapse of the national consensus Government.
The statements made by Israeli officials, from the
Prime Minister down, as well as the enumeration of the
specific aims of the aggression, are clear evidence of
that.
We recall that the Israeli Government cynically
used the killing of three Israeli settlers to launch the
aggression — a crime of which there has not been an
independent and transparent investigation but which
Israel has insanely used as the basis for its barbaric

S/PV.7220

attacks and because of which officials, settlers and
extremists continue to incite more terror and cause
harm to our people.
Moreover, it is an obvious repeat of the numerous
crises fabricated by Israel over the years to evade all
efforts to advance a peaceful political solution to the
conflict and to justly address its root causes, namely,
Israel’s denial and violation of the human rights of
the Palestinian people and its 47-year illegal military
occupation and colonization of Palestinian land. It is
not by coincidence that such deliberate destabilization
of the situation on the ground diverts international
attention from Israel’s obstruction of peace efforts,
particularly through its malicious settlement campaign
throughout the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
War crimes, crimes against humanity, State
terrorism and systematic human rights violations are
being committed by Israel against the Palestinian
people. That is not simply a Palestinian narrative.
It is fact. Before the eyes of the world, Israel wages
war against a defenceless civilian population,
tramples their human rights, commits grave breaches
of international humanitarian law and destroys the
pillars of the international system. At the same time, it
forces a repugnant double standard on the international
community through its cynical pretexts, including by
destroying the credibility of the Security Council itself,
which continues to stand aside as Israel flagrantly
violates its resolutions without consequences.
Israel’s actions belie its words. The facts speak
much louder than the disdainful words and immoral
lectures made repeatedly before the Council by the
Israeli representative while his Government and army
kill and maim innocent children, women and men.
The Palestinian death toll now stands at more than 274
people, plus the four children, making a total of 278
people killed and more than 2,065 people injured. The
overwhelming majority of those killed and injured are
civilians, including 66 children and, as we heard from
Mr. Feltman, 48 women and 17 elderly persons. More
than 47,000 people have been displaced, the majority
of whom are Palestine refugees. Those disturbing
facts are corroborated by reports from the United
Nations agencies on the ground, including the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.
The images of the Palestinian children killed by
the Israeli occupying forces sear our hearts and the

14-474315/20

S/PV.7220

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

conscience of the world. I am compelled to share the
names of the some of the children, families and elderly
and disabled persons killed by Israel’s onslaught since
our last appeal to the Council (see S/PV.7214), the
majority of whom were killed in Israeli airstrikes on
their homes. All the victims, including our children and
women, have names. They are not only numbers that
the Israeli occupying army slaughters as it wishes. The
names are as follows.
Mahmoud AI-Haj, Tariq Saad Al-Haj, Saad
Mahmoud Al-Haj, Omar Al-Haj, Najla Mahmoud
Al-Haj, Amina Al-Haj, all of the same family, were
obliterated. Abdullah Abu Ghazl, aged 4, Yasmeen
Al-Mutaweq, aged 4, Shand Helmi AI-Qarnawi, aged 5,
Ghalia Deeb Ghannam, aged 7, Nour Marwan Al-Najdi,
aged 10, Saber Sukkar, aged 80, and Ola Washahi,
aged 31, and Suha Abu Saada, aged 47, both of whom
suffered from severe mental and physical handicaps,
were killed in an airstrike on a disabled persons centre.
Eighteen members of the Al-Batsh family, including
six children and three women, one of them pregnant,
were massacred and 16 other civilians were wounded
by the Israeli occupying forces in a military airstrike
that was deliberately launched on their home and which
Israel declared was targeting Tayseer Al-Batsh, a police
chief in Gaza. The dead include Nahed Nai’im AIBatsh, aged 41, Bahaa Majed Al-Batsh, aged 28, Qusai
Issam Al-Batsh, aged 12, Mohammed Issam Al-Batsh,
aged 17, Ahmed Nu’man Al-Batsh, aged 27, Yehya
Ala Al-Batsh, aged 18, Jalal Majed Al-Batsh, aged 26,
Mahmoud Majed Al-Batsh, aged 22, Marwa Majed
Al-Batsh, aged 25, Majed Subhi Al-Batsh, Khaled
Majed Al-Batsh, aged 20, Ibrahim Majed Al-Batsh,
aged 18, Manar Majed AI-Batsh, aged 13, Amal Hasan
Al-Batsh, aged 49, Anas Alaa Al-Batsh, aged 10, Qusai
Alaa Al-Batsh, aged 20, Zakariya Alaa Al-Batsh and
Aziza Youssef Al-Batsh, aged 59.
Ismail Baker, aged 9, Ahmed Baker, aged 10,
Mohammed Baker, aged 10, and Zakariya Baker, aged
10, were murdered by the occupying forces in broad
daylight as they were playing on the beach in Gaza City,
in the incident that was referred to by Mr. Feltman.
Yasmin Al-Astal, aged 4, Osama Al-Astal, aged 6,
and Raqiyya Al-Astal, aged 70 — all members of the
same family — were killed in an air strike at a mosque.
Ibrahim Ramadan Abu Daqqa, aged 10, his brother
Amro Ramadan Abu Daqqa, aged 25, and their sister
Madeline Abu Daqqa, aged 27, a pregnant mother of
three, and their elderly grandmother, Khadra Abu

6/20

18/07/2014

Daqqa, Fulla Shuhaibar, aged 9, brothers Jihad Issam
Shuhaibar, aged 10, and Wasim Issam Shuaibar, aged
7, Ahmad Ismail Abu Musaflam, aged 14, his sister
Alaa, aged 13, and brother Muhammad, aged 15, Rahaf
khalil Al-Jbour, aged 4, Yassin Al-Humaidi, aged 4,
Mohammad Shadi Natiz, aged 15, and Mohammed
Salim Natiz, aged 4, and Fares Al-Mahmoum, 5 months
old, also died.
We join our grieving people in praying for their
souls and asking for strength and resilience for their
mourning families and nation.
The names of many of the dead are still unknown
as emergency personnel sift through the rubble and
as Israel continues its attacks. That is the unjust
reality in which the Palestinian people are struggling
to survive and suffering gravely under the Israeli
occupation, as their right to reject and resist that
immoral, inhumane and illegitimate occupation — and
their legitimate aspirations to realizing their rights and
freedom — continue to be shamefully perverted by the
occupying Power.
That reality is worsened by the repeated
appeasement of Israel and the failure of the international
community to hold it accountable and to impose the rule
of law. We call on the Security Council once again to
uphold its duties under the Charter and to act forthwith
to implement its resolutions regarding the PalestinianIsraeli conflict and on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and children in armed conflict.
Should the Security Council fail to respond to
our appeals to uphold the law to end those crimes
and violations against our people and ensure their
protection, and should our peaceful, diplomatic and
political efforts in that regard fail, we will have no
recourse but to turn to the judicial bodies of the United
Nations and the international system. We have a duty
to our people to leave no stone unturned as we strive
to end the Israeli occupation, oppression and colonial
domination and attain our inalienable rights.
We call on the Security Council to adopt a resolution
that condemns the Israeli military aggression against
the Palestinian civilian population in the Gaza Strip,
calls for its immediate cessation and the lifting of the
Israeli blockade on Gaza Strip, and for protection of the
Palestinian people, since Israel, the occupying Power,
has clearly abrogated its legal obligations to do so. In
that regard, we draw attention to the fact that such a
resolution and the necessary action to implement it

14-47431

18/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

has the full endorsement of the Group of Arab States,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the
Non-Aligned Movement, which constitutes the majority
of the United Nations membership.
Lastly, before concluding, I also wish to make an
appeal to the international community to support the
efforts to provide emergency humanitarian assistance
to the Palestinian civilian population in Gaza in order
to alleviate the grave suffering and devastation they
are enduring. In that regard, we appeal for urgent
donor support to the emergency appeal for Gaza
launched by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East on
14 July, recognizing the vital role being played by the
Agency, along with other United Nations agencies and
international organizations on the ground, to address
the crisis and meet the needs of the population.

S/PV.7220

A few hours ago, the Israel Defense Forces
entered Gaza to restore sustained quiet to the people
of Israel while degrading Hamas’ terror capabilities.
We did everything in our power to avoid that. Prime
Minister Netanyahu made the courageous decision to
accept every ceasefire offered, even as the people of
Israel were under attack. But Hamas rejected every
overture to restore the quiet. That was not what we
wanted. We have sent our children — our sons and our
daughters — to face an enemy that lives by violence
and celebrates death.

(spoke in Arabic)

I want to be clear. Our forces are fighting in Gaza but
they are not fighting the people of Gaza. For years, the
citizens of Israel have been the victims of unrelenting
attacks perpetrated by a murderous terrorist group.
Hamas has attacked us in our homes and our schools
and on our buses. The Council should stand now with
Israel to prevent the next barrage of rockets, the next
kidnapping, and the next suicide attack, so that we may
once and for all remove the threat of terrorism casting
its dark shadow over the people of Israel.

We return to the Security Council once again after
it failed to respond to the aggression against our people.
From this Chamber, we salute the Palestinian people
for their suffering and magnificent fortitude and bow
before their martyrs who have fallen as a result of
Israel’s barbaric act of aggression that has spared no
civilian woman, man or child in the 1.8 million people
living in Gaza. They are right to be angry at the Security
Council, which has not stopped that act of aggression.
They are right to be angry that the world watches as
they suffer and lose their children and members of their
families.

The past month alone offers a glimpse into the
unrelenting threats that Israel faces. We are being
attacked on four fronts. Rockets have been launched
from Syria, Lebanon and Sinai, and over 1,500 rockets
have been fired by terrorists in Gaza. Israel’s great
restraint is being met with unrestrained aggression.
For six hours on Tuesday, Israel held its fire. During
that time, the world witnessed Hamas’ understanding
of ceasefires. Israel ceases and Hamas fires. Hamas did
not fire one or two rockets; it battered Israel with 50
rockets. Every one sent a message loud and clear that
Hamas is determined to wage war on the Jewish State.

That aggression has not yet stopped. However,
people across the world are proud of the Palestinian
people as they struggle and spare no effort to attain
their freedom and put an end to that barbaric act of
aggression. We all know that the Palestinian people
will succeed, and soon, in putting an end to the barbaric
act of aggression.

Two days later, the United Nations asked for
a limited humanitarian truce. Once again, Prime
Minister Netanyahu agreed and proved that Israel
is not interested in a war. As aid workers transferred
goods to assist the people of Gaza, Hamas continued to
defiantly launch rockets into Israel. How did Hamas use
the humanitarian ceasefire? It sent 13 heavily armed
terrorists through a terror tunnel towards Kibbutz Sufa
with the sole purpose of committing a massacre. This
is the third time in the past two weeks that Hamas has
used its tunnels to infiltrate Israel and tried to carry out
attacks. All the while, it is still launching hundreds of
rockets.

Finally, allow to me to say just a few words in
Arabic to our people in the Gaza Strip.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): In the face of terrorists
kidnapping our children, we were left with no choice.
In the face of rockets raining down on our citizens,
we were left with no choice. In the face of jihadists
tunneling under our borders, we were left with no
choice.

For 10 days, the life of 5 million Israelis has meant
having just seconds to run for a bomb shelter and save
their lives. Our largest cities — Tel Aviv, Haifa and

14-474317/20

S/PV.7220

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Jerusalem — are being bombarded on a daily basis.
There is no country in the world that would tolerate
such an assault on its citizens, and Israel should not be
expected to do so either. We are acting solely to defend
Israelis from constant terror attacks.
Throughout Operation Protective Edge, Israel has
been committed to upholding international law. Our
army is a moral army like no other in the world. It
does not aspire to harm any innocent person. We are
operating only against terrorist targets and genuinely
regret any civilian loss. In contrast, there is no red line
that Hamas will not cross. It will stop at nothing and
there is no depth that it will not sink to. It is even using
ambulances filled with children to move its terrorists
around Gaza.
There is no site that is off limits for Hamas. It is
storing its weapons in family homes and launching
rockets from mosques, and has established its
headquarters in the basement of a Gaza hospital.
Yesterday, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
admitted that it had found, mysteriously, 20 missiles
in one of its schools. I am sure that if UNRWA took
the time to check its other facilities, it would discover
that this is just the tip of the iceberg. Hamas is using
United Nations facilities to commit a double war crime
by targeting Israeli civilians while hiding behind
Palestinian civilians. From the safety of their luxury
hotels in Qatar, Hamas leaders like Khaled Mashaal
order room service with one hand and order Hamas to
use Palestinians as human shields with the other.
But Council members do not have to take my word
for it. The Palestinian representative to the United
Nations Human Rights Council has admitted as much,
saying:
“The missiles that are now being launched against
Israel — each and every missile constitutes a crime
against humanity, whether it hits or misses, because
it is directed at civilian targets.”
I hope the Palestinian representative will remember that
when making threats to enter certain United Nations
organizations.
Israel has been faced with a choice that no nation
should have to make — refrain from responding and
subject its civilians to rocket attack, or engage with
terrorists and risk injuring civilians. Hamas uses
Palestinian casualties to fuel its propaganda machine.

8/20

18/07/2014

Hamas’ strategy is clear. It perpetuates the killing of its
own people in the hope that the international community
will place pressure on Israel to grant its demands.
Sadly, many people have fallen for this cynical
campaign by describing the fighting as moral
equivalency, or a “cycle of violence”. All those who
argue that both sides are equally to blame are playing
into Hamas’ hand and sentencing the people of Gaza and
Israel to further suffering. Ill-informed condemnations
of Israel strengthen the hand of terrorists. There is a
clear difference between Israel and Hamas. The Jewish
people believe in the value of life, while Hamas believes
in the value of taking lives. How many more Palestinians
must fall victim before President Abbas finally breaks
his partnership with Hamas? Abbas is the President
of the unity Government that includes a murderous
terrorist group. What exactly is his Government united
for? Obviously, not for peace.
Even as alarms sound throughout Israel, some
members of the international community are sounding
false alarms here in the United Nations. They told us
that as soon as Israel retreated to its 1967 lines and
dismantled its settlements, there would be peace.
They insisted that the conflict was fueled by the socalled occupation. Occupation? Does no one remember
anything?
In 2005, when I headed Israel’s foreign service,
Israel turned every inch of Gaza over to the Palestinians.
In the process, the world watched as we uprooted
thousands of families from their homes and dismantled
their businesses. When we were done, there was not a
soldier, not a settler and not a single Israeli left. All
we left behind were greenhouses and other structures
that would develop the Gaza economy and allow the
Palestinian people to build a peaceful society. We
opened border crossings and encouraged commerce
because we wanted Gaza to succeed. We hoped that this
would serve as a model of two societies living side by
side in peace.
But it did not. Hamas used the pretense of democracy
to create a militant theocracy. First, it waged a civil
war against Fatah and executed its political opponents.
Then it destroyed the greenhouses and businesses we
left behind. Instead of using them to build economic
institutions, it built a terrorist regime complete with
miles of underground tunnels. Finally, it seized the
funding that flowed from the international community
to flood Gaza with weapons.

14-47431

18/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In each and every month for the past nine years,
Hamas has fired rockets towards Israeli towns and cities.
Over time, it has expanded its arsenal of rockets from
a few hundred to thousands. The weapons it has today
are more sophisticated and can reach further into Israel
than ever before. Every few years, Hamas escalates its
attacks by launching a massive offensive. In 2008, over
the course of three weeks Hamas fired 800 rockets that
could reach a million Israelis living in the area near
Gaza. In 2012, Hamas fired 1,200 rockets in a single
week that could reach 3.5 million Israelis in southern
and central Israel. Over the past two weeks, Hamas
has fired 1,500 rockets that threaten 5 million Israelis,
or 70 per cent of our population living throughout the
country.
After each escalation, the international community
brokers a ceasefire and Israel accepts it, hoping that it
will finally bring peace. After three rounds of major
assaults and over 12,000 rockets in nine years, it has
become clear that Hamas is not interested in bringing
quiet to Gaza. It is employing the Hudna strategy. When
Hamas finds itself on the verge of defeat, it agrees to a
brief recess to reset, rearm and resume aggressions.
For years, we have told the Security Council about
the thousands of rockets that Hamas was smuggling
into Gaza. We have talked and we have repeated these
facts. We have been met with silence. Time and again,
we have called on the international community to
condemn the rocket fire and we have been met with
silence. It is time for the international community to
face the consequences of its inaction. Hamas used its
foothold in Gaza to trample on the Palestinian people
and build a terror base in Israel’s backyard. Now it sees
an opportunity to do so again. Hamas is using the unity
Government to export its terrorist capabilities from
Gaza to Judea and Samaria. If Hamas is not stopped, it
will mean more terror for Israel and more tragedy for
the Palestinians.
The international community embraced the unity
agreement between Fatah and the terror organization,
believing that it would move us closer to peace. Does
that sound logical? How could embracing a terror
group whose raison d’être is the eradication of Israel
bring about peace? By now it should be clear that
Hamas is using the cover of a political agreement to
gain legitimacy for its extremist objectives. Following
the establishment of the unity Government, Hamas
Minister Fathi Hamad declared that,

S/PV.7220

“the whistling bullets, the sound of bombs and
missiles exploding and the capture of Israeli
soldiers was music to our ears”.
The danger could not be clearer. Supporting the unity
agreement gives Hamas the opportunity to weave
incitement, violence and terror into the basic fabric of
Judea and Samara, just as it did in Gaza.
The citizens of Israel want to live in peace. We
want to see our children grow up and grow old without
ever having to run for a bomb shelter or put on an army
uniform. Our hope is that some day — some day — we
will read about attacks on Jewish people in history
books, rather than in newspapers. But that day has not
yet come. For now, we are forced to wage war against
a terrorist group committed to our destruction. As we
speak, night has fallen in Israel. Rather than sleeping
soundly in their beds, our sons and daughters are out
there in the darkness standing guard over Israel and the
people of Israel.
In the Book of Psalms, King David says, “Too long
have I lived among those who hate peace. I am for peace,
but when I speak, they are for war” (The Holy Bible,
Psalm 120:6-7). Israel was left with no choice. But each
and every individual in this Chamber has the choice to
stand against terrorism and for the right of people to
live in peace; to stand against the use of human shields,
and for human rights; to stand against oppression and
for the freedoms that we hold dear. The leaders of many
Governments represented in this Chamber have already
expressed their support for Israel’s right to defend
itself. We thank them for standing by our side at this
important hour. I ask the rest of those present to join
them.
I have here with me a compass. I offer it to the
international community in the hope that it will guide
its members towards making the right decision and
standing for greater clarity, for good against evil and
for right against wrong.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Jordan,
on behalf of the Group of Arab States, called for the
convening of this urgent meeting to discuss the latest
grave developments in the Gaza Strip. We thank the
members of the Council for responding quickly to our
call.

14-474319/20

S/PV.7220

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Jordan rejects and condemns in the strongest terms
the repeated aggressions waged by Israel on the Gaza
Strip. We denounce its war on the Palestinian people
and the most recent developments following the launch
of the land invasion against the Gaza Strip last night.
Jordan denounces the disproportionate, unjustified
use of excessive force and the indiscriminate targeting
of innocent civilians — the sons and daughters of the
Palestinian people. Has humankind become jaded as the
world has become accustomed to seeing dead children
in Gaza, dead children on the beaches of Gaza and dead
children among the remains of their destroyed homes?
Israel’s aggression has claimed more than 270
martyrs to date, as well as more than 1,500 injured. The
numbers continue to escalate. The United Nations has
reported that more than 80 per cent of the Palestinian
casualties are civilians. More than 20 per cent are
children. More than 1,600 Palestinian homes have been
obliterated. Tens of thousands of Palestinians have
left their homes in northern and central Gaza. More
than 18,000 have sought refuge in the schools of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. More than half of the people
of Gaza are living without water. Many schools and
health facilities have been destroyed, thereby escalating
the suffocating human suffering in the Gaza Strip.
Jordan calls on Israel to immediately end its
military operations. We call on Israel to withdraw
its forces from the Gaza Strip. Jordan calls for a
complete de-escalation and ceasefire and an end to the
targeting of innocent civilians anywhere, as well as
for their protection. We call for respect for the rules of
international humanitarian law. In that regard, Jordan
supports the Egyptian initiative towards ceasefire and
de-escalation, that has been tabled.

18/07/2014

the resumption of comprehensive, serious negotiations
based on the two-State solution. That would include
the establishment of an independent Palestinian State
on Palestinian land, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
based on the relevant international resolutions and the
Arab Peace Initiative, in order to ensure security and
stability for all the States and peoples of the region.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing.
The United States is deeply concerned about
the rocket attacks by Hamas and by the dangerous
escalation of hostilities in the region. In particular, we
are concerned about the devastating impact of the crisis
on both Israeli and Palestinian civilians.
President Obama spoke with Prime Minister
Netanyahu this morning to reaffirm the United States
strong support for Israel’s right to defend itself. As
President Obama said today, no nation should accept
rockets being fired into its borders or terrorists
tunnelling into its territory. In just the last two weeks,
Hamas and other armed groups in Gaza have launched
more than 1,500 rockets towards population centres
in Israel. Hamas attacks are unacceptable, and would
be unacceptable to any State Member of the United
Nations. Israel has the right to defend its citizens and
prevent those attacks.
President Obama also said today that we are deeply
concerned about the potential loss of more innocent
lives. It is important that everything possible be done
to prevent civilian casualties, as well as to mitigate the
suffering of innocent men, women and children.

Jordan has strengthened the capacity of the military
field hospital that has been operating in Gaza for years.
We have accelerated urgent medical assistance to the
Strip. Jordan has also opened its doors to the waves
of Palestinian wounded. We call on the international
community to provide urgent humanitarian assistance
to the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip.

The consequences of the increasing violence are
plain for all of us to see, and they are heart-wrenching.
We feel profound anguish upon seeing the images of
suffering from Gaza, including the deaths and injuries
of innocent Palestinian civilians, including young
children, and the displacement of thousands of people.
Israeli civilians, including the elderly and children
alike, are fleeing to shelters with little warnings to
escape the barrage of rockets from Gaza. That is no
way for anyone to live — not Palestinians, not Israelis.

Under the leadership of his majesty King Abdullah II
ibn Al Hussein, Jordan is working substantively through
intensive contacts with the leaders of the region and the
world, to reach a ceasefire agreement. We stress that
the only solution to guarantee a definitive end to such
Israeli aggression would be a political solution through

The four Palestinian boys playing on the beach
in Gaza City were like boys everywhere, restless for
play. Their deaths are heartbreaking, and the loss their
family members and neighbours must feel today must
be searing. The Israeli authorities have opened an
investigation into their deaths.

10/20

14-47431

18/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The devastating consequences of the conflict make
it all the more disturbing that Hamas has squandered
the serious efforts by Egypt to broker a ceasefire. A
cessation of violence would have offered civilians on
both sides a chance for peace, but Hamas continued its
rocket attacks.
As we have repeatedly stated, the United States
is committed to finding a diplomatic solution to stop
the ongoing violence. As President Obama made clear
earlier today, we believe there should be a return to the
ceasefire that was reached in November 2012. To that
end, we are committed to supporting Egypt’s ceasefire
proposal. That is why Secretary of State Kerry is
working with our regional partners to try to bring about
a cessation of hostilities, and is prepared to travel to the
region following additional consultations.
Until that ceasefire is reached, we need to do
everything within our power to assist the civilians
caught in the middle of the violence. We are grateful for
the five-hour humanitarian pause negotiated by Special
Coordinator Serry yesterday. It provided a critically
important window for the United Nations, humanitarian
and medical workers and others to reach the wounded,
displaced and most vulnerable. It allowed time for some
crucial infrastructure repairs to improve access to basic
services. And it offered a brief reprieve for some of the
people most affected by the conflict.
But let us be clear: a humanitarian pause is just
that, a pause. It is a brief stop in an otherwise persistent
and often overwhelming stream of violence, which has
inflicted suffering and terror on civilians. A pause is
no substitute for a ceasefire, which is what is needed.
Indeed, what was already a very troubling
humanitarian situation in Gaza is rapidly deteriorating.
There are widespread shortages of water, food,
electricity and medicine. The United Nations,
humanitarian organizations and regular Palestinian
citizens are all doing tremendous work to assist those
in need — from opening their homes to the displaced
to delivering emergency rations to those in the hardestto-reach places. But the situation is grave and getting
worse. Until a ceasefire is reached, we call on all parties
to ensure the protection of civilians and to respect and
protect humanitarian and medical facilities, including
those of the United Nations.
This week, the United Nations in Gaza discovered
20 rockets that had been put in one of its schools. The
United Nations quickly removed the rockets and roundly

S/PV.7220

condemned the action. Such tactics are indefensible. We
condemn in the strongest terms this immoral, unlawful
and dangerous use of schools and hospitals for military
purposes, which endangers some of society’s most
vulnerable members: children and the sick.
No family, Palestinian or Israelim should have
to live in perpetual fear of being unsafe in their own
homes. No children, Israeli or Palestinian, should be
kept awake at night by the sounds of rockets and gunfire,
or to be prevented from going to school because it’s too
dangerous to venture outside. No people want to live
like that. It is outrageous that they are being forced to
do so.
The only way to end the situation is an immediate
cessation of rocket fire from Gaza and a de-escalation
in hostilities. That is what we are calling for today.
The recent surge in violence escalated with the
kidnapping and senseless murder of three Israeli
boys, which was followed by the kidnapping and
senseless murder of a Palestinian boy. When news of
the Palestinian boy’s killing reached the mother of one
of the Israeli victims, she said: “No mother or father
should go through what we are going through now.” She
is right. Too much innocent blood has been shed. The
suffering of innocent civilians must come to an end.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Mr. President, for conventing today’s emergency
meeting. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman
for his briefing. I listened carefully to the statements
by the representatives of Israel and Palestine. China is
closely following the recent developments in the IsraeliPalestinian situation.
In spite of repeated calls by the international
community, Israel has continued with its large-scale
aerial bombardment against Gaza and has launched a
ground invasion into Gaza, resulting in heavy civilian
casualties, including women and children. China is
deeply concerned and grief-stricken at this development.
China condemns all abuse of force, whatever the excuse,
and any action that causes heavy casualties among
innocent civilians. Instead of solving problems, force
leads only to more bloodshed, destruction and hatred.
We are disappointed that the humanitarian pause
did not lead to a sustained ceasefire. We urge the
parties concerned to immediately cease hostilities,
withdraw their ground troops from Gaza, completely
lift the blockade against Gaza and give access to
United Nations and other international humanitarian

14-4743111/20

S/PV.7220

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

aid agencies so as to alleviate the misery of the local
population. China supports efforts by the Security
Council to adopt the necessary actions, take a firm
stand on the Gaza situation, promote an alleviation of
tension, prevent more civilian casualties and maintain
peace and stability in the Middle East.
China appreciates and supports the diplomatic
mediation efforts by the international community,
including by Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon, Egypt
and other countries of the region and the League of
Arab States, to de-escalate the current situation. The
imperative at this stage is for the Israeli and Palestinian
parties to respond positively to the international
community’s ceasefire initiative and good offices,
immediately achieve a ceasefire and avoid any military
ground operations, rocket-firing or other actions that
may lead to further escalation and tension.
China is in close contact with the parties concerned
to push for an Israeli and Palestinian ceasefire. A
Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister just met separately
in China with envoys and representatives of Israel,
Palestine, Egypt and other Arab countries and the Arab
League and is deeply engaged with them. As we speak,
the Chinese special envoy on the Middle East is on a
shuttle mission of good offices to Israel and Palestine,
pushing for peace and dialogue. We will also send a
further tranche in humanitarian aid to Palestine to
ease the humanitarian difficulties in Gaza. China is
ready to maintain communication with the concerned
parties, including Arab countries, and will spare no
effort in easing the Israeli and Palestinian situation and
maintaining peace and stability in the region.
The question of Palestine remains at the core of the
Middle East issue. The ongoing stalemate in the Middle
East peace process is not conducive to peace and stability
in the Middle East region. The re-emergence of conflict
in Gaza underscores the importance and urgency of
a solution to the Palestinian issue given the current
situation in the region. The international community
must step up its efforts to bring about constructive
initiatives by both sides in order to restore mutual trust,
to promptly resume dialogue and to achieve substantial
progress. As the dominant force, Israel must take
proactive steps and establish the necessary conditions
for the relaunching of the peace talks.
China firmly supports the just cause of the
Palestinian people to restore their legitimate national
rights and the establishment of a fully sovereign and
independent State on the basis of the 1967 borders
12/20

18/07/2014

with East Jersusalem as its capital. We also support
Palestine’s admission to the United Nations and other
international organizations.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I want to thank UnderSecretary-General Feltman for his briefing.
The ground invasion launched by Israel into
Gaza has led to a further escalation of the conflict
with Hamas. We regret that, despite the calls of wellintentioned leaders around the world for a de-escalation
and restraint, the conflict has increased in both intensity
and scope. Indeed, this conflict has claimed numerous
lives, including those of women and innocent children.
While we recognize Israel’s inherent right to
protect its citizens from attack, its response must be
proportionate to and in accordance with international
humanitarian law. The civilian toll on the Palestinian
side, especially the killing of women and children,
is simply unjustifiable. In the same vein, we urge
Hamas to put an immediate end to its indiscriminate
rocket attacks, which have terrorized Israelis and
disrupted their lives. Violence begets violence and
makes reconciliation almost impossible. We believe
that a de-escalation of the conflict is now urgently
required. That implies that the leaders of both sides
must demonstrate maximum restraint. Countries with
an influence on the warring parties should leave no
stone unturned to facilitate a return to the ceasefire of
November 2012.
It has been established that there can be no military
solution to the question of Palestine. The only path
to sustainable peace between Israel and Palestine
is through negotiations. The doors to a diplomatic
resolution must therefore remain open. We urge both
parties to embrace dialogue by reviving the stalled
peace talks. We reiterate our support for a two-State
solution, with both Israel and Palestine living side by
side in peace and security.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his briefing.
The events that we are witnessing are serious and,
unfortunately, not unprecedented. In 2008, 2012 and
2014, on each occasion the inhabitants of the Gaza
Strip have been caught between the rocket fire that we
condemn and the fire of the Israeli army, with all its
victims. Each time, the Israeli people have suffered
great distress. The history of the Middle East, more
than any other region of the world, repeats itself. Once
14-47431

18/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

again, we are seeing a deadly spiral and the distancing
of a peace that seems increasingly unattainable every
time that serious efforts fail. A few weeks ago, we
were talking about our support for the peace initiative
and dialogue between the parties under the aegis of
the United States Secretary of State, Mr. John Kerry.
Today, history is repeating itself and we are once again
at war.
In that context, as the Council and the international
community, what should our priorities be? Our
immediate and absolute priority must be to achieve a
ceasefire. On the one hand, the firing of missiles by
Hamas into Israel must cease. It violates international
humanitarian law. On the other hand, the Israeli air
strikes and ground offensive have already caused too
many deaths, those of nearly 300 Palestinians, 80 per
cent of whom are civilians, including 40 children.
I recall that, under international humanitarian law,
civilians should be protected. It is urgent to stop the
spiral of violence and a worsening of the disastrous
human toll of the crisis. The French Foreign Minister,
Mr. Laurent Fabius, is currently in the region. He has
met the Palestinian and the Egytian authorities, whose
mediation efforts we support. Tomorrow, he will meet
the Israeli and Jordanian authorities.
France also welcomes the role of the humanitarian
agencies in Gaza, in particular the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, the World Food Programme and the
World Health Organization, which are alleviating the
suffering and food insecurity of the Palestinian people.
Humanitarian teams fulfil a sacred mission and must
be able to act in accordance with the needs, with their
safety guaranteed.
However, a ceasefire is not enough. We must
establish the conditions for a lasting truce that meets the
legitimate aspirations of the Israelis and Palestinians,
in particular in Gaza — on the one hand, security,
which is an absolute right, and, on the other hand, an
end to the blockade and economic development, which
are essential. Gaza must no longer be the outpost of
those who want to destroy Israel or an open-air prison.
We call on Hamas, first, to support the proposal for
an immediate ceasefire, and then to pave the way for
a final agreement by accepting the conditions set by
the Quartet, namely, the recognition of Israel, the
renunciation of violence and the acceptance of the
agreements signed by the Palestinian Authority.

S/PV.7220

In addition, Gaza must be able to resume a normal
way of life, since poverty, despair and inactivity swell
the ranks of Hamas rather than weaken it. It is therefore
important to work for the lifting of the blockade and the
opening of the border crossings, including at Rafah. In
that spirit, France has proposed the reimplementation
of the European Union Border Assistance Mission in
Rafah, which would improve the living conditions of
the population and support an effective return of the
Palestinian Authority.
Finally, it is above all necessary to restore
meaning to a political settlement. I have already had
the opportunity to say that the key features of such a
solution are known. Yet no one is able to implement
them. The relaunching and conclusion of the peace
process are the only solution that exists. Europeans
and Arabs, alongside the Americans, must mobilize
themselves in order to effectively provide both parties
with the assurances that they need to overcome their
fears. Indeed, while that wall of fear continues and
the feeling of each party that the other wants its
destruction, nothing will be possible. The old formulas
have not worked for the 20 years since the Oslo Accords
were signed. The two parties are clearly unable to move
towards peace by themselves. We need new ideas and
the efforts of everyone to help them in that direction,
which they are hesitant to take.
Ms. King (Australia): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman for his briefing.
Alongside other members of the international
community, Australia is deeply concerned about the
escalation in hostilities between Israel and the militant
groups in Gaza. It is a tragedy that the recent events
have led us to that point. It is important that steps are
taken to reduce tensions and to restore peace. The
decision by Hamas to reject the Egyptian-brokered
ceasefire proposals and the continued firing of rockets
indiscriminately into Israel are inexcusable. We
appreciate all the efforts of a range of actors that have
gone into negotiating a ceasefire during the course of
the past week.
We welcome the news that the Secretary-General
will be travelling to the region tomorrow and we
strongly support his diplomatic efforts. We strongly
urge all parties to find a peaceful resolution and bring
an end to the current violence.
Australia condemns the events that led to the current
escalation in the region. The murders of the three Israeli

14-4743113/20

S/PV.7220

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

teenagers in the West Bank and the apparent revenge
murder of the Palestinian teenager on 2 July were tragic
events that should never have taken place. We extend
our sincere condolences to the families of the victims
and call for the perpetrators of those terrible crimes to
be held to account.
Australia calls on all parties to exercise restraint
and consider the welfare of the people they represent
when taking decisions on next steps. We also call upon
the parties to bring the escalation of violence to an end
by restoring the November 2012 ceasefire, a call which
has been repeated consistently by many members
of the international community over recent days and
which must be heeded as a matter of urgency. Australia
continues to urge both Israel and the Palestinians to
resume negotiations toward a just and lasting two-State
solution, with Israel and a Palestinian State existing
side by side in peace and security within internationally
recognized borders. As we all are aware, a just and
lasting two-State solution is the only basis for a durable
peace between the parties.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Eight
days ago we met in urgent consultations to address the
situation in Israel and Palestine, particularly in the
Gaza Strip, after which we released a statement to the
press expressing the deep concern of the members of
the Security Council with regard to the crisis.
Unfortunately, the call to reduce tensions and
restore the November 2012 ceasefire has fallen on
deaf ears. Instead, Israel has escalated the conflict by
initiating the ground phase of its military operation,
while Hamas and other armed groups continue to
reposition and launch rockets from the Gaza Strip. We
deplore the lack of a firm commitment of the parties to
de-escalate the conflict.
We appreciate the efforts of various regional
and international actors who have sought to broker a
ceasefire, although we wonder today whether seeking
to resume the mediation of previous years is the best
option, given the changes that have occurred in the
political map of the Middle East. We strongly support
the efforts of the Secretary-General and especially
those of his Special Coordinator, Mr. Robert Serry,
to whom reiterate our support. We wish to formulate
an urgent call to establish an immediate ceasefire and
protect the civilian population as well as the safety of
United Nations personnel. We believe that the attacks
on civilians in Gaza and Israel violate international
humanitarian law and could constitute war crimes.
14/20

18/07/2014

In the light of the report yesterday ​​by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, we recall the provisions of
resolution 2143 (2014) on children and armed conflict,
co-sponsored by my country, and condemn the use of
schools for military purposes in violation of applicable
international law. As Under-Secretary-General Valerie
Amos reminded us, this is the third large-scale armed
confrontation in the Gaza Strip in the past six years.
The conflict has deep roots on which the Security
Council has a duty to act.
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): We sincerely thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his latest briefing on the
situation in the region.
We are deeply concerned about the dramatic
escalation of violence in the Gaza Strip and the loss in
human lives. We deeply deplore the growing number of
civilian casualties, many of whom are children, and we
extend our most sincere condolences to the families.
It is our greatest concern that the situation could
rapidly deteriorate even further, taking more human
lives, causing greater numbers of wounded and further
increasing the most humanitarian needs in the region,
which was already suffering from a chronic lack of
basic humanitarian goods.
Lithuania strongly condemns the firing of rockets
from Gaza and Hamas’ mounting belligerent rhetoric
and its tactics involving the indiscriminate targeting
of civilians. We join the United Nations and others
in strongly condemning the placement of rockets in
the school operated by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
We call on Hamas to put an immediate end to those
acts and renounce violence. All terrorists and militant
groups in Gaza must disarm.
We recognize Israel’s right to protect its population
from the firing of rockets from Gaza. Nevertheless,
we reiterate that in doing so Israel must fully comply
international humanitarian law, act proportionately
and ensure the protection of civilians at all times.
Furthermore, it has to respect its obligations to allow
full, unimpeded access to humanitarian aid.
The ceasefire proposed by Egypt was a ray of hope,
and we deeply regret that the agreement was short-lived.
Once again, we call on both States to immediately stop
the violence, de-escalate the situation and return to
calm. A humanitarian pause is no substitute.

14-47431

18/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Lithuania welcomes the ongoing efforts of the
international community, the League of Arab States
and regional partners, including Egypt, to convince
both sides to immediately stop all hostilities and restore
the 2012 ceasefire agreement. We urge Israeli and
Palestinian leaders to commit to an immediate, durable
ceasefire and restart the dialogue. Lithuania remains
committed to the two-State solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I too
would like to thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing, and
you, Mr. President, for responding quickly to the urgent
request and scheduling today’s meeting at short notice.
As others have already said, the situation on the ground
is deeply alarming and of great concern to us all.
The United Kingdom has three objectives: to secure
a ceasefire, to alleviate humanitarian suffering and to
keep alive the prospects for peace negotiations, which
are the only hope of breaking the cycle of violence and
devastation once and for all. My Government’s position
remains clear. We want to see immediate de-escalation
and agreement on a durable ceasefire. The people of
Israel have the right to live without constant fear for
their security. The people of Gaza have the right to live
safely in peace. Steps must be taken now to address the
underlying causes of the conflict.
We welcome the Egyptian proposed ceasefire.
We welcomed Israel’s acceptance in principle of the
terms of the proposed ceasefire agreement and we
welcome the Palestinian Authority’s endorsement of
the Egyptian initiative. We also welcome the United
Nations-facilitated humanitarian pause on 17 July. We
call on Hamas and all militant factions in Gaza to cease
hostilities, ending all rocket fire into Israel. We utterly
condemn the firing of rockets into civilian areas.
Let me reiterate our support for Israel’s right to selfdefence. Israel faces a tough dilemma in responding to
unacceptable rocket fire from Gaza. But in exercising
its right to self-defence, Israel must act proportionately
and take all necessary steps to minimize civilian
casualties. As we have heard this afternoon, many
innocent civilians are being killed.
On our second objective, we are deeply concerned
by the dire humanitarian situation. There are hundreds
of thousands of extremely vulnerable civilians in Gaza
who are suffering acutely from the crisis. Access
to clean water, power and medicines is becoming
critically difficult. We urge all parties to continue to

S/PV.7220

allow unhindered access throughout Gaza. The United
Kingdom’s support has enabled United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East to respond to the crisis by continuing to provide
crucial health services.
On the third objective, any ceasefire needs to be
genuinely sustainable. It is important to tackle the
underlying causes of instability in the Gaza Strip
without which the long-term security of both Israel
and Gaza cannot be secured. As part of a ceasefire, we
need to consider establishing a viable verification and
monitoring mission to ensure the implementation of
any ceasefire agreement by all sides, learning lessons
from the past.
However, the implementation of a ceasefire
agreement must be only one part of a wider effort to
improve conditions in Gaza. Without that, we are likely
to see further such cycles of violence. That should
include the restoration of Palestinian Authority control
in Gaza, the opening up of legitimate movement and
access, and a permanent end to the unacceptable threat
of rocket attacks and other forms of violence from
Gazan militants against Israel.
The responsibility lies with both sides to make
progress towards a permanent peace, enshrined in a
two-State solution. No other alternative option exists
that guarantees peace and sustainable security for both
Israelis and Palestinians.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing.
Chad is following the situation in the Gaza Strip
with a great deal of concern. We firmly condemn the
new escalation of violence, which has already claimed
over 270 lives, including 30 today, more than 2,000
injured, 40,000 displaced persons, most of whom are
women and children, as well as thousands of houses
destroyed. Chad is outraged by the indiscriminate and
overwhelming violence and calls on Israel immediately
to put an end to its air raids and ground offensive, all
of which are mainly aimed at civilians, educational
facilities and hospitals and constitute a very serious
violation of international humanitarian law and human
rights law.
Chad also urges the Palestinians to put an end to
their attacks against Israel originating from the Gaza
Strip. That includes the firing of rockets and the crossborder attacks, which we condemn. We urge both sides to

14-4743115/20

S/PV.7220

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

exercise restraint in order to rapidly achieve a ceasefire
and the lifting of all forms of blockade imposed on the
Gaza Strip. In that regard, Chad supports the efforts of
the international community and the countries of the
region to restore peace and put an end to hostilities.
We express our solidarity with the citizens of
Gaza and the whole of the Palestinian people during
the very difficult and painful times they are currently
experiencing. We call upon the entire international
community to provide every possible form of support
and assistance to the Palestinian people, including
medical supplies and emergency aid to the Gaza Strip.
The Palestinian question has been on the United
Nations agenda for more than 66 years now but the
Palestinian people has no glimmer of hope based on
the efforts undertaken to guarantee its rights to selfdetermination and to put an end to the Israeli occupation.
The current situation in Gaza is a very dangerous
one. It is alarming as well. In the face of this, the
international community, including the Security
Council, must act in a firm and urgent manner to put an
end to this unprecedented cycle of violence and to create
conditions conducive to peace between Palestinians
and Israelis.
One and a half million people in Gaza cannot enjoy
a normal, dignified life. The blockade imposed upon
the Gaza Strip by Israel since 2007, with all borders
hermetically sealed, has rendered the daily life of its
inhabitants very difficult and unbearable. Almost no
one can leave the Gaza Strip even just to visit the West
Bank, where a great many have family and have worked
in the past. Health facilities are suffering from the
restrictions imposed by Israel on the transfer of medical
equipment, building equipment and a great many basic
goods necessary for their upkeep.
Security-related incidents in the zone between
Gaza and Israel often claim human lives and cause
the destruction of property and people’s means of
subsistence. Young people, who make up 50 per cent of
the 1.5 million inhabitants of the Gaza Strip and have
an unemployment rate of nearly 40 per cent, suffer from
a lack of any prospects and are carrying out a constant
and relentless fight to preserve hope in the future.
In those difficult conditions, when the Palestinian
population is destitute and oppressed, how can the
Palestinians believe in the peace process?
The Middle East is currently going through a very
difficult period in its history since a number of regions
16/20

18/07/2014

have already erupted into conflict, in particular in Iraq,
Syria, Iraq and Yemen. All of that constitutes a serious
threat to international and regional peace and security.
The international community must step up its efforts
to relaunch the process of dialogue between Israelis
and Palestinians to achieve a fair, comprehensive and
lasting peace in the region, one founded on the principle
of two States based on the 1967 borders, pursuant to
international law and the relevant provisions of Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, including
the exchange of land for peace, the road map, the
agreements previously concluded between the parties
and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Inter-Palestinian reconciliation should not serve as a
pretext for Israel to undermine the peace process. Peace
negotiations absolutely require political and a suitable
environment, as well as mutual confidence-building
measures. A people under occupation, whose territory
is slowly being eaten up by the illegal building of
settlements and who is systematically a victim of
aggression, will probably lose all hope in a better future.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): One cannot simply remain unfazed by
what is happening. Since the beginning of the Israeli
ground military operation, the situation around Gaza
has entered a dangerous new spiral of tension. We are
extremely alarmed by this turn of events. There is every
reason for concern that the scale of the bloodshed will
increase substantially.
The most important pressing issue today is to stop
the armed conflict, the victims of which are peaceful
Palestinian civilians, including women and children.
Civilians in both Palestine and Israel need to be rapidly
protected from terrorist attacks and the disproportionate
use of force.
In its latest statement, on 12 July, the Council,
inter alia, called upon the parties to abide by the norms
of international humanitarian law. In that regard, we
are alarmed by reports of Israeli bombardment of the
Al-Wafa rehabilitation centre in Gaza, as well the Beit
Hanoun, Shejaiya and Al-Quds hospitals.
The firing on other civilian objects, including
residential houses, is also unacceptable. There are
reports today of helicopter strikes on a building housing
journalists. At least one of them has been wounded.
International humanitarian law also requires the
demilitarization of civilian facilities. In that regard, it is
with concern that we hear reports that Hamas militants

14-47431

18/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and other factions in the Gaza Strip are using schools
for military purposes, including stockpiling munitions
and using them to fire on residential neighbourhoods
and civilian facilities in Israel.
We understand Israel’s concerns regarding the
continuing shelling of its territory from the Gaza Strip.
However, it is important to prevent the unleashing of
an unending spiral of violence, otherwise the situation
will irreversibly spin out of all control.
In those circumstances, we again urge all sides to
spare to no effort to rapidly achieve a ceasefire. We
welcome and support Egypt’s mediation efforts. Cairo’s
initiative, which Israelis and the central Palestinian
Authority have agreed to in principle, could serve as
the basis for a ceasefire agreement. Such a truce should
not only be long-term, but also ensure that peace
and stability is restored for Israelis, dignified living
conditions for the population and development for the
Gaza Strip. Russia is ready to participate in bilateral
and multilateral formats towards finding a solution to
the very dangerous crisis in the Gaza Strip. The current
crisis must prompt us to assist in the efforts to achieve
Palestinian unity.
We agree with the Secretary-General that the Gaza
Strip must be under a single, legitimate Palestinian
Government that complies with its Palestine Liberation
Organization commitments and the provisions of
resolution 1860 (2009), as well as with the plan for
the normalization of border crossings and further
intra-Palestinian reconciliation. At the same time, we
underscore that the current serious escalation of the
situation should remind us that there is no prospect
for the current status quo and of the importance of a
substantive negotiations process.
We are convinced that this process must be
supported collectively. Even intensive attempts to
achieve unilateral results have failed yet again. Now is
the time to step up the work of the international Quartet.
The representatives of the League of Arab States need
to work with the Quartet, and not merely follow its
decisions. Work towards a solution must be elaborated
jointly with the Arabs — first and foremost with the
Egyptians — so to ensure that they are participants in
the process to elaborate initiatives.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I too
thank Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing.

S/PV.7220

Recent developments in Israel and Gaza have
elicited a terrible sense of déjà vu, mixed with a profound
feeling of powerlessness. The déjà vu is that of reprisals
following reprisals; ever growing numbers of civilian
casualties; the voices of hawks and extremists drowning
out the voices of moderates. The powerlessness is that
of the international community which, since the end of
the Second World War, has continued to experience in
the Middle East one of its most serious political and
diplomatic failures.
Today, the peace process is at moribund and
violence prevails. Today, however, we must reiterate to
all of those who are willing to listen — and above all
to those who are not — that more war will not lead to
more security. War leads to nothing but new tragedies
such as that of two days ago which caused the death of
a group of children — four brothers who were killed by
shelling as they played on a Gaza beach.
The ground offensive just launched by Israel against
Gaza has therefore provoked our deepest concern.
Certainly, Israel has the right to protect its people from
rocket attacks from Gaza, which we condemn, but in so
doing Israel must act proportionately while at all times
ensuring the protection of civilians. According to the
latest information, in 11 days Israeli military operations
have produced many Palestinian casualties, including
more than 270 dead and nearly 2,000 wounded, the vast
majority of whom are civilians. We are particularly
shocked by the number of Palestinian children who
are victims. As stated by Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, we are facing a crisis involving
the protection of children in Gaza.
Let us recall that all parties are fully obligated
under international humanitarian law to protect the
lives of civilians trapped by hostilities. Naturally, that
also applies to Hamas and other militant groups that
seek to strike indiscriminately at the heart of Israel’s
urban centres in order to produce the highest number
of civilian casualties. Yesterday, as Mr. Feltman has
mentioned, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), discovered rockets that had been hidden
in one of its schools in Gaza. It is unconscionable and
cynical to jeopardize the lives of children in that way.
Effectively, those responsible for such acts and those
who are intensifying their calls for the destruction of
Israel are deliberately sacrificing the interests of the
Palestinian people.

14-4743117/20

S/PV.7220

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In the short term, all efforts of the international
community should focus on the full cessation of
hostilities. We deplore the fact that the humanitarian
truce proposed yesterday by the United Nations has
not led to a lasting ceasefire. We appeal to the parties
to de-escalate tensions and to immediately conclude a
ceasefire agreement. For its part, Luxembourg fully
supports all efforts to end the violence, particularly the
initiative of Egypt, whose mediation efforts we take this
opportunity to recognize. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s intention to visit the region and urge him
to pursue his efforts towards de-escalation. On the
humanitarian front, we reiterate our full support for
UNRWA and its crucial role in alleviating, howsoever
modestly, the suffering of the Palestinian people.
Ultimately, since war offers no solution, we must
give peace a chance. But a chance for peace requires first
giving a chance to the peace process. It is imperative
that Israelis and Palestinians resume dialogue in order
to try to fill the political vacuum prevailing between
them today. To end the spiral of violence, the best and
only way forward is the resumption of talks seeking a
comprehensive agreement in the framework of a twoState solution.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing, and the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine and the
Permanent Representative of Israel for their statements.
The Security Council cannot remain indifferent before
the tragic events taking place between the Gaza Strip
and Israel. I therefore take this opportunity to thank
you, Sir, for convening this highly important meeting.
Again, for the third time in less than six years,
civilians have been caught in the crossfire between
Hamas’ armed actions and Israel’s disproportionate and
excessive use of force. Argentina stands in solidarity
with the wounded and with the families of the victims
in Israel and Palestine.
In response to the situation, on 10 July the Security
Council issued a clear call for the de-escalation of
violence, the restoration of calm and the reinstitution
of the November 2012 ceasefire. It also firmly appealed
for respect for international humanitarian law and the
protection of civilians. At that time, Israel’s military
operations had killed 114 Palestinians and wounded
over 680. One week later, casualties in Gaza had totaled
more than 270 dead and 1,800 wounded, most of whom
were civilians. The 34,000 internally displaced and

18/20

18/07/2014

more than 1,700 families that had lost their homes
complete the picture of destruction and suffering.
We therefore firmly condemn Israel’s rejection of
appeals on the part of the Council, the Secretary-General
and many voices of the international community, and
its decision to escalate the crisis by launching a ground
offensive. That decision will only generate greater
instability in the region, more victims and increased
suffering. We also condemn the continued and
indiscriminate firing of rockets from Gaza into Israel
and the militarization of civilian facilities.
Argentina supports the ongoing efforts to end
all military operations and to end the bloodshed. We
urge both parties to join in the efforts of Egypt and
other regional and international actors to establish an
immediate and durable ceasefire. We also support the
efforts of the Secretary-General. Once calm returns,
concrete measures must be taken to end this destructive
cycle of violence by addressing the underlying
conditions that led to the escalation. It will be necessary
to allow unhindered access of humanitarian assistance,
to ensure the sustained and regular flow of goods and
people through the border crossings, and once and for
all to realize the pressing political need for a single
and effective Palestinian Authority governing all
Palestinian territory and speaking on behalf of all its
people.
It would therefore be regrettable for the current
situation to be used to undermine the unity Government
in Palestine, which is widely recognized and supported
by those seeking peace in the region. More broadly,
these tragic events have once again highlighted the
urgent need for the parties to resume a process of
genuine negotiations, based on internationally accepted
standards, so that the solution of two States living in
peace can be achieved. There is no substitute for
dialogue and negotiation to translate that vision into a
reality. Achieving that goal must remain our priority.
Argentina believes that the Security Council must
resume its function of playing a decisive role in this
situation. If our initial message was not heard, it may be
time to speak up louder and with one voice to demand,
with all the tools at our disposal, an end to hostilities
and respect for international law. Argentina is ready to
do its part to ensure that the Security Council assumes
its institutional responsibilities and supports peace
efforts.

14-47431

18/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Argentina expressly reaffirms that it is the political
leaders of both parties who have caused so much
suffering and are responsible for each and every one
of the victims of the conflict they have unleashed. The
international community and the Council should ensure
that so much death does not go unpunished, and that
the victims are not condemned to oblivion. We must
keep their memory alive and demand justice in order to
ensure a genuine, lasting peace.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank you, Sir,
for organizing today’s meeting to urgently discuss the
volatile situation in the Middle East. I also thank UnderSecretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his presentation.
The Republic of Korea is deeply concerned as
the situation in Israel and the Gaza Strip plunges
dangerously into greater turmoil. Fierce air strikes
and continued rocket barrages are gravely affecting
a number of civilians on both sides. The launch of a
ground operation by Israel is alarming, as it represents
a serious escalation of the situation. We condemn the
indiscriminate rocket attacks from Gaza into Israel.
The increased range of the rockets being deployed by
Hamas and Islamic Jihad is particularly troubling, as
it could extend the clashes to an even more dangerous
level.
At the same time, we are concerned by the mounting
civilian casualties in Gaza as a result of Israeli air
strikes and shelling. We fear that such a large number
of casualties will only increase if the ongoing hostilities
continue. The humanitarian situation is also dire, and
the daily updates of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs on Gaza make for harrowing
reading, as they describe over 600,000 people at risk of
losing access to water, traumatized children in need of
psychosocial support, mass displacements and a severe
lack of food and medicine. We commend the ongoing
work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and thank
Special Coordinator Robert Serry for having negotiated
a five-hour humanitarian pause between the two sides.
The Republic of Korea urges all Israelis and
Palestinians to exercise maximum restraint before
the situation spins even further out of control. We
encourage the regional mediators to redouble their
efforts to bring. While we are dismayed that the earlier
Egyptian-proposed ceasefire did not hold, we hope
that new modalities can be agreed upon that can bring
relief to those in the crossfire. We reiterate our call
for an immediate ceasefire, as articulated by the press

S/PV.7220

statement issued by the Council on 12 July (SC/11472).
We strongly support the Secretary-General’s efforts to
de-escalate the situation, including through his trip to
the Middle East tomorrow.
While working for a durable ceasefire in Gaza and
a lessening of tensions in the West Bank, we must keep
in mind that the only long-term answer is a negotiated
settlement, with the two-State solution as its essence.
As such, the Republic of Korea appeals to both sides to
return to the negotiating table as soon as possible.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Rwanda.
I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman for his briefing on the current crisis in the
Middle East, especially the situation in Gaza. I also
thank Ambassador Ryad Mansour, Permanent Observer
of the Observer State of Palestine, and Ambassador
Ron Prosor, Permanent Representative of Israel to the
United Nations, for their respective statements.
Since the beginning of this month, the Security
Council has issued three press statements on the situation
in the region, starting with the condemnation of the
kidnapping and killing of three Israeli teenagers and
of a Palestinian teenager. Last Thursday, the Security
Council convened an emergency meeting to discuss
this tragedy (see S/PV.7214), which was followed by
the third press statement of the month on the situation
in Israel and Palestine, issued on Saturday (SC/11472).
In that statement, Council members called for the
de-escalation of the situation, the restoration of calm,
the reinstitution of the November 2012 ceasefire, and
respect for international humanitarian law, including
the protection of civilians.
Unfortunately, the situation today in Gaza shows
that parties on the ground did not heed this call.
Hostilities have further escalated, leading to dire
humanitarian consequences. The conflict has now
claimed over 260 lives and left over 48,000 displaced.
We welcomed the short humanitarian pause in Gaza,
which had allowed the United Nations and partners to
deliver humanitarian assistance to thousands of people
in dire need. We call for more humanitarian pauses to
allow more deliveries to flow without hindrance.
We express our strong support for the ceasefire
agreement that was brokered by Egypt, as was that
of November 2012. We note that this proposal was
accepted by Israel, the Palestinian Authority and the
League of Arab States, but rejected by Hamas. We

14-4743119/20

S/PV.7220

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

call upon Hamas to immediately cease fire and stop
its indiscriminate rocket fire into Israel. Furthermore,
while we recognize the right of Israel to defend itself,
we call on the Israel Defense Forces to exercise
maximum restraint and ensure that civilians in Gaza
are protected.
To conclude, let me reaffirm that the IsraeliPalestinian conflict — the longest conflict on the
agenda of the Security Council — will end only with
the creation of a viable Palestinian State, living side
by side in peace and security with a secured State of
Israel. In this regard, we call on the Quartet, countries
of the region, the United States and other countries with

20/20

18/07/2014

influence on the parties to redouble their efforts in order
to reach a political settlement and help the Palestinians
and Israelis to fulfil their legitimate aspirations to
peace, security and prosperity.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

14-47431
