zo

General AHembly-Eleventh Seeaion

1. Decides that:
(a) The Third Committee should devote enough
time to its discussion of the draft International Covenants on Human Rights to be able to complete its consideration of the draft Covenants, if possible by the
end of the thirteenth session of the General Assembly,
for adoption by the Assembly at that session ;
( b) The Third Committee should discuss, at the
beginning of the twelfth session of the General Assembly, how many meetings should be devoted to the consideration of the draft International Covenants on
H uman Rights ;

2. Decides to transmit to the Commission on Human
Rights the official records and other documents relating
to the important question of measures to be taken
with respect to violations of human rights, discussed
by the Third Committee at the eleventh session of the
General Assembly.
656th plenary meeting,
20 February 1957.
1042 (XI). Long-range programme
munity development

for

com-

The General Assembly,
Having noted chapter VI, section I, of the report
of the Economie and Social CouncilG on the programme of concerted practical action in the social field
of the United Nations and the specialized agencies,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Economie and
Social Council for its continuous attention to practical
programmes for the integrated economic and social
development of the under-developed countries;

2. Agrees with the emphasis placed by the Council
on community development as part of the comprehensive measures taken by Governments for raising levels
of living, in rural areas in particular;
3. Observes with interest the increasing application
of community development principles and processes by
national Governments in their programmes for promoting balanced growth of their countries and peoples;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in drawing up
the recommendations called for by Council resolution
627 (XXII) of 2 August 1956 concerning the longrange programme for the promotion of community
development which the Council and the Social Commission are to prepare, in collaboration with the specialized agencies, to take into account the views expressed by representatives in the Third Committee and,
in particular, to lay stress upon:
(a) The integration of social and economic measures
within such a programme;
( b) Adequate research into all factors affecting the
planning and implementation of national community
development programmes ;
( c) The role of community development in raising
levels of production, health, education and welfare and
the importance of co-ordinating national and international efforts in comprehensive community development
programmes ;
"Ibid., Eleventh S~ssion, Supplement No. 3 (A/3154).

( d) The study of the problems arising out of the
migration of rural populations to urban centres;
( e) The assistance that should be given in particular
to newly constituted States in planning and _organ_iz!ng
community development programmes and m trammg
the personnel required for implementing such programmes;

S. Invites Member States, either singly or acting
in concert in regional groups, to continue to consider
and propose ,additional measures in the field of community development which, in thei~ view, will make
the Council's programme more effective.
658th plenary meeting,
21 February 1957.
1043 (XI). International cultural and scientifi.e
co-operation

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations expressly stressing the importance
of the development of international co-operation in
the field of culture and education,
Considering that ail nations contribute their val1;1able
share in the common treasury of culture and science
of the world,
Recalling the resolutions adopted by the General
Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its ninth session on
international scientifi.c co-operation, the development
of international cultural relations in general and mutual
appreciation of Eastern and Western cultural values
in particular,
B earing in mind that the peoples of the world desire
wide and intensifi.ed international cultural and scientific
co-operation,
N oting the positive results achieved up to now by
such international co-operation,
Recognizing that mutual knowledge and understanding of the culture and life of nations contribute to the
strengthening of international confidence and to the
maintenance of peace,
Bearing in mind the desirability of furthering the
development of cultural and scientific relations among
nations,
1. Invites all States to promote, by mutual agreements and other means, wider cultural and scientific
international co-operation and to spare no effort in
trying to achieve the implementation of these peaceful
objectives;

2. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization and the other specialized
agencies concerned to include in their annual reports
to the Economie and Social Council a statement of
their views and activities in the field of international
cultural and scientific co-operation, and requests the
Council to give special attention to such statements.

658th plenary meeting,
21 February 1957.
