ARTICLE 8

The oral proceedings of the Tribunal shall be
held in public unless the Tribunal decides that
exceptional circumstances require that they be
held in private.
ARTICLE 9
If the Tribunal finds that the application ii
well founded, it shall order the rescinding of the
decision contested or the specific performance of
the obligation invoked; but if, in exceptional
circumstances, such rescinding or specific performance is, in the cpinion of the SecretaryGeneral, impossible or inadvisable, the Tribunal
shall within a period of not more than sixty days
order the payment to the applicant of compensation for the injury sustained. The applicant shall
be entitled to claim compensation in lieu of
rescinding of the contested decision or specific
performance. In any case involving compensation,
the amount awarded shall be fixed by the Tribunal and paid by the United Nations or, as
appropriate, b:r the specialized agency participating under article 12.
ARTICLE 10
1. The Tribunal shall take all decisions by a

majority vote.
2. The judgments shall be final and without
appeal.
3. The judgments shall state the reasons on
which they are based.
4. The judgments shall be drawn up, in any of
the five official languages of the United Nations,
in two originals which shall be deposited in the
archives of the Secretariat of the United Nations.
5. A copy of the judgment shall be communicated to each of the parties in the case. Copies
shall also be made available on request to interested persons.
ARTICLE 11
The present Statute may be amended by decisions of the General Assembly.
ARTICLE 12
The competence of the Tribunal may be extended to any specialized agency brought into
relationship with the United Nations in accordance
with the provisions of Articles 57 and 63 of the
Charter upon the terms established by a special
agreement to be made with each such agency by
the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Each such special agreement shall provide that
the agency concerned shall be bound by the judgments of the Tribunal and be responsible for the
payment of any compensation awarded by the
Tribunal in respect of a staff member of that
agency and shall include, inter alia, provisions
concerning the agency's participation in the administr:itive arrangements for the functioning of
the Tnbunal and concerning its sharing the expenses of the Tribunal.
255th plenary meeting,
24 November 1949.

Lt. General His Highness Maharaja Jam Shri
Digvijayasinhji Sahib;
Mr. Roland Andrews Egger;
Mr. Omar Loutfi;
Dr. Emilio N. Oribe;
Dr. Vladimir Outrata;
2. Declares the following members to be appointed for a three-year term, to commence on
1 January 1950:
Madame Paul Bastid;
Lt. General His Highness Maharaja Jam Shri
Digvijayasinhji Sahib;
Mr. Omar Loutfi;
3. Declares the following members to be appointed for a two-year term, to commence on 1
January 1950:
Mr. Roland Andrews Egger ;
Dr. Emilio N. Ori be;

4. Declares the following members to be appointed for a one-year term, to commence on 1
January 1950:
Sir Sydney Caine;
Dr. Vladimir Outrata.
274th plenary meeting,
9 December 1949.

352 (IV). Amendment to the United
Nations Provisional Staff Regulations
The General Assembly
Resolves that Provisional Staff Regulation 23
shall be revised, as of 1 January 1950, to read
as follows:
" (a) The Secretary-General shall establish
joint administrative machinery with staff participation to advise him before disciplinary action
is taken against any staff member.
" ( b) The Secretary-General shall establish
joint administrative machinery with staff participation to advise him in case of any appeal by
staff members against any administrative decision
alleging the non-observance of contracts of appointment or regarding the application of rules
and regulations and established administratiYe
practices or against disciplinary action.
" ( c) An Administrative Tribunal shall he establishe(Jl~ to hear and pass judgment upon
applications from staff members alleging nonobservance of their contracts of employment or
terms of appointment, including all pertinent
rei:.,rulations and rules."
255th plenary meeting,
24 November 1949.

353 (IV). Expenses of the Permanent
Central Opium Board: assessment
of non-members of the United Nations, signatories of the Conventicm
of 19 February 1925 relating to
narcotic drugs

B

The General Assembly
1. Appoints the following persons as members
of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal
in accordance with article 3 of the Statute of the
Administrative Tribunal :
Madame Paul Basti<l ;
Sir Sydney Caine;

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the last paragraph of resolution
201 (VIII) 16 of the Economic an(l Social Coun-

1• See resolution 351 (IV).

16
See Official Reco,-ds of the tighlh srrn,m of th,•
Economic o...d Social Council, Resolutions, page 15.

51
