VIII,

2. Requests the Secretary-General to implement,
in the light of the relevant recommendations and comments of the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination and in the most appropriate manner, the relative growth rates accepted by the General Assembly
as the framework of programme priorities;
3. Considers that the Committee for Programme
and Co-ordination, while proposing priorities in its
programme review, should continue to limit its recommendations to ranges of growth;
4. Invites the Committee for Programme and Coordination, in its review of the medium-term plan at
its eighteenth session, to take into account the abovementioned consideration;

III
I. Authorizes the Secretary-General, in consultation with the executive secretaries of the regional commissions concerned, to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session through the Economic
and Social Council, in the light of the recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination and of paragraph 16 of the report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,67 programme proposals for increased activity in
the transport programmes of the Economic Commission for Africa, the Economic Commission for Latin
America, the Economic Commission for Western Asia
and the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and
the Pacific and revised estimates to that end;
2. Decides, in the light of additional information
provided to the General Assembly and of subsequent
developments, to defer until its thirty-third session
consideration of the recommendations of the Committee
for Programme and Co-ordination dealing with programme transfers and reductions.
110th plenary meeting
2 1 December 1977

32/207.

Technolo:z;ical innovations in the production of the puhlicationri and documentation of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Concerned about significant costs accruing to all
Member States, including direct costs to themselves
as well as charges to the United Nations, which result
from current methods of producing and distributing
the publications and documentation of the United
Nations,
1. Commends the Secretary-General for his efforts
and initiatives to improve documentation and publications services;
2. Concurs with the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions contained in its report 68 to pursue measures
proposed by the Secretary-General with regard to technological innovations in the production of the publications and documentation of the United Nations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to explore and
recommend additional measures to improve and expedite the production and distribution of publications
68 Ibid., document

A/32/8/ Add. I 2.

199

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

and documentation, using a cautious, step-by-step approach, and in particular requests him to study:
(a)
The means to ensure publication of the full
official records of sessions of the General Assembly;
( b) Increased revenue from the sale of publications and documentation in recognition of the improved
service;
( c)
Further limitations on free distribution of publications and documents;
( d)
Installation of modern facilities to improve
the in-session availability of important documents;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session on the
progress achieved in the implementation of approved
measures, on the results of further studies and on recommendations for additional measures to improve documentation and publications services.
110th plenary meeting
21 December 1977
32/208.

United
Nairobi

Nations

accommodation

at

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3004 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, in which it decided to locate the secretariat of the United Nations Environment Programme
in a developing country and further decided to locate
it at Nairobi,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on United Nations accommodation at Nairobi 0 n and
of the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions; 70
2. Accepts with appreciation the generous grant
by the Government of Kenya of the site at Gigiri,
Nairobi, upon which to construct the project, subject
to a suitable agreement between the Secretary-General
and the Government;
3. Concurs in the observations and recommendations of the Advisory Committee; 71
4. Approves, in principle, the construction of permanent headquarters facilities for the United Nations
Environment Programme and accommodation for the
other l '.nited Nations offices at Nairobi;
5. Authorizes the Secretary-General, bearing in
mind the observations and recommendations of the
Advisory Committee, to proceed in accordance with the
recommendations contained in his report; 72
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly annually on the status of the project.
110th plenary meeting
2 I December 1977
32/209.

Expenditure with respect to experts and
consultants in the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling that its decision of 18 December 197 4, 73
taken at its twenty-ninth session, by which it outlined
69A/C.5/32/19 and Add.I.
Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. BA (A/32/8/Add.l-30), document
A/32/8/ Add. JO.
71 Jbid., paras. 10-29.
12 A/C.5/32/ 19, para. 32.
73 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/963 I), pp. 136 and 137,
item 73.
7 0 Official
