S/PV.9390

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9390

th meeting
Monday, 31 July 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Eckersley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Xing Jisheng
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mr. Diaba
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mrs. Shino
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Hauri
Ms. Shaheen
Ms. Saha

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-22503 (E)
*2322503*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9390

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite the following briefers to
participate in this meeting: Mr. Raffi Gregorian, Deputy
to the Under-Secretary-General and Officer-in-Charge
of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism; and,
as requested by the Russian Federation, Mr. Sergey
Chaulin, civil activist.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Gregorian.
Mr. Gregorian: It is an honour to appear before
the Security Council, which the Charter of the United
Nations imbues with the responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. The Security Council
has had a long and admirable record of consensus
when it comes to the issue of terrorism, including
landmark resolutions related to Al-Qaida, in 1998
(resolution 1189 (1998)) and against terrorism as a whole,
in 2001 (resolution 1377 (2001), annex), the establishment
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (resolution 1373
(2001)) and a series of resolutions against Da’esh that set
forth practical measures that, as successive reports by the
Secretary-General have recorded, have helped Member
States to choke off the flow of foreign terrorist fighters
to Da’esh and reduce its cash reserves. The whole world
owes the Security Council its thanks for these measures.
Unfortunately, there has not yet been consensus
at the General Assembly on the draft comprehensive
convention on international terrorism, including in
relation to how the definition of terrorism would precisely
apply in situations of armed conflict. When the General
Assembly established the Office of Counter-Terrorism
(UNOCT), in 2017 (General Assembly resolution 71/291),
it did so with the clear intention of helping Member
States to implement the General Assembly’s 2006
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (General Assembly
resolution 60/288) and other relevant General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions related to the fight
against terrorism.
2/16

31/07/2023

The General Assembly mandate for the UNOCT
includes five main functions: first, to provide
leadership on the General Assembly counter-terrorism
mandates entrusted to the Secretary-General from
across the United Nations system; secondly, to enhance
coordination and coherence across the Global CounterTerrorism Coordination Compact entities, to ensure
the balanced implementation of the four pillars of
the United Nations global counter-terrorism strategy;
thirdly, to strengthen the delivery of United Nations
counter-terrorism capacity-building assistance to
Member States; fourthly, to improve visibility, advocacy
and resource-mobilization for United Nations counterterrorism efforts; and fifthly, to ensure that due priority
is given to counter-terrorism across the United Nations
system, and that the important work on preventing
violent extremism is firmly rooted in the Strategy.
The General Assembly does not provide the
UNOCT with the mandate to investigate or ascertain
the conduct of States and other actors, nor to determine
what constitutes an act of terrorism, whether by a State,
a group or an individual. For these reasons, I regret
that I have nothing else to contribute to the substance
of today’s meeting. However, I would note that both
the Security Council and the General Assembly, on
several occasions, have remarked that compliance
with international law, including international human
rights law and international humanitarian law, is the
bedrock of the fight against terrorism. This includes
full respect for all the obligations under the Charter of
the United Nations. Any action that contravenes these
higher-level legal obligations and moral imperatives
undermines the global fight against terrorism. And
as the hard-won consensus at the eighth review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy by
the General Assembly last month (General Assembly
resolution 77/298) showed, when Member States speak
with one voice, we can make real and meaningful
progress in the fight against terrorism.
The President: I thank Mr. Gregorian for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chaulin.
Mr. Chaulin (spoke in Russian): My name is Sergey
Ivanovich Chaulin. I am a humble heating engineer from
Estonia. In my spare time, I was involved in human
rights activities back home, fighting for the freedoms of
assembly and speech, for the right to receive education
in one’s native language and for the traditional family
values that my parents taught me back in Soviet times.
23-22503

31/07/2023

Threats to international peace and security

For all those reasons, on 14 February, I was deported
from Estonia, having been denied the opportunity
to even call my lawyer or relatives. By doing so, the
Estonian authorities violated all existing international
norms and agreements regarding stateless persons. I
had an alien passport, and I was a stateless person, a
fact that brings shame upon Europe. Despite the fact
that the Russian side had no obligation to host me, I
was hosted and received in Russia. Upon my arrival in
Saint Petersburg, I was provided lodging in a hotel and
given assistance with obtaining documents establishing
my legal status in Russia. They also provided me with
food, clothing, housing and money, as I had been
deported while still wearing my work uniform — I
had been deported straight from my workplace. Since I
ended up in another country, I began to look for other
sources of information in order to understand what
was happening. In Estonia and in Europe they say one
thing, whereas what we hear in Russia is completely
different. That is how, on 2 April, I ended up at an
event in a café in Saint Petersburg a with a military
correspondent, Vladlen Tatarsky. When I arrived at the
event, I took a seat close to the stage, in advance, so
that I could potentially meet the participants. For me,
to hear a military correspondent speak was an entirely
new experience. I had never even seen a military
correspondent with my own eyes.
Many people attended the event, which had a very
warm and friendly atmosphere. There were even some
of Tatarsky’s fans in attendance — people who were
well acquainted with his work. One young woman said
that she had written the military correspondent many
letters and sent him photographs. He recognized her.
She asked if she could bring a special gift up to the
stage. The military correspondent acquiesced, and the
gift turned out to be a bust of Vladlen Tatarsky himself.
Everyone was impressed by the bust, which was covered
in gold paint. The young lady was thanked and given a
standing ovation. I then invited her to take the spare
seat next to me, by the front of the stage.
A few seconds later, there was an explosion. At
first, I thought that perhaps my cell phone had exploded
and so I threw it aside. It felt as though I were being
hit across the face with a wooden board from every
direction at once. My face felt like it was full of
splinters. At first, I was in a state of complete shock and
total confusion. I did not understand what happened. I
thought that the ceiling was about to collapse, because
the room was filled with smoke, and it was impossible

S/PV.9390

to see anything. There were two women next to me,
whom I helped leave the building as quickly as possible.
Once we were out in the street, I saw people wounded
and covered in blood. Everyone was drenched in blood,
especially their faces. Some were screaming and some
were crying, while others were on the phone, calling
ambulances. Some people stopped and tried to help,
while others drove by, as though nothing had happened.
When the ambulances arrived, they put out chairs
for people right there in the street and began to provide
first aid. They put me in an ambulance and began
assisting me. They had to cut my clothes off of my
body because they were impossible to remove. They
simply had to cut off my clothes. I was then taken to
hospital for various surgeries and a long treatment and
recovery process.
While I was in the hospital, the investigators looking
into the terror attack came to interview me. They were
trying to find out who was involved, what had happened
and why I was there. The investigation revealed that
it was the bust gifted by the young lady, whom I had
kindly invited to sit next to me, that exploded. As it
turns out, she had been recruited by Ukrainian militants.
The terrorists had detonated the bomb, despite the fact
that the young lady herself was right there next to it.
Somehow, she was barely injured — I think because she
was directly behind Vladlen Tatarsky. He unknowingly
shielded her from the blast with his body, leaving her
practically unhurt. Tatarsky himself, of course, died as
a result of the explosion. Many other people are still in
critical condition and in recovery in the hospital. One of
my friends is still having issues with her vision after a
number of surgeries and requires further treatment. The
host of the event, too, is still in the hospital receiving
treatment, five months after the incident.
As for the young woman who brought the bomb
disguised as a gift, realizing that the terrorists had no
qualms about letting her die, she most likely cooperated
with the investigators. As far as I know, the investigation
has now concluded and there will soon be a trial, during
which all the details of the investigation will be made
public, and we will be able to learn more about what
happened and who is responsible.
I believe that Vladlen Tatarsky’s murder was
organized because of his professional activities.
Tatarsky was an honest journalist, and he tried to convey
what he had seen in Donbas and the truth about what
had been happening on the front lines since 2014. With

23-225033/16

S/PV.9390

Threats to international peace and security

regard to my own personal experience, it is difficult to
put it into words. I had not been planning to go to the
front or to fight. My friends and I had simply decided
to attend an event at a café together, along with many
other ordinary, peaceful citizens.
That took place in a city thousands of kilometres
from any military conflict. There is no war in Saint
Petersburg, yet it witnessed that terrorist attack, causing
many people to suffer. Now I can understand the people
who survived the terrorist attacks in Pushkin Square
in Moscow in 2000; on the metro in Saint Petersburg
between the Sennaya Square and Institute of Technology
stations in 2017; or in New York on 11 September 2001,
when so many people died. But unlike the United States
authorities, who later drowned all of Iraq in blood by
killing more than a million of its citizens in response,
Russia is investigating the incident in order to punish
those directly responsible for what happened.
I am not a vengeful person, but I would very much
like to see not only the perpetrators of such an attack
punished, but also those who planned and prepared it,
including by recruiting beautiful young women to do
their dirty work. Terrorist acts should be condemned
by the international community and international
organizations. Measures must be taken to punish the
direct perpetrators, as well as those who give them
their orders.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the surgeons
who treated me and patched me up so well that one
could hardly tell that I was barely a metre away from
the epicentre of the explosion. I am so grateful to the
doctors who helped me to get back on my feet.
The President: I thank Mr. Chaulin for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): As my colleagues have probably calculated,
in July, the Security Council, under the British
presidency, has already discussed various aspects of the
Ukraine topic four times. Furthermore, this issue was
also discussed in the General Assembly this month. I
would therefore ask what the added value is in having a
fifth Security Council meeting on the topic?
I am sure that we will hear in this regard our former
Western partners’ traditional mantra about Russia’s
strategy to divert the Security Council’s attention from
its actions in Ukraine. We are already used to the fact
4/16

31/07/2023

that Washington and its satellites are ready to discuss
only concepts that are part of their propaganda about
the supposedly unprovoked war of choice that Russia is
conducting in Ukraine. That ploy can be followed if one
assumes that the Ukrainian crisis — and in fact world
history as a whole — began on the 24 February 2022.
It is satisfying that an increasingly number of our
partners understand that that is not the case, and if
world diplomacy truly wants to find a peaceful solution
to the crisis around Ukraine, we need to examine all
its aspects, including various aspects of the harrowing
Kyiv regime. Today, we are precisely suggesting that we
discuss the terrorist essence of the Ukrainian regime,
which was formed after the bloody anti-constitutional
coup d’état of 2014 sponsored by Washington and
Brussels. For Russians, as well as Ukrainians who
have not become zombies by the Banderite ideology,
the notion does not even need to be explained; it is
absolutely obvious. Western colleagues living in a
world where the truth no longer plays a role and where
black has become white and vice versa, of course, will
not hear or accept anything we say. That is why our
efforts are not intended for them, but for those who are
still capable of thinking and analysing.
To begin with, I would like to mention a quote from
a recent television interview with one of the most public
talking heads of the Kyiv regime, the former adviser
to Zelenskyy, Oleksiy Arestovich, who, by the way,
claims to be open-minded and even liberal. He stated,
“Zaluzhny”, the Head of the Ukrainian armed forces
of Ukraine,
“has two tasks: to gain access to the sea and to cut
off the land corridor. To cut off Crimea, the bridge
must be destroyed. That’s it. We have 2 million
people in Crimea with nowhere to go and no water
or food. We can use that to negotiate.”
In other words, one of the main ideologists of the Kyiv
regime argues that the task of the Ukrainian armed
forces is to take the inhabitants of Crimea hostage and
use them to negotiate. It is a classic terrorist approach,
similar to that of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) fighters or Chechen terrorists who took peaceful
civilians hostage, including children in Beslan in 2004,
with the tacit connivance of Western moralisers, who,
of course, will stay silent now too.
It should be said that Kyiv has been for many years
losing sleep over Crimea, which has been thriving since
its reunification with Russia and receiving millions
23-22503

31/07/2023

Threats to international peace and security

of tourists. According to Kyiv’s playbook, Crimea is
supposed to be depressed and engulfed in protests. That
explains Kyiv’s blind desire to punish the Crimeans and
take revenge on them. That explains the two terrorist
attacks on the Crimean bridge on 8 October 2022 and
17 July this year. The Kyiv regime did not even try to
deny responsibility for that; on the contrary, it claimed
responsibility for it. It is important to take into account
that the bridge has long been an exclusively civilian
structure. It ensures passenger and cargo transit, as
well as railroad connectivity with the peninsula. There
is has long been no need to use it to transport military
cargo. Both Kyiv and the West know that very well.
The Head of the Security Service of Ukraine, Malyuk,
called the first attack “an implementation” of SBU.
Deputy Minister of Defence Hanna Maliar labelled it
as a “success of Ukrainian army”. What’s noteworthy
is that the tactic for the first attack was again borrowed
from ISIL. The driver of the truck that was laden with
explosives was unaware that he was being used as a
suicide bomber. Among the victims there were only
civilians.
Another dream of the post-Maidan Ukraine is
the energy and water blockade of the peninsula,
which Kyiv imposed in September 2015 and in April
2014, respectively. However, after the Kherson and
Zaporizhzhya regions became part of Russia, the Kyiv
regime could no longer bother the Crimeans in such
a way. So Zelenskyy’s regime set another goal — to
ensure the shallowing of the North Crimean Canal,
which supplies the Crimea with water. In pursuit of
this, they blasted the dam of the Nova Kakhovka
hydroelectric power plant.
Some colleagues may have already included in their
statements today the idea that Ukrainians can use any
means possible to defend themselves themselves in the
context of the ongoing hostilities against that country. I
strongly advise them to think twice before stating that.
The Kyiv regime is attacking not so much the Russian
military infrastructure, warehouses and fuel depots,
but peaceful cities and targets, sometimes thousands
of kilometres away from the area of fighting and it is
also resorting to ISIL methods of individualized terror.
What military expediency can explain the shelling of
villages on Russia’s border regions, where no military
facilities are situated and civilians are the only ones to
be killed and injured? What can justify the cowardly
raids by Ukrainian sabotage and reconnaissance groups
that do not shy away from shooting fleeing children in

S/PV.9390

the back, as happened in the Bryansk oblast? What
kind of threat to Ukraine did Daria Dugina, Vladlen
Tatarsky or Zakhar Prilepin, who were targets of
assassinations, represent? They were not carrying arms
on the battlefield. Their only weapon was words. By
assaulting them, the Kyiv regime, in classic terrorist
tradition, wanted to silence them and intimidate those
in Russia and Ukraine who are not afraid to tell the
truth about what is happening in Ukraine and what
Zelenskyy’s regime is doing. What military expediency
can explain using drones to attack Moscow and other
Russian cities? At the same time it is important to
understand that hundreds, if not thousands of terrorist
attacks that the Security Service of Ukraine planned
on Russian territory are being prevented by Russian
security services. Such reports pop up in the news
almost every day. Just as pointless in terms of gaining
military advantage was another act of intimidation —
the strike on 22 July with cluster munitions supplied
by the United States on a civilian car with journalists
in the Zaporizhzhya oblast. The strike killed Rostislav
Zhuravlev, a correspondent from RIA Novosti, and
inflicted wounds of varying severity on four of his
colleagues.
We are likely to hear today our Western colleagues
make some inappropriate comparisons with the
precision strikes by the Russian airspace forces against
Ukrainian facilities that are aimed at destroying the
military potential of the Kyiv regime. They will say
that Ukraine is acting that way because Russia is acting
that way. But I would like to warn the Council: such
an assertion would be blasphemous, because, as we
have recently confirmed, the destruction of homes
and other purely civilian objects in Ukraine is not due
to our strikes, but to the actions of the Ukrainian air
defence forces located in residential areas. Numerous
video testimonies leave no doubt about this. Suffice
it to mention the recent incident involving the
Transfiguration Cathedral in Odesa, when Ukrainian
Internet users exposed the Zelenskyy regime, having
discovered that the Cathedral had been hit by a
Ukrainian air defence missile.
I would also like to mention that one should not
think that the Kyiv regime began using terrorist methods
only after the start of our special military operation
in February 2022. In fact, its terrorist nature was
evident immediately after the 2014 coup d’état, when
the United States and the European Union financed
and organized the bloody Maidan coup. They were

23-225035/16

S/PV.9390

Threats to international peace and security

well aware of what kind of forces they were bringing
to power in the country. People such as Oleksandr
Turchynov, Andriy Parubiy, Oleh Tyahnybok, Oleksii
Bilyi, Andriy Biletsky and similar national radicals,
criminals and extremists, openly, in plain sight of their
Western sponsors, used methods of terror to overthrow
a democratically elected Government. Their first
victims were all those who thought differently from
them — Ukrainian politicians, journalists and public
figures. On 18 February 2014, radicals threw Molotov
cocktails at a branch of the ruling party, the Party of
Regions. They started a fire and beat the people who
tried to escape the office. Two people died. The same
terrorist tactics were used in Odesa on 2 May 2014.
Organized armed groups of nationalists, with the
connivance of the police and authorities, turned a rally
against the self-appointed “Maidan authorities” into a
massacre. They drove the protestors into the building
of the Trade Union House, then blocked the doors
from the outside and set the lower floors on fire with
Molotov cocktails. They did what they could to let no
one escape. Those who jumped from upper floors were
killed on the ground. Approximately 50 people died at
the hands of neo-fascists.
It would seem that, looking at this terrible atrocity,
the collective West, which always, at least rhetorically,
promotes human rights and the fight against impunity,
would have finally thought about who it brought to
power. But no, its support for the national radicals only
grew, giving the latter a sense of complete impunity. As
a result, the repression against dissenters grew stronger
and stronger. On 15 April 2015, Oleh Kalashnikov, a
former member of the Verkhovna Rada from the Party
of Regions, was killed at the door of his Kyiv apartment.
The next day, on 16 April 2015, journalist Oles Buzina
was shot dead near his home in Kyiv. On 20 July
2017, a well-known Russian and Ukrainian journalist
Pavel Sheremet was blown up in his car in Kyiv. Their
murderers were not brought to justice.
The multifold increase in violence in Ukraine
began in April 2014, when the Maidan Acting President
Turchynov issued a decree for the start of the so-called
anti-terrorist operation. That was the beginning of
a multi-year campaign to exterminate the Russianspeaking population in Donbas, who refused to accept
the outcome of the coup d’état. Its characteristic feature
is the shelling and bombing of peaceful towns for no
military purpose. On 2 June 2014, for example, Luhansk
was the target of an air strike. A kindergarten, a small
6/16

31/07/2023

park, civilian housing and a city hall were targeted, and
eight civilians died. The inhabitants of Horlivka have
named 27 July 2014 — when a massive artillery strike
by the Ukrainian army killed 13 people, including
children, and wounded dozens — Donetsk Bloody
Sunday. Every year, we in Russia remember the children
of Donbas who died as a result of Ukrainian shelling.
The support of the West emboldened the Maidan
authorities to believe that they could do anything.
From 2014 to 2022, these typically terroristic tactics of
the Kyiv regime, namely targeting peaceful cities and
towns where there were no military objectives, led to
the loss of thousands of civilian lives We do not have
enough time to list all the facts of the Ukrainian crimes
against the people of the Donetsk People's Republic and
the Luhansk People's Republic.
Since the beginning of the special military operation,
the Kyiv regime has expanded its terrorist methods of
warfare. The Ukrainians military and nationalists use
the tactics of “human shields” previously employed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Artillery
positions and ammunition depots were deliberately set
up in schools, hospitals and residential buildings so that
civilians could be used as shields.
The neo-Nazi Azov Battalion, located in Mariupol
and designated by Russia as a terrorist group, was
particularly keen to resort to such practices We got
access to Azov’s playbooks, according to which
residential buildings were to be transformed into socalled “sandwiches”, with the first and last floors to be
occupied by the military and all other floors reserved
for civilians who would serve as hostages. Kyiv is using
terrorist means to achieve its political goals as well. Let
us recall the explosion of the Togliatti-Odesa ammonia
pipeline in Kharkiv oblast on 5 June — this facility
was important for ensuring food security. Kyiv used
terrorist methods to organize appalling provocations
against our country in order to smear its image. It is
enough to simply mention the strike against the packed
railway station in Kramatorsk, controlled by the
Ukrainian regime. Dozens were killed or injured. All of
this was done just to point a finger at Russia. However,
as we know, the plan failed. Photos of the supposedly
Russian missile debris, which were published on the
Internet, made it possible to identify the missile as a
Ukrainian Tochka-U, and the serial number visible in
one of the pictures proved that the missile had belonged
to the Ukranian forces. We also recall how the Nazis
from Azov blew up the theatre in Mariupol with people
23-22503

31/07/2023

Threats to international peace and security

inside it, just so as to be able to portray this barbaric act
as a Russian strike. The staged operation in Bucha will
also undoubtedly go down as one of the most dirty and
inhumane provocations in history.
It would be highly naive of us to expect Western
countries to condemn the terrorist actions of their
Ukrainian mentees. For a long time now, the United
States and their satellites, including the United
Kingdom, have not hesitated to voice their true goals
in Ukraine. They talk about ensuring that Russia
suffers a strategic defeat. They do not hide the fact that
they strive to maintain their domination in the world
at all costs and by any means necessary. For Western
intelligence agencies, creating and using terrorist
organizations, including ISIL and Al-Qaida, to promote
their own geopolitical interests is nothing new — they
are orchestrating a similar scenario in Ukraine. Any
and all radicals, neo-Nazis, white supremacists and
other extremists fostered by the collective West first
were used to overthrow the legitimate Government,
and then integrated into the army, law-enforcement
bodies and special services of the country, where they
started promoting terrorist tactics and methodology.
With the help of its sponsors, the whole of Ukraine
has become a collective suicide bomber, willing to
defend those sponsors’ geopolitical interests down to
the last Ukranian. Meanwhile, Western self-proclaimed
advocates of democratic values and human rights seem
to remain under the delusion that if all the “dirty work”,
including blatant terrorism, is assigned to Zelenskyy
and his cronies, it is possible to keep their own hands
clean. It is not going to be that way. To execute its
terrorist attacks, Ukraine has used Western weaponry,
equipment and intelligence. Therefore, its generous
sponsors do in fact bear full responsibility for the
regime’s many crimes and terrorist acts that have
already been or will be committed. The Council should
have no illusions about that. Moreover, it is obvious that
without regular military, financial and organizational
support from the West, especially from the United
States, the Kyiv State terror machine would have fallen
like a house of cards a long time ago.
Setting aside the financial side of the issue, I
would like to highlight its ethical and moral aspects.
It is very difficult to believe that ordinary Americans,
who survived the tragedy of 11 September 2001 and
who know the dangers of terrorism first-hand, would
support financing and pumping full of weapons a
regime whose leaders openly admit their involvement

S/PV.9390

in terrorist attacks and laugh at the victims. Also,
residents of European Union member States might
reasonably ask how supporting Ukrainian terrorists
relates to European values. Is it possible that the
Western media have gone completely mad, with their
primitive Russophobia having permanently zombified
the Western public, making it forget how to think and
analyse facts?
In conclusion, I would like to say that, considering
Kyiv's descent into outright terrorism, we cannot forget
the role of the United Nations Secretariat and other
international bodies. After the bloody coup in 2014,
they all demonstrated incredible selective blindness,
readily turning a blind eye to Kyiv’s atrocities and
crimes, including those against peaceful cities and
towns in Donbas. Meanwhile they zealously joined
in propagating and recounting all manner of fake
crimes orchestrated by the Ukrainians and for which
responsibility was attributed to Russia, be it the staged
provocation in Bucha or utterly wild lies about handing
out Viagra to Russian soldiers to promote mass rape.
In addition, United Nations officials increasingly often
resort to the universal response when it comes to any
information about the increasingly bold crimes being
committed by the Kyiv regime’s leaders, including
blatant terrorist attacks. They say that none of what has
happened would have happened had it not been for the
so-called “Russian aggression”.
That position is based on a gross shift in ideas.
The root cause of the crisis in Ukraine is precisely the
unreasonable geopolitical ambitions of the collective
West, which organized a coup d’état in the country
neighbouring ours and brought to power aggressive
nationalists who hate everything Russian and do not shy
away from using any method to achieve their extremist
goals. Without that, a special military operation would
not have been necessary. By repeatedly refusing to
condemn the increasingly monstrous actions of the
Kyiv regime, the United Nations follows the Western
lead and gives the Zelenskyy regime and his clique
carte blanche for all manner of crimes, allowing them
to do whatever they want, as everything will be written
off as a part of the Russian special military operation.
As a result, the Kyiv regime, now convinced that it
acts with impunity, has turned to terrorism, which it
practises with undisguised enthusiasm. What will
be next — nuclear, chemical or biological terrorism?
Will the Council remain silent and blame everything
on Russia? We expect that the leadership of the

23-225037/16

S/PV.9390

Threats to international peace and security

United Nations Secretariat will finally remember the
principles of impartiality and independence and have
the courage to give an objective assessment of the
actions of the puppet Kyiv regime, as Ukraine’s use of
terrorist methods is a factor that is only exacerbating
the Ukrainian crisis and making a peaceful resolution
ever less likely. The United Nations should be well
aware of it.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank the Deputy
to the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Gregorian, for
his briefing.
Let me also say, from the very start, that our
position remains crystal clear: we denounce any and all
acts of terror — anywhere, at any time and by anyone.
Our actions and policies in that respect speak far louder
than our words.
I have lost count of the number of Security Council
meetings called by Russia to push its distorted narrative
about Ukraine, but this one — on the final day of the
United Kingdom’s remarkably handled presidency of
the Council — does not stand out in any particular way.
It is in the same vein of déjà vu. We deplore the fact
that Russia has turned the Security Council into a place
where it tries to sell every ludicrousness on what has
been, is and will remain — for as long as it goes on — an
unjust, unjustified and inexcusable war of choice.
We should not be trapped in an artificial discussion
of a chicken-or-the-egg sort because everything that
happens in Ukraine, including what we hear in the
Chamber on the matter, is a consequence of that war.
Had there been no aggression, we would not be here to
deplore its consequences. That is why all these meetings
continue to have two features in common: they are part
of the same usual propaganda, and they reveal a lack
of credibility. As per today’s topic, calling Ukraine’s
defence terrorism is as credible as when Minister
Lavrov made a packed room in New Delhi laugh by
saying that Russia was trying to stop a war initiated
by Ukraine.
By calling meeting after meeting to disinform,
Russia is taking up our time. It is misusing the Council’s
resources for such purposes. It has lowered the bar by
inviting militants and propagandists, including in some
cases entertainers disguised as briefers — no offence to
Mr. Chaulin and his personal account today.
While that course has not changed anything on
the ground or in the understanding of the war, it has
contributed to making noise — the kind of noise that,
8/16

31/07/2023

regrettably, further erodes the credibility of the Council
and is used as an excuse to hinder the United Nations
and its bodies from properly doing their work and
discharging their responsibilities. But truth cannot be
hidden, facts cannot be altered, and a narrative aimed
at brainwashing domestic opinion and misleading the
world is doomed to fail. As we know, it has not changed
the core issue. Russia is the aggressor, and there is so
much to say about that. I have three specific questions.
I would very much like to know, what is the
purpose of throwing missiles in the middle of the night
into apartment buildings and residential areas if not
to terrorize people? What is the definition of the use
of Iranian kamikaze drones that end up destroying
schools, kindergartens and health facilities? How
does one explain the vicious obstinacy of attacking to
deliberately destroy power generation installations in
the midst of winter, if not to terrorize the population,
freeze it to death and force it to surrender?
Therefore, for us, and I hope for many, there is no
doubt as to who is using terror in the bloody war, who
is responsible for its terrible consequences and who
should be held accountable. Neither is there any doubt
about who is violating the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, as clearly and unquestionably
determined by the General Assembly. That is the issue
that should have been the primary preoccupation of
the Security Council, were it not paralysed and held
hostage by a permanent member, in a blatant conflict
of interest.
The world is witness to the fact that Russia is
using every method to bring Ukraine to its knees. It
has instrumentalized religion. It has attacked Ukraine’s
culture and assaulted its identity. It has weaponized
gas and has again turned against food. In a desperate
and regrettable move, Russia went back to the crime
scene and killed the grain deal — the one to which it
had agreed, showing once more that agreements mean
little to Russia when breaking them suits its interests.
Furthermore, to consolidate its gains, Russia is now
bombarding Ukraine’s ports on a daily basis in an
effort to make impossible any future exports of grain
from Ukraine.
Let me end with the following. When we know
very well — and we have been there already — that
preventing grain exports from one of the breadbaskets
of the world, Ukraine, would worsen the world situation,
lead to increased prices, make it harder for millions to
afford their daily bread, make the poor go hungry and
23-22503

31/07/2023

Threats to international peace and security

cause the death of innocent people who do not need to
die from hunger, is that not terror of some kind? It is
just a thought.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland challenges the pretext under which today’s
meeting has been convened. Moreover, we believe
that today’s meeting harms the effectiveness of the
Council’s work.
Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine is
a serious violation of international law. Switzerland
condemns that act in the strongest possible terms. The
promotion of international humanitarian law and respect
for all its rules is an abiding feature of Swiss foreign
policy. The principles of distinction, proportionality
and precaution must be respected in the conduct of
hostilities by all parties and in all armed conflicts.
The parties have an obligation to protect civilians and
persons hors de combat. In that respect, we are appalled
by the serious violations of international humanitarian
law committed during the war. We recall that Russia
is not only responsible for the military aggression
against Ukraine, but that credible reports show that it
is also responsible for the vast majority of violations of
international humanitarian law during the conflict.
With the adoption of a General Assembly
resolution in February (ES-11/6), more than 140
countries reiterated their call on Russia to withdraw its
troops from Ukrainian territory. More than 140 States
voted in favour of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity, and in favour of respect for international
law, in particular the Charter of the United Nations.
They made a commitment to peace. For the quest for a
diplomatic solution to continue, we urge Russia, once
again, to de-escalate the situation, cease all hostilities
and withdraw its troops from Ukrainian territory
without delay.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to express my delegation’s
appreciation for the way in which you, Mr. President,
have steered the work of the Council. I listened closely
to the briefers.
This is the fifth meeting we have held in the past
two weeks on Russia’s military aggression against
Ukraine. I must point out that, as long as the invasion
continues, the Council must continue to pay attention to
the developments in the situation and discuss them. We
should also be able to take decisions.

S/PV.9390

On 27 February 2022, the Council was able to adopt
resolution 2623 (2022), based on the Uniting for Peace
mechanism. That resolution convened the eleventh
emergency special session of the General Assembly on
the Russian Federation’s invasion of Ukraine.
Similarly, in May 2022, the Council was able to agree
on a presidential statement (S/PRST/2022/3), in which
it expressed its deep concern about the maintenance
of peace and security in Ukraine. It also recalled that,
pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations, all Member
States have an obligation to resolve international disputes
through peaceful means. The statement also expressed
strong support for the efforts of the Secretary-General in
the quest for a peaceful solution. Other draft resolutions
were vetoed, owing to a partial application of Article
27, paragraph 3, of the United Nations Charter, which
results in a veto, but also includes an obligation for the
parties to a dispute to abstain from voting.
It is nearly a year and a half since Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine and a year and three months since the last time
the Council took a decision on the conflict. Since then,
instead of improving, the situation has only deteriorated.
We will never tire of insisting that this organ must fulfil
its obligations. We reiterate that, in line with Article
51 of the Charter, nothing in the Charter shall impair
the inherent right of legitimate self-defence if an armed
attack occurs against a Member State. We also recall
that all parties must observe strict and unconditional
compliance with their obligations under international
humanitarian law, focused primarily on the protection
of civilians.
Lastly, we reiterate our belief that only a political
solution, based on respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity, will allow for lasting peace.
Mr. Diaba (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank the
briefers for their statements.
The war unfolding in Ukraine continues to flout
the most fundamental principles of international law
and international humanitarian law. We are helplessly
watching the escalation of violence, in which civilians
have become trapped because of their cultural or
religious affiliation. The number of victims continues
to rise, places of worship are being destroyed, and
major infrastructure is being damaged. We will not
tire in repeating that the situation is unacceptable and
must be continuously condemned. Indiscriminate or
targeted attacks, forced displacements, acts of sabotage
and similar acts lead only to further suffering for the
population, especially women, children and the elderly.

23-225039/16

S/PV.9390

Threats to international peace and security

Protecting the physical and psychological integrity
of every individual is a moral imperative. We recall
the need to safeguard civil and cultural infrastructure.
Attacks on schools, hospitals, churches, monuments
and cultural sites are not only a crime against the
country’s cultural heritage, but also against its future
generations and their cultural inheritance. We must
redouble our efforts to end this war. Concrete measures
must be taken to guarantee the safety of populations
and facilitate access for humanitarian organizations.
In conclusion, my country recalls that the
proliferation of both conventional weapons and weapons
of mass destruction poses a threat to world peace and
security. No reason — no matter how praiseworthy it
might be — can justify war and its devastating social,
geopolitical and economic consequences. Gabon
continues to advocate for international peace and
security and calls on the parties to engage in dialogue
in order to find a diplomatic solution. It is our shared
responsibility, as an international community, to
support efforts to that end in our collective commitment
to achieving world peace.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I thank Mr. Gregorian for
his briefing.
Today the Security Council is meeting yet again at
the request of the Russian Federation to discuss a topic
that does not reflect the realities on the ground. This
is another attempt by Russia to advance its isolated
stance and try to justify its senseless, unjustified
and unprovoked aggression against Ukraine. Malta
reiterates its condemnation of Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine, which constitutes a blatant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law. We
also condemn Russia’s unilateral decision to terminate
the Black Sea Grain Initiative at a time when the World
Food Programme estimates that more than 345 million
people are facing high levels of food insecurity
worldwide, 43 million of whom are just one step away
from famine.
The world is at a turning point. We are facing a
man-made problem of food insecurity, and hunger
is being used as a weapon. Furthermore, Russia
is blocking and bombing Ukrainian seaports. It is
preventing freedom of navigation in the Black Sea,
without any justification, while also targeting civilians
and civilian infrastructure. Those are the issues on
which the Security Council should be focusing when
discussing Ukraine. Russia’s disregard for international
10/16

31/07/2023

humanitarian law has been perpetuated further by
the recent deliberate missile strikes on Odesa and
Kostiantynivka. Those acts violate the architecture of
international treaties that the international community
has been building for decades. Malta condemns those
barbaric acts of terror, which have resulted in the death
of civilians, including children. The shelling has also
damaged educational institutions and other cultural
and religious sites. We remain firmly committed to
ensuring that Russia be held fully accountable for all
its crimes.
In conclusion, Russia’s efforts to change the optics
over the largest humanitarian crisis in Europe since
the Second World War are counterproductive to the
efforts to achieve a political settlement. Malta remains
convinced that the only step towards a lasting peace
is for Russia to immediately cease all hostilities and
unconditionally and completely withdraw all its forces
and military equipment from the entire territory of
Ukraine, within its internationally recognized borders.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank the briefers for
their briefings.
This is the sixth time that the Security Council
is discussing the Ukraine-related issue this month.
It is regrettable that Russia has been consuming
Security Council resources by simply requesting the
same number of Council meetings as those requested
by the countries that accuse Russia. Instead, Russia
should have taken the floor at the previous meeting on
Ukraine, on Wednesday (see S/PV.9386). Russia seems
to have requested today’s meeting to blame Ukraine
for not being able to reach a political solution to end
Russia’s unprovoked war of aggression against Ukraine.
However, we should never lose sight of the root cause.
We all know the indisputable fact that, if Russia had
not initiated the current aggression, the tragedy we are
witnessing now would have never happened. As stated
by the overwhelming majority of the General Assembly,
Russia’s aggression is a clear violation of international
law, including the Charter of the United Nations.
There are calls for a political solution for peace.
A diplomatic solution cannot be reached by inflicting
damage on one side. Peace prevails based on justice
and the principles of the Charter in order for it to
last. Russia must stop its hopeless attempt to deceive
the international community. It will never be able to
justify its outrageous act. Instead, it should fulfil its
responsibilities as a permanent member of the Security
23-22503

31/07/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Council. The Russian Federation should withdraw all
of its troops and military equipment from Ukraine
and respect Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity, within its internationally
recognized borders.
Ms. Saha (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Gregorian for his briefing.
We regret that this meeting, convened at Russia’s
request today, makes a mockery of the important
work of the Office of Counter-Terrorism in countering
terrorism and that Russia continues to abuse its position
on the Council to lie, distract and mislead.
In listening to Russia’s remarks today, some might
be confused about who is the aggressor and who is the
victim. Since the beginning of Russia’s brutal full-scale
invasion of Ukraine, the international community has
been clear: more than 140 countries have repeatedly
condemned the Russian Federation for its aggression
against Ukraine and demanded that Russia withdraw
its military forces from Ukraine’s internationally
recognized territory. We have listened carefully to
Russia’s remarks, and it is clear that its efforts to divert
the Council’s attention from the core issues at hand are
a transparent ploy to distract from its own aggression.
Over the weekend, Russia once again resorted to
irresponsible nuclear rhetoric. Russia also announced
the stationing of tactical nuclear weapons in the territory
of Belarus, further aggravating an already dangerous
situation. Russia’s complaints about the impacts of a
war that it began should remind us all of a simple truth:
this war would end today if Russia withdrew its forces
from Ukraine’s sovereign territory and abandoned its
relentless and brutal attacks against Ukraine’s cities
and civilian infrastructure. Until that day comes, the
United States will continue to offer its full support for
Ukraine’s self-defence and the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I thank Mr. Gregorian,
for his briefing. We have also listened to the views
expressed by Mr. Sergey Chaulin.
At the outset, I reiterate Ghana’s position against all
acts of terrorism, wherever they occur and whosoever
the perpetrators may be. Terrorism, as we know, is
a canker on any society. We therefore reaffirm our
support for accountability for any acts of terrorism that
are duly established. The information provided must
therefore be properly investigated if the conclusions
being proposed are to be shared. My delegation is

S/PV.9390

also mindful of the context of the ongoing aggression
against Ukraine and the principles of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations, which affords
Ukraine the right to self-defence against an existential
threat to its independence and sovereignty. Ghana,
however, continues to be deeply concerned about the
fact that the prospects for peace in Ukraine remain
starkly dim, with the parties now heavily invested in a
fierce military contest. It would appear that the strong
appeal for a military win over any other resolution is
the only common denominator between the parties at
this time. Regretfully, the calls for peace continue to
go unheeded, and the chances of sustainable peace are
reduced by the events of each passing day.
As we have always maintained, nothing justifies the
extensive destruction of the war and the accompanying
civilian casualties now running into the tens of thousands.
Characteristically, innocent citizens, especially women
and children, continue to pay the highest price of the
war. In parallel, the global economic repercussions
caused by the war continue to visit situations of hardship
and instability on many populations already faced with
socioeconomic difficulties.
In assessing the trend of the war over these past 17
months, we conclude that its perpetuation can only lead
down a path of further destruction and tragic outcomes
at great costs to all. Accordingly, my delegation wishes
to reiterate the following four points.
First, the rules and principles of international law
must be respected and upheld by all States and applied
in a consistent manner. A selective application based
solely on the convenient choices of States weakens the
international legal order as well as the protection that
that order affords to ordinary and vulnerable citizens. It
also diminishes our ability to protect present and future
generations from the scourge of war.
Secondly, the protection of civilians everywhere
must be prioritized, and all necessary measures taken to
avoid causing harm to them, in line with requirements
under international humanitarian law. We also stress the
need for humanitarian access to all areas, as millions of
people still stand in need of life-saving assistance.
Thirdly, we stress the crucial importance of
dialogue in reaching a mutually acceptable agreement
on a credible pathway for negotiating a settlement of the
conflict. We believe that the conflict between the two
neighbouring countries should ultimately be resolved
around the table and not on the battlefield. Accordingly,

23-2250311/16

S/PV.9390

Threats to international peace and security

31/07/2023

we encourage the use of diplomacy to build bridges
towards peace and call for the sustained support of the
international community.

community should create conditions and an atmosphere
that enable the parties to reach a ceasefire and halt the
fighting, resume peace talks and break the impasse.

Fourthly, we strongly urge the Russian Federation
to heed the many calls for the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of its troops from Ukraine.
The cessation of violence would offer some respite to
the suffering people of Ukraine and further support a
negotiated settlement free from the sway of the war.

Relevant African national leaders recently called
once again for a political settlement of the Ukraine crisis,
which China welcomes. On the issue of Ukraine, China
consistently advocates that all countries’ sovereignty
and territorial integrity should be protected, that the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter be
respected, that all parties’ legitimate security concerns
be taken on board and that all efforts conducive to the
peaceful settlement of crises be supported. We stand
ready to make unflagging efforts and work with the
international community towards a political settlement
of the Ukraine crisis.

Finally, and in closing, I wish to reiterate the
interest of my country, Ghana, in seeing an early end
to the war. We reiterate our support for all international
efforts aimed at realizing our collective objective,
namely, peace in Ukraine.
Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank the Deputy to the Under-Secretary-General and
Officer-in-Charge at the Office of Counter-Terrorism,
Mr. Gregorian, for his briefing. I have also listened
attentively to the briefing by Mr. Chaulin.
The Ukraine crisis remains ongoing with a persistent
prevailing military logic, expanding the number of
affected areas, utilizing new methods of warfare and
causing ever-greater destruction to civilians and to
large-scale and critical civilian infrastructure. Cruelty,
danger and the unpredictability of the war are all on the
rise. The situation is deeply concerning.
Since the outbreak of the crisis, developments
have repeatedly shown that protracted and prevailing
clashes will cause greater risks, even to the point of
no return, undermining the interests of all parties and
the prospects for peace talks and reconciliation. The
parties concerned should exercise reason and restraint
and refrain from action or rhetoric that might further
escalate confrontation or lead to an error in judgment.
It is especially imperative to strictly safeguard the
bottom line of clear nuclear safety, stay away from the
red line of nuclear war and spare no efforts to prevent
the situation from getting out of control.
China calls upon the parties to the conflict to strictly
comply with international humanitarian law and do their
utmost to protect civilian and civilian infrastructure. In
the face of the situation, the international community
needs to make every effort to bring about the cessation
of the hostilities and a political settlement at an early
date. The parties should meet each other halfway and
explore solutions in line with regional realities that
accommodate each other’s concerns. The international
12/16

Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
Russia says it is worried about the lack of prospects for
resolving the war of aggression it itself has unleashed.
Once again, let us remind ourselves of the facts: Ukraine
did not want war, nor did it do anything to provoke it.
Russia alone is responsible for the current situation. It
is Russia that decided to violate the principles of the
United Nations Charter and attack its neighbour. It is
Russia that is committing war crimes in Ukraine.
Let Russia withdraw its troops from Ukraine,
and the war will end. It was ordered to do so by the
International Court of Justice over a year ago.
Ukraine wants peace, but it is forced to choose
between its legitimate right to defend itself and its
annihilation. That is why France will continue to
support Ukraine and the Ukrainian people for as long
as necessary. Any solution leading to the ratification
of illegal annexations would only reward violations
of international law and encourage the use of force.
This is why there is only one possible outcome: a just
peace, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, which respects Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I wish to thank the
briefers for their insights.
International conflicts, such as that which is
ongoing between Russia and Ukraine, do create
conditions that are ideal for terrorist acts and methods,
which exacerbates the situation and leads to the
eventual postponement of a political settlement. This
conflict has spurred radicalization on both sides and
is threatening to create a fertile breeding ground for
23-22503

31/07/2023

Threats to international peace and security

other non-State violent actors to thrive. That is deeply
disturbing for countries in Africa, which are already
grappling with the fallout of international crises that
have led to an unprecedented rise of acts of terrorism
and violent extremism.
If recent history is any guide, international
conflicts have often set the stage for the genesis and
growth of terrorism, allowing terrorist groups to extend
their terror footprint globally. This fact is borne out by
examining the genesis and emergence of contemporary
violent transnational groups that have exploited the
chaos that ensues from conflict. These unfortunate
patterns have been witnessed not only in Afghanistan
and Iraq but also in Libya and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where protracted conflicts have led to
the rise of terrorism that has reverberated regionally
and globally. As the custodian of international peace
and security, the Security Council has a duty to act in
strict compliance with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter.
The recently concluded review of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy by the General Assembly,
coupled with the Secretary-General’s New Agenda for
Peace, underscored the need to deter and prevent the
spread of terrorist ideologies through enhanced dialogue
and broad international cooperation. We must therefore
employ all tools at our disposal to stop the potential
exploitation of terrorist methods in the Russia-Ukraine
conflict. It is an urgent task that demands immediate
attention and action, guided by the principles shared by
the international community as a whole.
As we have stated in previous Council meetings,
Mozambique reiterates its plea for an immediate halt
to hostilities and the resumption of direct negotiations
between the parties. This is the only desirable path
to a lasting peace, where human lives are saved and
socioeconomic infrastructure preserved.
We further emphasize the importance of considering
various peace initiatives, including those proposed
by African countries, in resolving this conflict, as
repeatedly emphasized during the recently concluded
Africa-Russia summit. We advocate a comprehensive,
multifaceted approach that can address not only the
symptoms but also the root causes of this unfortunate
confrontation. We must also seek the swift application
of diplomatic pressure, backed by the international
community, to ensure respect for the independence,
territorial integrity and sovereignty of all States. Let us

S/PV.9390

remember, the solemn pledge inscribed in the Preamble
of the Charter of the United Nations: “to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our
lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind”.
In conclusion, let us not be remembered as the
Council that observed and deliberated, but as the
Council that acted when action was required the most.
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates): I would like
to thank Mr. Gregorian his informative briefing. We
listened carefully to Mr. Chaulin.
Eighteen months into the war, there is no sign
of it abating. We reiterate our deep concern with
the continuing conflict and its impact on civilians,
including those in different regions the world.
The dynamics of the war are perpetuating a
dangerously escalating cycle with potentially severe
repercussions for geopolitical stability, civilian lives
and livelihoods and the environment. The tragedy
of the Nova Kakhovka dam and the situation around
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant are just two
reminders of that precariousness.
They are among the reasons we continue to call
for hostilities to end, but as long as they continue, they
must be carried out with full respect for international
humanitarian law. We reiterate our call on all parties
to abide by their obligations under international law.
We stress, in that regard, that civilian objects must
never be a target of attack. We also recall the clear
prohibition under international humanitarian law of
acts whose primary purpose is to spread terror among
the civilian population.
Throughout the conflict, there have been efforts to
help bring it to a conclusion and to mitigate its impact
on people in Ukraine and elsewhere in the world.
We encourage and commend the endeavours of the
Secretary-General and many world leaders to that end.
That diplomacy has contributed to several humanitarian
initiatives, including prisoner-of-war exchanges and
most notably the Black Sea Grain Initiative and the
memorandum of understanding on Russian fertilizers
and food products. We encourage all relevant actors to
engage with a pragmatic and constructive spirit, such
as that which led to the Black Sea Grain Initiative
and the memorandum of understanding on Russian
fertilizers and food products a year ago in Istanbul.
That engagement could again mitigate the impacts of
the conflict and eventually end the conflict itself. It is

23-2250313/16

S/PV.9390

Threats to international peace and security

time to redouble efforts to achieve a just, sustainable
peace in Ukraine in line with the Charter of the United
Nations and that respects Ukraine’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.
Finally, as this is the last meeting of the Council
for July, I would like to conclude by congratulating the
United Kingdom for its presidency this month. And we
look forward to supporting the United States during its
presidency in August.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank Mr. Gregorian
for his briefing.
Last week, Brazil warned once again that the
continuation of hostilities was causing ever-increasing
human and material losses (see S/PV.9386). Preventing
further destruction is a common responsibility of the
parties and all Member States under the Charter of the
United Nations.
Deliberate attacks against civilian targets are illegal
under international humanitarian law. Brazil reiterates
its call on all parties to refrain from actions that may
result in more fatalities and in further damage to civilian
infrastructure, including port facilities, transportation,
schools, hospitals and places of worship, and raise the
costs of reconstruction. It is our priority to prevent this
humanitarian crisis from reaching new levels.
The Security Council has met to discuss the conflict
in Ukraine 66 times since February 2022 and 5 times
this month alone. We regret that other urgent situations,
such as in the Sudan, the Sahel and Palestine, are not
given adequate consideration.
While we believe the situation fully justifies the
level of attention of the Council, it is disturbing that our
collective response is limited to a repetition of opposing
narratives about events on the ground and of positions
known, at this point, by all. It is regrettable that
dialogue — the only way to lasting peace — remains
blocked and that no advancements towards that end is
in sight.
Once again, Brazil urges the parties to immediately
de-escalate hostilities and initiate peace negotiations.
We support a lasting solution that respects Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity and the security
concerns of all parties involved. Ending the fighting,
achieving a lasting peace and preventing new conflicts
is our common responsibility not only regarding the
world now, but also future generations.
14/16

31/07/2023

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
More than 100 years ago, Sigmund Freud came
up with a psychological concept called projection.
It involves denying negative characteristics and
behaviours of oneself and falsely attributing them to
others. It is often done deliberately as part of a strategy
of blame shifting, or it can be indicative of various
types of dysfunction.
Russia’s claim that it is Ukrainian aggression
that is in any way responsible for the ongoing war in
Ukraine is absurd. It is a projection of the behaviour of
the Russian State itself.
There is only one aggressor in this war. We have all
seen hundreds of thousands of Russian troops invading
that sovereign country illegally and unprovoked.
We all know that the right to self-defence in those
circumstances is enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.
Russia has carried out relentless attacks on civilian
infrastructure, including homes, schools, hospitals
and, as we saw last week, places of worship. Russian
forces are responsible for horrific atrocities on the
ground. It is Russia that has been condemned by the
Secretary-General for committing grave violations
against children. It is Russia that made the unilateral
decision to end the Black Sea Grain Initiative, despite
widespread calls from the international community,
including the Pope and the leaders of the African
Union, for Russia to renew the deal. And it is Russia
that is sending thousands of its own young men to
their deaths. Estimates suggest that more than 200,000
Russian soldiers have been killed or injured in Ukraine.
Russia is inflicting terror on the Ukrainian people
and, in parallel, it is inflicting suffering on its own
population and millions across the world.
In the face of this, Ukraine has had no choice but
to exercise its right to defend itself enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. It is fighting a war of
national survival and defending the right of all nations
to live without fear of aggression.
The only path to a sustainable peace in Ukraine is
for President Putin to end his illegal invasion, withdraw
his troops and thereby demonstrate that he is prepared
to engage on terms for peace that respect the Charter of
the United Nations.
23-22503

31/07/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Russia started this war, and Russia must end it
before it causes any more suffering.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Ms. Hayovyshyn (Ukraine): I recognize the
members of the Security Council. I also recognize the
representative of Russia in the permanent seat of the
Soviet Union. Let me thank the Deputy to the UnderSecretary-General, Mr. Gregorian, for his briefing.
The Security Council has gathered today to
address threats to international peace and security.
Ukraine firmly reaffirms its unwavering commitment
to safeguarding global peace and security, which we
have consistently demonstrated, including over the past
nine years, since the start of Russia’s aggression. We
fearlessly confront the Russian aggressor State, whose
actions pose a substantial threat to stability in the region
and worldwide.
It is crucial to remember that Russia’s testing of
international law long predates its invasion of Ukraine
in 2014. The lack of an adequate response by the
world to Russia’s invasion of Georgia back in 2008
only encouraged Moscow to escalate further, based
on that dangerous precedent. That historical example
underscores the importance of not allowing illegal
actions to go unpunished, as they tend to recur with
greater force. Indecisiveness or delays in addressing
such misconduct pose a genuine risk to international
peace and security. The world’s failure to restrain Russia
then was due to misguided beliefs in its power and the
myth of the world’s second army. Today, Ukraine dispels
those myths, proving that evil can be stopped only by
force, not mere talk.
The Russian aggression against Ukraine presents
the gravest threat to international peace and security.
But just as dangerous is the world’s reluctance to
employ force and accountability mechanisms to stop the
aggressor. Ukraine remains steadfast in its pursuit of
liberating its sovereign territory within internationally
recognized borders and freeing our citizens from the
horrors of Russian occupation. That endeavour is not just
a right but also a duty — an obligation to protect fellow
United Nations Member States from similar ordeals.
Working in collaboration with United Nations
structures, the International Criminal Court and other
international bodies, Ukraine will keep gathering

S/PV.9390

evidence of Russian crimes. All those responsible
for the crime of aggression, war crimes and crimes
against humanity will be held accountable. It is a
matter of primary interest for, and responsibility of, the
international community.
In recent days, the aggressor State has been
stubbornly attacking peaceful cities, shelling civilian
objects and housing. This morning, regions of Ukraine
were shelled again, including Kryvyi Rih and Kherson.
Residential buildings, a university building and a
crossroads were hit. Among those killed was a 10-yearold girl. That is terrorism against peaceful cities
and people.
As President Zelenskyy said:
“But this terror will not frighten us or break us.
We are working and saving our people. Each new
Russian act of terror increases only the amount of
reparations that Russia will pay for its crimes, not
the chances of the occupiers to stay on our land”.
When evil faces defeat, it behaves exactly like the
representative of the Russian delegation in this Chamber.
It often resorts to manipulation, trying to portray
itself as a victim. It persistently mocks the mandate
and procedures of the Council — all that because the
Russian Federation is losing the war it launched against
a sovereign, independent, and democratic country that
stands firmly in defending itself and will do so for as
long as needed for a victory in the war. That means
the liberation of our entire territory from Russian
occupiers, the full restoration of Ukraine’s sovereignty
within internationally recognized borders and the
return of all Ukrainian citizens captured by Russia.
Ukraine exercises its inherent right of self-defence
under the Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations. The delegation of Ukraine officially stated so
at the Security Council meeting on 25 February 2022
(see S/PV.8979) and notified the United Nations of
that statement, circulated further in Security Council
document S/2022/183.
These days, we are commemorating the victims of
Olenivka, brave prisoners of war who tragically lost
their lives at the hands of Russia on the solemn day of
29 July 2022, just a year ago. As we reflect on the lives
lost, we are reminded that there can be no other course
of action but to ensure the aggressor is held accountable
and brought to justice. Their memory inspires us to seek
rightful retribution and find the appropriate punishment
for those responsible.

23-2250315/16

S/PV.9390

Threats to international peace and security

31/07/2023

Recognizing evil’s weakness is crucial, and we must
resist the temptation to extend a hand of compromise.
If evil is pardoned or inadequately punished, it will
resurface with even greater ferocity, seeking revenge for
its perceived humiliation. We cannot afford to display
weakness or stop halfway. The Russian Federation will
face full and just punishment.

on behalf of the delegation of the United Kingdom, I
would like to express our sincere appreciation to the
members of the Council and to the Secretariat for all
the support they have provided to us, including the
technical support team, conference service officers,
interpreters, verbatim reporters and security staff.

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.

As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf
of the Council in wishing the delegation of the United
States all the best for the month of August.

Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month of July,

16/16

The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

23-22503
