United Nations

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-eighth year

4720

th meeting
Tuesday, 18 March 2003, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Fall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Guinea)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou
Mr. Valdés
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Schumacher
Mr. Pujalte
Mr. Akram
Mr. Lavrov
Ms. Jiménez de la Hoz
Mr. Wehbe
Ms. Howe-Jones
Mr. Negroponte

Agenda
Proliferation of small arms and light weapons and mercenary activities: threats to
peace and security in West Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

03-28492 (E)

*0328492*

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

The meeting was resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Côte d’Ivoire, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. DjangoniBi (Côte d’Ivoire) took a seat reserved for him at
the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): Before opening
the floor to speakers, I wish to remind all participants
that they must limit their statements to no more than
seven minutes in order to enable the Council to work
efficiently within its timetable. I thank you for your
understanding and cooperation.
The first speaker on my list this afternoon is His
Excellency Mr. Roland Y. Kpotsra, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Togo, whom I invite to take a seat at
the Council table.
Mr. Minister, I would like to extend to you my
country’s condolences and those of other Council
members upon the death of our brother, Koffi Panou,
and we would like to extend these condolences to your
country and to the family of our beloved brother.
I now invite you to make your statement.
Mr. Kpotsra (Togo)(spoke in French): Mr.
President, first and foremost, I wish to welcome your
assumption of the presidency of this prestigious United
Nations body during this particularly sensitive time
when the world is wavering between peace and war. It
is a sensitive period, because of tensions, conflicts and
threats of war prevailing all over that are continuing or
will not fail to cause many victims and destruction.
Sir, my delegation is convinced that this sad state
of affairs in the world can only reinforce your
commitment to the search and the strengthening of
international peace and security.
In addressing these warm congratulations to you,
my delegation would like to assure you that we have

2

great confidence in your eminent qualities as a skilled
diplomat to successfully conduct the Council’s
proceedings during this month when all are looking at
the Council.
Mr. President, by including on the Council’s
agenda the question entitled “Proliferation of small
arms and light weapons and mercenary activities:
threats to peace and security in West Africa”, your
country, Guinea, is once again demonstrating its
unswerving devotion to peace, security, friendship and
the policy of good-neighbourliness. Our Government
welcomes this fortunate initiative, which again
provides an opportunity to the international community
to assess the crises in the subregion and to determine in
the light of the assessment that it makes the best ways
and means to provide West Africa with the political
stability and security that it so much wishes, with a
view to ensuring that the integration policy can
flourish.
Before going any further, I should like to bring
your attention to an excerpt from a speech delivered on
Friday, 7 March, by the President of the Togolese
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Gnassingbé Eyadema, in
the presence of His Excellency John Kufuor, President
of Ghana, the current President of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), at the
opening of the Third ECOWAS Trade Fair:
“By creating ECOWAS, we sought an ideal
to become fact: to build a vast common market
for harmonious trade and development in a space
of peace and security. We rightly think that the
peoples and nations of West Africa are as capable
of taking their own fate in their hands, to succeed
in integrating their economies and to work
together to ensure their prosperity, as have the
peoples in Europe, America and Asia. We are
aware that no development effort is possible
without peace and security. Hence, we have
decided to give pride of place to dialogue,
working together and preventive diplomacy to
avoid having conflicts distract us from economic
progress.
“We have also come to understand that
ensuring the free movement of people and
goods — which is an essential component of
economic integration — peace and security must
be guaranteed to all member States of the
Community.

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

“Unfortunately, like other parts of the
continent, our subregion continues to be at the
mercy of fratricidal conflicts that threaten
development efforts and subregional integration.
“Day after day, the climate of insecurity —
which began in December 1989 with the Liberian
war — is spreading like wildfire. As if part of
some domino effect, since 19 September 2002,
Côte d’Ivoire too has been beset by civil war.
“That succession of armed conflicts is
simply the direct result of the free movement of
light weapons and of the recruitment of
unemployed young people who are trained in
ECOWAS member States to attack other member
States. If we want such wars to stop, we must do
our utmost to fully implement the Protocol on
Non-Aggression we signed at Lagos on 22 April
1978, precisely to ensure that the territory of a
member State cannot be used for the recruitment,
training or arming of assailants who would attack
another member State.
“Only strict respect for the Protocol will
make it possible for our subregion to avoid the
fratricidal wars that lead to the loss of many
human lives, destroy property, maim people,
drive millions of men, women and children into
homeless exile and delay economic development
and prosperity in our States.”
That statement by Togo’s Head of State conveys
the steadfast nature of our country’s foreign policy,
which seeks to make peace, security and political
stability the fundamental goals of its diplomacy. It is
for that reason that Togo is working tirelessly to find a
peaceful resolution to conflicts and to establish
peaceful and good-neighbourly relations of cooperation
with our immediate neighbours and with other
countries. That Togolese presidential statement also
demonstrates Togo’s commitment to contribute as
much as it can to ensuring that West Africa becomes a
region of peace and an area that promotes economic
integration throughout our continent of Africa.
The item on our agenda illustrates the fragility
and precariousness of West Africa, particularly as a
result of the conflicts in the Mano River region and the
civil war in Côte d’Ivoire. With the conflicts in Liberia
and Sierra Leone, our region has been moving for over
a decade towards a state of instability marked by the

length of those conflicts and by the scope of their
humanitarian, economic and social consequences.
The end of the war in Sierra Leone led us to
believe that there would be a climate of peace; but then
Côte d’Ivoire plunged into turmoil. How could one
explain that progressive extension of war from State to
State in our subregion? Looking at the situation, one
could say that the ease with which armed insurrection
and war take place so easily in West Africa is due to
the proliferation and circulation of small arms and light
weapons and to the ease with which those who provoke
such conflicts are able to find the necessary local and
foreign human resources willing and able to undertake
destabilizing actions, aggression and war.
However, that state of affairs can also be
explained by the inconclusive results of two essential
phases of the consolidation of peace. The first phase is
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
combatants in order to strengthen peace; the second is
the implementation of economic and social measures
conducive to reconstruction and to reducing social
injustice.
As the Council will recall in that regard, many
measures were put forth to strengthen peace after the
tragic conflicts in Liberia and Sierra Leone.
Unfortunately, they did not meet expectations. The
pledges of financial contributions to bring about the
effective and seamless disarmament, demobilization
the reintegration of former combatants and the
reconstruction of economic and social infrastructure
have generally not been honoured. It is therefore
important to acknowledge that policies to re-establish
peace have had very limited success, thereby
promoting the proliferation and circulation of light
weapons and the resurgence of mercenary activity. That
activity has often occurred because former combatants
and child soldiers are prepared to provide their services
and expertise whenever conflict erupts or when there
are uprisings against constitutionally established
regimes.
Given the dangerous situation that has emerged as
a result of the proliferation of light weapons, on
31 December 1998, the heads of State and Government
of ECOWAS adopted a Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Light Weapons in
West Africa for a renewable period of three years. That
was followed by the establishment of the Programme
for Coordination and Assistance for Security and

3

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

Development (PCASD) in March 1999 as a body to
support the Moratorium. Progress has been made in the
implementation of those two mechanisms, namely,
through the setting up of national commissions to
combat the proliferation and illicit traffic in small arms
and light weapons, the training of armed and security
forces and the collection and destruction of light
weapons. All of that justifies the importance and utility
of such bodies to our countries.
The essential goals of those mechanisms require
that the international community further strengthen and
make more effective its support through appropriate
financial assistance that makes it possible for the
mechanisms to better carry out their missions to deal
with the problems caused by the flow of these
weapons. The porous nature of borders makes it
possible for such weapons to, among other things,
nurture banditry, insecurity and cross-border crime.
Similarly, the international community must provide
considerable assistance to our States so that we can
work to implement the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
which was adopted by the United Nations Conference
on the subject that was held in July 2001. A review of
that Programme will take place in a few months.
Togo is a party to the Organization of African
Unity’s Convention for the Elimination of Mercenarism
in Africa, which was adopted on 3 July 1977 at
Libreville. We are also a party to the International
Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing
and Training of Mercenaries, which was adopted under
the aegis of the United Nations on 4 December 1989.
We are therefore very concerned about the use of
mercenaries in the current conflict in West Africa. We
vigorously condemn the use of mercenaries in
conflicts, and urge countries and others involved in
providing the services of mercenaries to end their
activities for the sake of peace, security, friendly
relations, brotherhood and cooperation among our
countries. At the international level, the United Nations
Convention against Mercenarism should be further
implemented and adapted to deal with new pernicious
forms of mercenarism today.
We are fully aware of the fact that the major
objectives of ECOWAS cannot be achieved without
first establishing lasting peace, security and
harmonious understanding between our member States.
Accordingly, Togo continues to attach special

4

importance to the Protocol on Non-Aggression signed
at Lagos on 22 April 1978, the scrupulous adherence to
which will spare West Africa from the challenges
posed by the wars it is experiencing.
In accordance with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations, the provisions of the Protocol
stipulate that member States must refrain from
threatening or using force against the territorial
integrity and political independence of other member
States. It also forbids States from committing,
encouraging or supporting any acts of subversion,
hostility or aggression against other member States.
States must also prevent such damaging acts on the part
of resident foreigners or non-resident aliens who are
using their territory as a base for operations. The
Council will agree with my delegation that the Protocol
provides a basis for healthy political cooperation
among ECOWAS States in order to decisively prohibit
any actions that may impair their sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity.
We are convinced of the relevance and positive
nature of the Protocol. My country would therefore like
to reiterate what President Eyadema said at a recent
CENSAD summit held in Niamey by the members of
the Community of Sahel and Saharan States. He stated
that every member State must fully respect and
implement the letter and spirit of the Protocol, as the
economic integration that will promote the prosperity
and happiness of the people of West Africa depends
upon it.
It is a fact that the proliferation and illicit
circulation of light weapons and the use of mercenaries
in West Africa poses a serious threat to international
peace and security. Our States must act to further pool
their efforts to eliminate these factors of political
instability that are also capable of destroying economic
and social infrastructure. Particular attention should
also be given to the traffic carried out by independent
intermediaries who facilitate the illicit trade in light
weapons between manufacturers and armed groups.
That must by achieved by strengthening national
legislation in this area and by increasing cooperation
between States in the field of border control.
Lasting peace and security, which our countries
wish so much to see and for which they are actively
working to lay the foundations, cannot be established
unless the international community makes a genuine
and determined commitment, through assistance that is

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

more sustained and is commensurate with our goals in
the implementation of policies for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants
and the financing of peace-building processes.
There is also a need for relevant and rigorous
measures to prevent the recruitment of mercenaries
from the usual countries of origin and for the countries
that produce and export weapons, particularly certain
members of the former Warsaw Pact, to commit to a
true ban on the illicit export of weapons to African
countries in general, and ECOWAS States in particular.
This is the only way that the States of ECOWAS can
hope to stem the proliferation of and illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons and counter mercenary
activities, in order to preserve the peace and security
that are so dear to each of our nations, and to assure the
harmonious development of countries of the subregion.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Togo
for his kind words addressed to me and my country.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are very glad to see you, Sir, preside over
the Council. We thank you for convening today’s
meeting and welcome in this Chamber the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs from the Economic Community of
West African States.
Today’s meeting is further proof of the great
interest that the international community and the
Security Council have shown in cooperating to resolve
the complex problems of maintaining and restoring
international peace and security on the African
continent. It is proof of our common aspiration to work
out effective strategies to combat the scourge of the
illicit proliferation of small arms and light weapons
and mercenary activities.
Russia firmly condemns mercenary activities and
has consistently supported international efforts to
eradicate this criminal phenomenon. Such services
have become particularly in demand in the recent
decades, during which armed mercenaries have been
used in the struggle against legitimate Governments
that had freed themselves from colonial dependence on
certain States. Everyone is aware of the tragic
consequences of the involvement of mercenaries in
regional and national conflicts. We have become aware
of them from the tragic examples in Sierra Leone, Côte
d’Ivoire, Angola and other countries.

Mercenary activities are highly unethical and
illegal, according to the generally recognized principles
of international law. An important landmark in the
process of establishing universal approaches to
defining the illegal nature of this phenomenon was the
adoption of the first Protocol Additional to the Geneva
Conventions, which fleshed out the legal content of the
concept of a mercenary. The entry into force in 2001 of
the International Convention against the Recruitment,
Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries has
significantly expanded the means available to combat
this scourge.
Without a doubt, the establishment of effective
mechanisms to counter mercenary activities requires a
corresponding measure of political will in order to
consistently carry out international standards in
national legal systems. Current Russian law includes
special norms that carry criminal penalties not only for
direct involvement of mercenaries in armed conflict,
but also for activities for their recruitment, training,
financing and other logistical support.
Recently within the United Nations there has
been substantially heightened interest in the problem of
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and its
impact on regional security. Of great significance in
this regard were the 2001 Conference and the
Programme of Action adopted at it. This summer there
will be the first biennial review conference on the
implementation of the Programme, which undoubtedly
will facilitate the further resolution of pressing
problems connected with the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons in all its aspects.
Many practical questions related to the supply of
small arms and light weapons, including brokerage,
end-user certificates and others, will be discussed
during the meeting of the group of governmental
experts to be convened by the Secretary-General. We
believe that the Security Council should focus its
attention on instances in which the illegal trade in
small arms and light weapons is directly related to
conflict situations in Africa that are on its agenda.
The Russian Federation has consistently called
for tough measures in cases in which weapons are
supplied by illegal armed groups. We believe the
Security Council is justified in imposing an embargo
on arms shipments in conflict regions. This certainly
will have a positive impact, and the examples of Sierra

5

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

Leone, Angola and
convinced us of this.

other crisis

situations

have

During the past years we have managed to finetune the oversight mechanism for monitoring the
Council’s weapons embargoes. This has been made
very clear by the regular reports of the chairpersons of
the relevant sanctions committees. Of course, much
remains to be done, particularly to enhance the
effectiveness of monitoring of the investigation of the
facts of embargo violations.
We consider it justified that in the context of
carrying out peacekeeping operations under United
Nations auspices, the peace agreements between the
parties should include specific provisions for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants. It is also essential to endeavour to
include in the mandate of such operations adequate
resources to collect and destroy illegal small arms and
light weapons used in conflicts. It is important to help
countries of the West African region to implement
measures to monitor and combat the illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons.
Of great significance is developing practical
measures to combat the illegal shipments of small arms
and light weapons at the preventive stage and in the
post-conflict
phase
of
settlement.
Regional
organizations have a solid body of useful experience,
including in Africa. We believe that the measures
proposed within the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) — such the establishment of
an information-exchange mechanism in the area of
small arms and light weapons, the introduction of a
regional register that would provide data on the
national stocks of such weapons in the ECOWAS
countries and other practical steps — deserve to be
approved and supported.
It is also necessary to take steps to improve
domestic legislation to stop small arms and light
weapons from falling into the illicit trade system.
Above all in countries in which such legislation is
lacking, steps must be taken to upgrade and codify a
national system of export controls and to establish a
broad-based exchange of information between States
regarding existing legislation and practical experience
in this area.
We hope that today’s meeting under your
presidency, Sir, will allow us to move forward on all
these issues.

6

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the Russian Federation for his kind
words addressed to me.
Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
country is very pleased that you, Sir, are presiding over
the Security Council today. We consider you to be a
great friend of Mexico. We hope with all our heart that
this workshop will be a success and that its conclusions
will promote discussion in the Council on the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons, links
with mercenaries and the threats they represent to
peace and security in West Africa.
We have listened very closely to the opinions and
proposals put forward by Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, the Interim Commissioner of the African
Union, the Executive Secretary of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
representative of the Chairman of ECOWAS, the
representative of the Programme for Coordination and
Assistance for Security and Development, and
ministers of West Africa on this situation. It cuts across
all borders, because small arms and light weapons and
their connection to the use of mercenaries exist in other
conflict regions.
Mexico attaches great importance to the followup and full implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Combat, Prevent and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted in 2001, as well as
the proper coordination of activities among the
Security Council, including the design of mandates for
peacekeeping operations; the other organs and
programmes of the United Nations; and regional bodies
and agreements with specific mandates to combat the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
Members of the Council periodically examine
developments in the situation in Guinea-Bissau, Sierra
Leone, Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire. One of the greatest
causes for concern in our discussions has been the
excessive accumulation of small arms and light
weapons and their destabilizing effect on the region of
West Africa, in particular on the countries of the Mano
River Union.
We note that the illicit flows of those weapons
have not been stopped, despite the arms embargoes
imposed by the Security Council. We therefore call
once again on all countries, particularly those countries
that export arms, to comply fully with the relevant

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

resolutions of the Security Council. Similarly, we
support accompanying all legal transfers of arms with
end-user certificates as an effective tool for combating
the diversion of, and illicit trade in, small arms and
light weapons.
We encourage the States of West Africa to carry
out the necessary steps for full compliance with the
Moratorium agreed in 1998 on the importation of this
category of arms. Those efforts, as well as compliance
with the commitments entered into under the United
Nations Programme of Action, will lead to a reduction
in the amount of arms available to use by mercenaries.
The recruitment, financing, training and use of
mercenaries are a cause of concern to the international
community because of their responsibility for
violations of human rights and the provisions of
international humanitarian law, and due to their links to
the illicit trade in arms and diamonds and other
criminal activities in which they are involved.
Mexico is committed to combating the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons and has
demonstrated its concern for that trade’s links with
transnational organized crime, the illicit traffic of drugs
and international terrorism, as well as its negative
impact on democracy and the development of
countries. In that context, Mexico promoted the
adoption of the Inter-American Convention against the
Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Munitions, Explosives and Other Related Materials and
was an active participant in the negotiations on the
United Nations Programme of Action and on the
complementary protocol of the Convention Against
Transnational Organized Crime, prepared in Vienna.
Mexico is particularly concerned that the
presence of mercenaries has been detected in the
conflicts in Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire because those
activities not only contribute to the internal
destabilization of those two countries but also
constitute a risk for the stability and security of Sierra
Leone, Guinea and other countries of the subregion.
They also impede the access of humanitarian
organizations and agencies to the areas where refugees
and internally displaced persons are located.
We therefore reiterate the call made by the
Security Council in the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2002/36) of 13 November 2002 on the
situation in Liberia, for States in the region to prevent
armed individuals from using their national territory to

prepare and launch attacks on neighbouring countries.
We also support the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
African Union and the United Nations to put an end to
the practice of the use of mercenaries, including child
soldiers, in conflicts in West Africa.
I would like to mention the following suggestions
to prevent, combat and eradicate the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and the use of
mercenaries in this region of the African continent.
The lessons learned in the disarmament process in
Sierra Leone should be taken into account in order to
carry out similar actions in Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire.
The collection and destruction of surplus arms should
be an integral part of peace agreements in the
subregion. The supervision of disarmament and
destruction activities by regional organizations and the
United Nations will provide a guarantee for preventing
excessive accumulations and the destabilizing effects
of these weapons.
The international community must continue to
support
programmes
for
the
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants in
Sierra Leone, as the lack of financial resources has
meant that a significant number of young people move
to conflict zones in the region where they can obtain an
income by taking up arms. The Security Council must
support the use of programmes of that type in Liberia
and Côte d’Ivoire.
The countries of West Africa must strengthen
mechanisms for political consultation in order to deal
with the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
and the phenomenon of mercenaries. The forums
provided by ECOWAS, the Mano River Union and the
Rabat Process must be used fully to benefit security,
safety, stability and peace in the subregion.
The Security Council must take into account the
regional context of the conflicts in Liberia and Côte
d’Ivoire and promote mechanisms of coordination and
cooperation
with
regional
and
subregional
organizations in the search for peaceful solutions to
these crisis situations.
Finally, allow me to express Mexico’s
appreciation to the delegation of Guinea for preparing
and leading negotiations on the annex to the draft
resolution to be adopted at the end of this meeting.

7

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Mexico for his kind words addressed
to me and for his suggestion.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is His
Excellency Mr. Pierre Osho, Minister of State for
Defence of Benin. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Osho (Benin) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to associate myself with preceding speakers
in
extending
my
sincere
and
enthusiastic
congratulations to our brother, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Guinea, who has the honour of presiding
over this meeting of the Security Council during this
delicate month of March 2003. This is especially so in
light of the burning acuteness of the present
international political situation, which, as everyone
knows, is almost completely polarized with respect to
the Iraqi crisis. To note the speech given a few hours
ago, the holding of a workshop such as this ran the risk
of seeming a non-event. But, very fortunately, that is
not the case when you consider the number and the
stature of the participants, in particular, the effective
presence of Secretary-General Kofi Annan at this
meeting’s opening. I would also like to warmly
welcome the positive inspiration of the Guinean
Minister for Foreign Affairs — the President of the
Security Council — to inscribe for reflection by this
United Nations body this matter of concern for West
African States — the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons and the use of mercenaries.
Regarding the topic submitted to us for our
individual and collective reflection, and speaking after
a series of speakers, there are not too many new things
for me to say. The essential things have been said,
particularly by the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs
of Senegal, whose approach and conclusions, the
relevance of his ideas, as well as the relevant statement
of the honourable representative of the United
Kingdom, I would like to publicly support.
Benin believes that we must stop making
speeches on the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. Rather, we must look to specific and
effective actions. In that context, Benin believes that
we must act upon the source and the fundamental
reasons for two scourges — the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons and the use of mercenaries.
Our specific proposals in that regard are the following.

8

We must establish an international convention
that strictly limits the purchase of light weapons of war
only to States and national armies, aiming particularly
at the ability to trace weapons and at supplying them
through official channels.
Secondly, we must put in place at the
international level provisions related to the dismantling
of bodies, firms and international networks that sell
weapons that do not have the agreed or official status
of an exporting State of these light weapons of war.
Benin draws the attention of all participants to the fact
that poor countries such as ours have neither the
technology nor the logistics to sell or manufacture, or
to organize the flows or the delivery of weapon
stockpiles. Therefore, countries that have this
technology and these logistics, both in terms of
manufacturing weapons and transporting, shipping and
delivering them, are, clearly, fully responsible in this
regard.
Thirdly, we must put in place a United Nations
convention for the dismantling of companies and
agencies that specialize in so-called military-serviceproviding activities, which are nothing more than
official mercenary companies, militias or private
armies. These companies exist and are flourishing in
the northern countries. In some southern countries,
these companies have set up shop and have begun
recruitment through legally placed advertisements.
Why is that the case? Because today we increasingly
are seeing actions recognizing these companies as
providers of government protective services and
protective services for official institutions, while in
reality, these companies that provide lethal and
destabilizing services are nothing but mercenary
organizations.
Therefore, we must admit that henceforth our
assessment of the question of the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons and of the use of mercenaries
must clearly integrate the empowerment of States,
holding them responsible, including groups of
nationals, where groups of nationals have been
identified as mercenaries. It will no longer suffice to
invoke the personal freedom of individuals who have
made the choice to engage in an activity, even if that
activity is marginal, illegal or illicit. They will not be
able to sidestep their responsibility with respect to the
State. We will have to admit that individuals,
recognized as mercenaries from a particular country,
engage, at the same time, the responsibility of States

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

that have not been able to gain control over their
institutions and nationals in illicit activities carried out
abroad.
The fourth proposal is that the Security Council
should put in place a working group that would design,
organize and carry out a media counter-campaign at the
international level, against the campaign that we have
seen for a while now, a campaign which tends to extol
or preach the decriminalization of mercenary activities.
We read increasingly in the press — as I did on my
way to New York yesterday — specialized articles to
the effect that, given their weakness and their lack of
money, poor countries are not able to organize their
own security and that, as a result, it is legitimate that
those States have recourse to certain services and
agencies that specialize in security matters. Those
companies, however, are the same ones that are the
service providers for political groups that organize the
destabilization of legal institutions within States.
My fifth proposal — and it is of a general
nature — is to act upon the source of these two
scourges. Acting upon the source means that it should
be understood that the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons and the use of mercenaries have as
fertile ground misery, poverty, the lack of a political
system and institutional democracy, the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and endemic
underdevelopment that persists in most of the southern
countries and in the subregion I come from.
As a result, the global problem of development
assistance once again emerges. And, in the search for
effective solutions to that problem, there is the problem
of assistance to the armies and national police forces of
underdeveloped
countries.
Today,
cooperation
agreements that have been concluded, whether at the
bilateral or the multilateral level, generally and
systematically exclude the police and the army from
their aims, on the pretext that those are institutions of
State sovereignty and that cooperation is limited to
economic, technical and financial aspects, among other
things.
But how can we create conditions enabling a
national army to control the situation within a
country’s borders, to confront aggression and to protect
State institutions, if that army itself is not a wellequipped army, a trained army, an army that does not
function with respect for the constitution and for State
institutions? The same applies to the police and the

national police with regard to public security. As a
result, it is increasingly appropriate to consider very
seriously the issue of the equipping, arming and
technically training national armies and national police
forces so that they can become institutions that serve
the rule of law and, if the conditions are such, so that
we will naturally be able to lend enough help to the
countries in which the democratic process is
developing harmoniously, to assist the countries in
which we observe concrete and significant efforts
aimed at good governance. Because it is bad
governance — marginalization of a part of the
population, of the intelligentsia outside the political
sphere — that creates frustration. Once again, that is
fertile ground for the recruitment of mercenaries and of
those who wish to take up arms to bring about political
changes through violence and destabilization.
I shall conclude by expressing the hope that the
necessary support will be provided to ECOWAS to
enable it to complete the follow-up of the
implementation of the Moratorium and all other
oversight activities of the national commissions to
combat the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Minister of State for Defence of Benin for the kind
words he addressed to me and for his timely proposals.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is His
Excellency Mr. Jean de Dieu Somda, Minister for
Regional Cooperation of Burkina Faso. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Somda (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to express to you, Sir, our
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of March and on
the admirable way in which you are carrying out your
heavy responsibilities, especially during this period of
difficult deliberations in which the future of the world
is at stake. To those congratulations, the delegation of
Burkina Faso would like to add its thanks for your
excellent initiative to organize this workshop on a
subject of great urgency for Africa and, more
particularly, for our subregion.
Over the past few years, the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons has provoked and exacerbated
a number of armed conflicts throughout the world. That
situation has caused human insecurity that is

9

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

unprecedented in our history, with particularly grave
consequences for women and children, the most
vulnerable members of society.
By holding the largest conference ever on the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in New
York in July 2001, the United Nations expressed a
universal concern over the threat that this scourge
poses to international peace and security. The outcome
of that conference certainly did not fully meet the
expectations of countries affected by the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons, but it did enable the
participating countries to establish an action plan. We
must follow up those efforts with other initiatives
aimed at ensuring the effective implementation of the
action plan.
In that connection, Burkina Faso welcomes the
forthcoming first biannual meeting to follow up the
conference of July 2001, which will enable us to
measure the progress achieved. As we await the
recommendations that will result, the current debate
should provide here and now an opportunity for the
Security Council to renew its support for the
worldwide process of combating the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons. Moreover, our subregion
expects that the Council will support the initiatives
already under way in West Africa for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants.
A new phenomenon has just appeared in West
Africa: mercenarism. In fact, the recent crises that have
arisen in the subregion have exposed this phenomenon
and have shown that even Governments use them to
deal with internal rebellions or to neutralize crisis
situations. Mercenaries are a source of insecurity. They
are not strangers to the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons; quite to the contrary, they facilitate it
and are naturally active in creating a favourable
environment for it.
By devoting today’s debate to this issue, the
Security Council is once again reminding all of us of
our responsibilities and of the paramount need to
observe the spirit and the letter of the United Nations
Convention against mercenarism. It would be
appropriate to send a strong signal to those who recruit
and train mercenaries that they must put an end to that
practice without delay and must refrain from engaging
in it in the future.
Burkina Faso has always affirmed its wish for
freedom and peace within its borders and in all other

10

countries. But we must emphasize here that the armed
conflicts and rebellions that have erupted in certain
countries bordering Burkina Faso have naturally
promoted the circulation and trafficking of small arms
and light weapons from those zones into our country,
spawning a certain kind of cross-border criminality and
deepening insecurity for our country and for the entire
subregion.
Our country’s geographical position makes
controlling our borders difficult, which requires
effective cooperation with neighbouring countries to
try to eliminate that insecurity.
To curb this situation, which we are facing on a
daily basis and which is creating a certain insecurity
both nationally and subregionally, Burkina Faso has
taken an active part in the process that led to the
Moratorium on the Importation, Exportation and
Manufacture of Light Arms in West Africa. That
process was held on 1 November 1998 in Abuja
alongside the twenty-first session of the Conference of
Heads of State and Government of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). It is
within this framework of searching for solutions to the
problems of insecurity that Burkina Faso has given a
lot of attention nationally, subregionally and
internationally to all of the ongoing actions and
meetings that might effectively contribute to combating
the proliferation and illicit trade in small arms.
At the national level, a number of actions to
implement the multilateral agreements have been
implemented by the Government. First, in 1994, we
received a United Nations mission to assess the state of
trafficking of small arms in the Sahelo-Saharan zone.
This mission, subregional in nature, also went to Niger,
Côte d’Ivoire and Mali. Secondly, in 2001 our rereading of legislation on weapons and civilian
munitions in Burkina Faso was necessary as the best
means for combating all illegal actions in this area. It
meant a hardening up of all measures and sanctions
initially scheduled in prior texts. Thirdly, in April
2001, we established a national commission to combat
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. And
fourthly, on 24 January 2001, we created a high
authority to oversee importation of weapons and their
use, which backstops the national commission’s action
to combat the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons with information that can be provided as to
the physical and geographical situation of those
weapons that are imported. To show its commitment to

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

fight against the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, Burkina Faso, in spite of its difficult
financial situation, accepted the headquarters of the
observation zone and follow-up group number two, the
region which takes in Mali, Niger, Côte d’Ivoire and
Burkina Faso. The chief of zone in Burkina Faso has
been there since 2001. The zone was formally set up in
October 2002.
At the subregional level, Burkina Faso has
actively participated in all meetings regarding the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons held in
the subregion, of which the most important meetings
were a conference on conflict prevention, disarmament
and development in West Africa, held at Bamako from
25 to 29 November 1996; a meeting of experts, held
from 8 to 13 March 1998 in Yamoussoukro on the
ECOWAS Mechanism and on transferred crime; a
workshop organized in Accra from 19 to 21 November
1999 on the establishment of a register and a data base
on small arms for ECOWAS member States; an Abuja
workshop, held from 24 to 30 September 2000 on
elaborating a programme to train the trainers of armed
forces and security in combating the proliferation of
small arms; a ministerial conference held in Bamako
from 25 November to 2 December 2000 to prepare the
international conference on the illicit trade in small
arms in all its aspects; and training courses having to
do with border control and weapons control, which was
organized by the United States Customs Service from
11 to 24 February 2001.
At the regional level, our country participated in a
meeting of the African Group and experts on the illicit
trafficking of firearms in Africa, held in Kampala from
10 to 12 January 2000, and a meeting of experts on
small arms, organized in Addis Ababa from 14 to 21
May 2000.
At the international level, Burkina Faso actively
participated in the development of three additional
protocols to the Vienna Convention by the special
United Nations committee in Vienna from 1999 to
2001, particularly the protocol on the illicit trafficking
of small arms, their elements and munitions. Burkina
Faso was also the first African country to ratify this
protocol.
We participated in the United Nations Conference
on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms in all Its Aspects,
held in New York from 9 to 21 July 2001.

In conclusion, I would like in particular to
emphasize that in all of these actions undertaken at the
national level, the financial effort was made to
participate in all meetings where the critical problem of
combating the proliferation, exportation, importation
and the illegal manufacture of small arms and light
weapons was debated. It proves that, if need be,
Burkina Faso has made a resolute commitment for 15
years now to combat this scourge by all possible
means.
My country remains convinced that the fight
against the proliferation of small arms cannot be
conducted only at the regional or subregional level, or
even only at the national level. The chances for success
reside solely in the cooperation and synergy of action
on the part of the entire international community. The
ECOWAS Moratorium shows the strong will of a
subregion to pool its potential to combat this scourge
that claims many victims each day in its civilian
populations. But we cannot succeed without the
logistic and financial support from our development
partners.
And so the Security Council, in a unique way, has
a critical role to play and should become involved in
helping to eradicate this phenomenon that undermines
the foundation of development — the basis of peace
and security.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Minister of Burkina Faso for his kind words addressed
to me.
Mr. De la Sablière (France) (spoke in French):
First of all, Sir, I would like to thank you for having
chosen to draw the Security Council’s attention to the
question of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons and mercenary activities and to have
organized this workshop with the Ministers,
delegations, States of the subregion and representatives
of the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS).
Since this morning, the debate has shown that
these two scourges are everywhere, but they have a
particular impact on West Africa, and they threaten
peace and security. They undermine economic
development, are at the heart of many excesses, and
contravene human rights. These two threats are most
often linked. Mercenaries and other armed groups
profit from easy access to illicit trafficking in small
arms in order to acquire large quantities of weapons at

11

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

often ridiculously low prices; and, therefore, they
maintain their ability to harm.
We also see in post-conflict situations, in the
context of fragile peace efforts, that if these
phenomena are not overcome in time, they remain an
ongoing impediment to strategies for peace,
demobilization and the reintegration of ex-combatants.
In fact, we have seen that mercenaries, once present in
a war economy based most often on the exploitation of
lucrative natural resources, such as diamonds, drugs or
other illicit trafficking, have no trouble at all in
recruiting their troops and in acquiring enough small
arms to continue their nefarious activity.
Another point that these two things have in
common is that they have a trans-border character. We
see the ground and air routes that are used by
traffickers of small arms that criss-cross the subregion
and the groups of mercenaries. These activities know
no boundaries. They use country X as a base for their
atrocities, and then they gradually export conflict and
war economy to the entire subregion.
I would first like to talk about mercenary
activities and then small arms and light weapons, since
they are related phenomena. For convenience’s sake, I
will distinguish between them in my statement.
Thousands of combatants, often completely out of
control, are traversing the conflict areas of the
subregion — from Liberia to Sierra Leone and
throughout Côte d’Ivoire. These are mercenaries
without borders who leave in their wake only
destruction, atrocities, theft, murder, rape and attacks
of all kinds, including those carried out in Sierra Leone
by so-called “short sleeves” and “long sleeves”. We
must therefore ask why this phenomenon occurs more
frequently in West Africa than it does elsewhere. I
would offer one explanation: the first civil war in
Liberia.
Combatants in that bloody conflict were never reintegrated into society, or even disarmed. The
international community was not up to the task of its
responsibilities. A number of those combatants merely
reconstituted themselves into the conflict in Sierra
Leone, either as rebels of the Revolutionary Armed
Forces (RUF) or as part of the Civil Defence Force
(CDF) militia. As far as the RUF is concerned, they
undoubtedly received support from the Government of
Liberia, as the reports of the Groups of Experts on
Sierra Leone and Liberia have pointed out. The

12

Security Council reacted by imposing sanctions against
the Government of Liberia. Resolution 1343 (2001),
which was renewed as resolution 1408 (2002),
demanded that the Liberian authorities cut off all ties
with the RUF. That decision was necessary but
insufficient. Those mercenaries will not disappear,
despite the disappearance of the RUF as a rebel army.
Today it is mostly Liberian mercenaries — but
also mercenaries from Sierra Leone — who are
clashing in the western part of Côte d’Ivoire. That is an
inter-Liberian conflict, and not one between the people
of Côte d’Ivoire. Those mercenaries are impeding the
return to peace. Let us not forget that the ceasefire is
being respected in the rest of the country.
The international community must take action in
the face of this a phenomenon, and France is
determined to do its share. What, then, should we do?
The first obligation when confronting the use of
mercenaries is to contain them with an effective
military presence. The Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno,
has referred to “robust peacekeeping”, which is a very
good English phrase. The United Nations Mission in
Sierra
Leone
(UNAMSIL)
employed
robust
peacekeeping successfully against the RUF. French
troops are doing the same today in Côte d’Ivoire
against the rebel movements in the western part of the
country. But robust peacekeeping is only an initial
phase. The only long-term solution entails real
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes. In Sierra Leone the United Nations has
thus demobilized and reintegrated over 46,000
combatants. Liberia must be the next field of action.
There is no other way to avoid other countries in the
region being convulsed by conflict similar to that
which is unfortunately taking place today in Côte
d’Ivoire.
I would now like to say a few words about
combating the illicit traffic in small arms. We need to
take action at the national, regional and international
levels in order to eradicate illicit markets and the
destabilizing supply of small arms and light weapons in
the West African subregion.
In September 1999, France launched an initiative
to conclude an international instrument on the marking
and tracing of small arms and light weapons. Our goal
was to identify the illicit traffic in these weapons. My
country is pleased with the work that has been done —

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

on the basis of joint proposals submitted by France and
Switzerland — by the United Nations Group of Experts
on this subject with regard to the feasibility of this type
of international instrument. We hope that there will be
long-term negotiations for an international convention
in this field.
France would like to emphasize the importance of
producing States having a responsible attitude. If they
have not yet done so, they must without delay adopt
stringent legislation on export controls.
All of these essential measures are currently
being implemented or explored as part of the
Programme of Action adopted by the first United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Traffic in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which was held
in July 2001. The biennial conference to be held in July
will provide an opportunity for an initial examination
of the work under way. Another meeting, to be held in
2005, will allow us to begin preparations for the 2006
review conference. The Security Council has supported
these efforts, as it and the international community
should in fact do with regard to efforts under way in
the subregion.
In that regard, my country has from the beginning
supported the Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light
Weapons in West Africa, which was adopted by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). Last February, France announced the
renewal of its contribution to the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development (PCASED), which is managed by the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). The
Programme has the specific task of supporting the
implementation of the Moratorium. In addition, since
2000, France has supported the operations of the
United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament at Lomé.
The effectiveness of the Moratorium must
nevertheless be strengthened, especially as regards
establishing exemptions and an end-user certificate that
cannot be forged. France hopes that the Executive
Secretary of ECOWAS will limit requests for import
exemptions made by States to the legitimate security
needs of those countries.
On this issue, I would like to know the
assessment of partners as regards the progress made in

the implementation of the Moratorium and
proposals made to strengthen its effectiveness.

the

Assistance provided within the PCASED
framework to implement the ECOWAS Moratorium has
a special role in operational activities. Those activities
pertain to the establishment by each State participating
in the Moratorium of a national commission and a
small arms register. It also entails their training
security forces, harmonizing legislation and collecting
and destroying confiscated weapons. We have
concluded that the results achieved are encouraging.
Twelve national commissions have been set up in the
15 participating countries. Nevertheless, additional
efforts will have to be made in order that the
commissions are truly able to begin their work.
I have one final question for the representatives
of the Secretary-General.
The West African subregion is obviously being
threatened by a number of conflicts, in particular by the
two on our agenda today: the proliferation of small
arms and the use of mercenaries. Would it then not be
worthwhile for the Secretariat to prepare for the
Council a report on the specific risks that exist in this
region — as Mr. Annan himself suggested in his report
of the summer of 2001 on the issue of conflict
prevention? Such a report could highlight the transborder dimensions of conflicts that are already on the
Council’s agenda. It would also be based on relevant
information at the disposal of the Secretariat and
various actors on the ground, such as UNDP. In
particular, the report could focus on the problem of
small arms and light weapons and of mercenary
activities, even if other questions — particularly
humanitarian ones, for example — would also be part
of that discussion.
I think that this work would facilitate the followup on this important question that is being considered
by the Security Council.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of France for his kind words addressed
to me.
Before calling upon the next speaker, I would like
to ask the Regional Director of the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development to react briefly to some questions that
were raised by the representative of France.

13

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Sall (spoke in French): I would simply like
to add a small note to the statement of the
representative of France, by saying that indeed it has
been some time since we last communicated with his
country, when our Programme noted 12 national
commissions out of 15. We have moved a step forward
since then, with a national commission set up in Benin.
We therefore now count 13 national commissions out
of 15.
As for the functioning of national commissions,
once decrees have been signed by the Presidents of the
Republic, and ministers or heads of Government have
established national commissions, we plan to
immediately make financial resources available so they
can start their activities. Once the documents have been
adopted and executive action has been taken, we plan
to immediately finance the national commissions so
that they may become operational.
A second point that I believe should be
remembered is the final-use certificates. This question
frequently comes up, and there has been the possibility
of falsifying those certificates. Therefore, what I would
like to propose for the coming months in the review in
our programme of activity — we do have joint reviews
carried out by PCASED and ECOWAS — is to have
included on our agenda a review of the end-user
certificate to improve it and make it more reliable to
meet the problems just raised.
Concerning the specific risks in the subregion,
there was a meeting of UNDP resident representatives
no more than a month ago in Dakar, after which the
idea was adopted of carrying out a study on future
security risks in the subregion that would be
coordinated with the representative of the United
Nations Secretary-General in West Africa, Mr. OuldAbdallah.
These are all issues that are currently being
addressed, and I am pleased that France put its finger
precisely where needed. I would not say on a sore spot.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Regional Director of the Programme for Coordination
and Assistance for Security and Development for his
clarifications.
Mr. Acuña (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I welcome
the holding of this public debate organized as a
workshop, a format that is used to deal with topics that
are the subject of paramount concern in the Council

14

and the international community because of their
relevance in humanitarian, peace and security fields
and in the development of peoples.
Chile cannot but share the deep concern about the
impact of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons in conflicts besetting West Africa and of the
increasing illicit intervention of mercenary forces in
such conflicts. Those practices contribute considerably
to the violation of human rights and international
humanitarian law, both among the combatants and the
affected civilian populations.
In this connection, as was clearly stated this
morning by the Secretary-General, the question of the
involvement of children in armed conflict acquires a
particularly serious prominence. We associate
ourselves with his appeal that States of the subregion
implement the international instruments prohibiting
such practices and develop the necessary machinery to
deal with the problem.
As we said in the high-level debate at the United
Nations Conference in 2001 on the illicit trafficking in
such weapons, we believe it indispensable not only for
regions such as West Africa but also for the entire
international community to lay down norms to restrict
severely the manufacture and trade of small arms and
light weapons, to duly registered manufacturers and
duly authorized trading agents. In this connection, we
are convinced that we must give pride of place to
restrictions over freedom of commerce.
With regard to the question of supplying small
arms to West Africa, Chile supports the initiative of
shoring up cooperation and the exchange of
information among States of the region to identify and
monitor individuals and entities that are involved in the
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons and
those who are supporting mercenary activities in West
Africa.
Similarly, my country recognizes that States of
the region must commit themselves more profoundly to
the practical implementation of the Moratorium on
small arms and light weapons declared in 1998 by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). To that end, particular account must be
taken of the recommendations of the recent African
conference on the implementation of the United
Nations Programme of Action on small arms and light
weapons of 2001.

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

From the global standpoint, the Security Council,
with the assistance of the Secretariat, over years has
developed a set of measures to avoid at least in part the
devastating
consequences
of
the
excessive
accumulation of small arms and light weapons and
their illicit trade by means of measures entailing
embargoes on territories where there is conflict and in
cases of conflict prevention, peacekeeping operations
or peace-building activities.
My delegation would like to thank the President
for organizing this seminar, which has enabled us to
exchange views in our search for effective solutions to
tackle this scourge that is so seriously affecting the
region of West Africa. The workshop format used on
this occasion, as well as the quality and suitability of
the Ministers for Foreign Relations and the other
speakers invited to participate have given us a very
comprehensive, first-hand picture of the situation and
the needs of West Africa. Those elements will enable
the Security Council and the Secretariat, as well as
Member States, to better prepare their work on those
sensitive issues.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Chile for his kind words addressed to
me.
Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We are pleased to see you, Sir, once again,
within two weeks, presiding over an important
meeting. We would also like to thank you for your
initiative, which led to putting this item on the agenda
this month, in view of its importance in many parts of
the world, and especially West Africa. It is our pleasure
to welcome the Ministers and the representatives of the
regional organizations who are with us today.
Today’s meeting is one in a series of important
meetings held by the Security Council on the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and the
phenomenon of mercenaries, in view of their negative
effects on West Africa. In that context, we would like
to confirm the need to respect international law and the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular respect for national sovereignty,
non-interference in the internal affairs of Members
States, the right to individual or collective self-defence
as stipulated by Article 51 of the Charter, the right of
peoples to self-determination and the right of Member
States to develop their own defence systems to
guarantee their national security.

The international community’s adoption of the
Programme of Action of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects in July 2001 was an
important step forward in dealing with one of the most
urgent problems confronting international peace and
security: the tragedy of the unruly and excessive
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and the
illicit trafficking of them. Those are among the most
important reasons for the continuation and the fanning
of conflicts all over the world. The illicit trade in small
arms, especially in West Africa, adds to the violence
and contributes to the displacement of innocent people,
spreads the culture of violence and undermines the
stability of societies. It also undermines the efforts at
peace and negotiations, victimizes children, women
and vulnerable groups in particular, and creates a
climate propitious to the looting of valuable minerals,
especially in West Africa.
My delegation believes that the way to deal with
this question in general, and in West Africa in
particular, lies in encouraging measures designed to
restore peace, security and confidence among countries
so that resorting to weapons is made less necessary; in
promoting measures to prevent conflicts and seeking
negotiated solutions; and in taking all necessary
measures to control the circulation of small arms and
light weapons and their possession, use, transfer and
stockpiling. A mechanism must be established to stop
the exportation of small arms to non-State entities,
such as combatants and mercenaries, and sanctions
must be imposed on manufacturers, arms traffickers
and middlemen who do that.
We need to give financial and technical support to
national programmes aimed at reintegrating the
demobilized combatants and those illicitly possessing
small arms.
With respect to the question of mercenaries, my
delegation believes that armed conflict, illicit
trafficking and covert operations by third countries
lead, inter alia, to an increase in the demand for
mercenaries in the international market. It is part of
supply and demand. The recruitment, financing,
training and use of mercenaries are part of this. It is a
great cause of concern to all countries. It is also a
violation of the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.

15

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

The General Assembly and the Security Council
have adopted many resolutions condemning the use of
mercenaries as a form of external interference in the
internal affairs of States in cases where the purpose is
to undermine the stability of such countries and to
violate their territorial integrity, independence and
sovereignty. The relevant United Nations resolutions
have emphasized the need to prevent the training,
financing and recruitment of mercenaries and their
being sent from one country to another. They also
underline the need not to offer them any facilities,
including financing, in order to equip them and to give
them the opportunity to go to other countries. Those
resolutions describe the use of mercenaries against
national liberation movements struggling against
colonialist domination or other forms of foreign
occupation as a crime.
The political problems and disputes among
neighbouring countries, especially in West Africa, have
led to armed conflicts, and the presence of mercenaries
is a recognized fact in all these conflicts. That has led
to barbaric actions and the continuation of wars.
Although the phenomenon of mercenaries is not
limited to West Africa, Africa is the continent where it
has continued and has done the most harm. We have
heard many ministers and representatives confirm that.
Many armed conflicts in Africa are the result of
extended political instability and the presence of
valuable natural resources that other foreign entities try
to control by encouraging and arming their allies
within those countries so that they can take power.
Later, such acts are carried out by mercenaries who
have the individual military skills or by what are called
military security companies, which use well-organized
small armies of mercenaries in order to calm the
situation in any of those countries. It is wrong to think
that such private military security companies can help
in managing the affairs of the countries in which they
operate.
The problem of the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons and the use of mercenaries threatens
peace and security in West Africa and other parts of the
world. My delegation believes that discussion of this
problem in its general framework definitely applies to
this important part of the African continent. There is no
doubt that we should follow up the question closely
and draw the necessary lessons from what has
happened in those lands.

16

Finally, we believe that cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations is essential for the
achievement of the United Nations objectives of peace
and security in West Africa, in all parts of Africa as a
whole and in the entire world.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic for his kind
words addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is Her Excellency
Mrs. Senn, Minister of Labour and Vocational Training
of Mali. I invite her to take a seat at the Council table
and to make her statement.
Mrs. Senn (Mali) (spoke in French): I wish, at
the outset, to express, on behalf of the delegation of
Mali, my warmest thanks to the delegation of the sister
Republic of Guinea for this initiative of convening this
Security Council workshop to consider an issue that
has been a concern to our subregion for almost 10
years. I am referring to the circulation of small arms. I
wish to pay tribute to the Secretary-General for his
tireless efforts in dealing with that matter. My
delegation also thanks the various institutions
combating the proliferation of light weapons, and it
fully agrees with their analysis.
First I wish to briefly refer to two major
initiatives that my country has taken on the issue of
small arms and light weapons. In 1994, the President of
Mali at that time, His Excellency Mr. Alfa Omar
Konaré, called for and obtained from the SecretaryGeneral a study on the risks inherent in the illicit
circulation of small arms in the Sahelo-Saharan
subregion. A year later that led to a United Nations
resolution on small arms, which has become a
resolution of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) on assistance to States to
halt the illicit circulation of small arms and light
weapons and to collect and destroy light weapons.
Secondly, I wish to recall our initiative,
subsequently approved by ECOWAS, that a
Moratorium be adopted on the import and export of
small arms. Speaking about the Moratorium and its
characteristics, President Konaré said “In the mind of
Malian diplomacy, the Moratorium is not a legal ban
designed to infringe on the sovereignty of States and
their freedom to provide defence, but rather it is an act
of faith showing the world the unswerving political
commitment of our States to eradicate the
accumulation of death and destruction-dealing devices,

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

to pursue the economic and social development of our
peoples that have been so sorely tested. It is an act of
diplomatic intelligence leading to self-censorship,
restraint, the temporary abstention of States of the
subregion from producing, receiving or exporting
weapons, as a necessary preliminary stage to reinforce
means of effective security and take positive action
related to micro-disarmament in subsequent phases”.
Support for the Moratorium is voluntary and is
open not only to States of the subregion, but also to all
African States. The Moratorium is essentially a
confidence-building measure relating to the import,
export and manufacture of small arms. To enhance the
effectiveness of that Moratorium and to reinforce the
capacity of concerned Governments to exercise stricter
monitoring of small arms traffic, Governments may
take additional steps. The Programme for Coordination
and Assistance for Security and Development is an
additional device that was adopted. I will not dwell on
that programme, which was addressed in a statement
this morning.
Five years have elapsed since the adoption of the
ECOWAS Moratorium on the import, export and
manufacture of light weapons. In announcing the
Moratorium on 31 October 1998, the heads of State of
the Community decided to harm themselves by
refraining from importing, exporting or manufacturing
small weapons for three years. Those three years would
then be used to draw up an inventory of the national
arsenal, to create national and community registers.
That period was designed to enable the various
ECOWAS members to take the steps necessary to
protect borders and prevent the illicit circulation of
small arms. At the end of that three-year period, an
assessment reinforced the conviction of the heads of
State that they made the right choice in renewing the
Moratorium for three more years.
It is obvious that as long as there is illicit
proliferation of small arms in the subregion, peace in
ECOWAS will always be precarious. Without being the
cause of conflict, small arms nonetheless contribute to
exacerbating them. Brawls and small disputes among
neighbours, farmers and ranchers frequently become
armed conflicts among socio-professional groups or
ethnic groups and can spawn civil war or genocide. The
proliferation of small arms and light weapons underlies
the phenomenon of child soldiers. The massive
accumulation of small arms and light weapons has
meant that supply exceeds demand. That means that

supplies of arms and munitions are very plentiful in
times of armed conflict.
The implementation of the Moratorium has made
it possible to reduce the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons in the subregion, with the participation
of arms manufacturers. While the circulation of
weapons has been slowed down, there are nonetheless
8 million weapons in West Africa remaining in the
hands of illegal owners. To prevent any possibility of
their misuse, it is necessary to recover these illicit
weapons that are illegally held, which contribute to
banditry, the creation of armed gangs, criminal crossborder activities and the use of mercenaries. Over the
long term, if their firepower permits it, those armed
gangs regroup and form mercenary armies willing to do
anything to threaten the peace and security of other
countries. That is the situation prevailing in our
subregion. The situation in Côte d’Ivoire is a perfect
illustration of that.
As can be noted, all armed conflicts occur when
one party or another feels that it can engage in an
armed battle after having stockpiled arms and
munitions that they can use or that they have received
through a deal with mercenaries. Despite international
legal instruments prohibiting the use of mercenaries, it
must be noted that they are still relevant because they
are now using new information technology, such as the
Internet.
To improve the situation of small arms in relation
to the use of mercenaries, my delegation would like to
make the following suggestions. Embargoes against all
countries to a conflict might be envisaged, as could
preventive measures imposed against countries
responsible for the illicit traffic of weapons. Also of
value would be a binding resolution prohibiting the use
of mercenaries in all its forms. The provision of
additional support to national commissions combating
the illicit proliferation of small arms in order to
establish additional development projects might also be
envisaged.
Unfortunately, our subregion, once a haven of
peace, is afflicted by this fever, which is rooted in
poverty, unequal distribution of justice, joblessness,
unequal distribution of income, bad governance and,
finally, a deficit in democracy.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Mali for the kind words she addressed
to me and for her suggestions.

17

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I
should like to tell you once again, Sir, how pleased I
am to see you presiding over the work of the Security
Council.

My country welcomes the integrated approach of
the United Nations and of the Security Council aimed
at reducing and preventing the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons as it relates to West Africa.

I believe that the Guinean presidency was right to
keep this workshop on the “Proliferation of small arms
and light weapons and mercenary activities: threats to
peace and security in West Africa” in this month’s
programme of work. It not only concerns an important
problem for the subregion, but also, in my delegation’s
view, is a way of emphasizing the importance that the
Council attaches to African issues at a time when all
eyes are, of course, turned towards Iraq.
Congratulations, therefore, on such tenacity.

Bulgaria commends the more active cooperation
among the region’s countries, which represents an
important element in the global strategy aimed at
combating the illicit and uncontrolled proliferation of
small arms and light weapons. Those countries already
possess a tool to combat the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons: the ECOWAS Moratorium on the
Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Light
Weapons in West Africa, adopted in 1998. The
effectiveness and performance of that monitoring
mechanism must be improved. My country encourages
the countries of the region to implement the
recommendations contained in the reports of the groups
of experts on Liberia and Sierra Leone and to
strengthen the implementation mechanisms, with a
view to putting an end to the trafficking of small arms
and light weapons.

I should also like to say how much my delegation
appreciates the presence of eminent personalities of the
subregion and
of regional and
subregional
organizations, and how useful this discussion is for the
future of the subregion. The Secretary-General’s
participation
also
represented
an
important
contribution.
Before addressing specific subjects, I should like
to say that my delegation appreciates the extremely
positive role played by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) on behalf of peace and
stability in the subregion. Once again, we should like
to express our support for the efforts of ECOWAS to
promote peace, particularly in Côte d’Ivoire. In that
regard, I should like to thank the current Chairman of
ECOWAS, Ghanaian President John Kufuor, and the
ECOWAS force in Côte d’Ivoire, who should be fully
supported in their efforts by the international
community.
It is logical for the Security Council to devote
special attention to the problems related to the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons in the region of
West Africa, because that is one of the world’s regions
that suffers most from the destabilizing accumulation
of such weapons. Bulgaria expresses its grave concern
at the excessive accumulation, illicit and uncontrolled
proliferation, circulation and trafficking of small arms
and light weapons, which continue to be a major
challenge to stability and development in West Africa.
The uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light
weapons intensifies existing ethnic and political
tensions, causes considerable loss of human life and
weakens the international community’s efforts to
provide humanitarian assistance to civilian populations.

18

The international community must lend consistent
support to the efforts of the States of the region. It
would be useful if the chairmanship of ECOWAS
briefed the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1343 (2001) concerning Liberia
on the actions that ECOWAS is undertaking to
implement the Moratorium on light weapons. That
occasion should contribute to the creation of conditions
for more effective implementation of the Moratorium.
Finally, I should like to say that Bulgaria supports and
respects the ECOWAS Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Light Weapons in
West Africa.
The implementation of embargoes in force are
also an important element of the global strategy to
combat the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
in West Africa. We must say that the reports of the
groups of experts on Sierra Leone and Liberia reveal
similar violation schemes, often orchestrated by the
same arms traffickers. As the Council is aware, the
destabilizing activities of such individuals are not
limited to the region of West Africa but extend far
beyond it. My country believes that the Security
Council must consider what the best way to tackle this
reprehensible phenomenon would be. We believe that a
structural change along the lines of the French-British
idea of a semi-permanent mechanism is desirable,
because that would better contribute to monitoring the

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

implementation of sanctions imposed by the United
Nations.
The second element of our discussion today —
the use of mercenaries in armed conflicts — is
undeniably a threat to peace in the subregion.
Mercenaries play a particularly nefarious role in
conflicts in the subregion. We are all fully aware of the
harmfulness of the activities of mercenaries in Côte
d’Ivoire. The international community must examine
and assess recent concentrations of mercenaries in
Africa, particularly in the West African region. It is
clear that the settlement of conflicts depends on the
immediate demobilization of mercenaries.
In conclusion, I should like to say that my
delegation fully supports the draft presidential
statement that should be adopted following this debate,
which is a useful contribution to efforts aimed at
eradicating these threats.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Bulgaria for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Niger. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Moutari (Niger) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Mr. President, I should like to pay a warm
tribute to the Republic of Guinea, your country, for the
excellent work that it has accomplished in the
presidency of the Security Council during this period,
so critical for international peace and security.
Niger is pleased to see members of the Council
devote today to a debate on the illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons and the use of
mercenaries in West Africa. Her Excellency
Ms. Aïchatou Mindaoudou, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Niger, had wished to be present and to
discuss with Council members this issue, whose
importance led our heads of State and Government to
proclaim, in 1998, a Moratorium on these types of
weapons in West Africa. Unfortunately, having been
unable to make the trip to New York for scheduling
reasons, she asked me to convey to you her friendly
greetings and her best wishes for success.
Because of its geographical location and its
recent national experience, Niger feels not only that it
is an integral part of all initiatives taken in this area but
also that the path we have followed, with the

benevolent help of countries and friendly institutions,
can provide some useful examples within the
framework of preventing and resolving conflicts, as
well as the consolidation of peace and reconstruction in
the post-conflict period.
As the Council knows, Niger is familiar with
armed rebellion. It began as early as the 1990s and has
affected a substantial portion of our territory, including
the northern areas of Aïr and Azawak, and, in the
eastern part of the country, Manga.
Our national experience teaches us that, whatever
one might say about the illicit proliferation of arms and
the use of mercenaries, the pivotal point in the quest
for solutions is, first of all, a genuine will on the part of
the national protagonists to deal peacefully with the
deep-seated reasons for the conflicts they face. Foreign
assistance in this way is certainly very useful, even
essential, but it is still just assistance. Thanks to an
understanding on the part of the different national
actors in Niger, peace agreements were signed between
April 1995 and August 1998 between the Government
and 17 fronts and self-defence movements, with the
help of friendly countries, including Algeria, Burkina
Faso, France and Chad. These agreements have
allowed us to begin the procedure to collect and
destroy small arms and light weapons. This procedure
finally led to the organization on 15 September 2000 in
Agadez of a peace torch, with the presence of United
Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan, to whom I
once again would like to convey my deep gratitude.
Then there was the design and implementation of
the project to collect small arms and light weapons in
the Gigme area in Manga. This was done thanks to help
from the United Nations and the group of interested
States — Germany, France, Norway and Japan — who
were trying to breathe hope into that part of Niger.
From its outset, this project was designed and
perceived as a pilot project, the success of which would
enable us to progress and the experience of which was
to be replicated in other parts of the country. It was
concerned with places such as Aïr and Azawak, but as
it spread out in concentric circles, it was also meant to
link with other projects going on in the rest of West
Africa so as to ensure that similar initiatives would be
eventually implemented in other member countries of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). Along these lines, a new project to
consolidate peace has just been crafted by Niger, in
partnership with the United Nations Development

19

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

Programme (UNDP), with the United Nations
Volunteers and with French cooperation, in order to
reintegrate 3,160 ex-combatants to promote a culture of
peace and development in areas affected by conflict.
Our national experience in Niger has thus brought
us to a full implementation of peace agreements and to
make it a major priority. From this perspective, the
socio-economic reintegration of the ex-combatants was
a priority for us, without which the peace process could
not be successfully concluded, because the feeling of
abandonment, due to the fact that financial promises
had not been kept, made people impatient, and even fed
up. They did not really wish to progress; rather, this led
to armed banditry situations. This project, valued at
about 1,400 million CFA francs (about $2 million), has
been submitted to the donors for their consideration.
In addition, it seems to us that one of the
shortcomings that has to be corrected as soon as
possible is the weakness of the national structures
responsible for follow-up of the collection of small
arms and light weapons, as well as the reintegration of
ex-combatants and the reconstruction of the affected
areas.
Our national commission to collect these
weapons, and our high commission for peacekeeping,
are cruelly short of human, logistical and financial
resources that are essential for them just to carry out
the everyday work of their mission. Strengthening
national institutions is necessary. It is a basic need for
us. The same can be said for the regional level, as Mr.
Chambas reminded us this morning.
ECOWAS has an urgent need to establish a small
arms unit to provide for the effective implementation
of the Moratorium. As was also pointed out by
Ambassador Said Djinnit, of the African Union, a
Moratorium on the importation, exportation and
manufacture of weapons can only function if there is a
follow-up oversight mechanism adequately resourced
and truly independent; this would allow them to point
out and name the violators, as well as impose a
sanctions regime against the parties in default.
We truly hope that recommendations will emerge
from this workshop that will strengthen the national
capacity-building of the national, regional and
continental institutions that are to work against the
scourges of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons and the use of mercenaries.

20

Finally, the Regional Director of the Programme
for Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development (PCASED) told us this morning how
small the number of resources are that they have to
work with, in spite of the ever more urgent needs of the
States in the region. It is important, therefore, that one
of our recommendations speak specifically to the need
for strengthening our financial wherewithal to do our
work.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Niger for his kind words addressed to
me and to my country.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First and foremost, Mr. President, I welcome you to
New York in presiding over this important meeting. I
also wish to extend a welcome to other Foreign
Ministers of African countries and the representatives
of regional and subregional organizations. I wish to
thank them for their important speeches.
In recent years, the excessive accumulation of
and rampant illicit trafficking in small weapons in
Africa, especially in West Africa, have aggravated
armed conflicts and turmoil in these regions. Through
their prolonged presence in these regions, mercenaries
have not only been involved in armed conflicts but also
have been engaged in the trafficking of arms and the
plundering of resources, thus further exacerbating and
prolonging the conflicts.
In the absence of an effective resolution of this
issue, peace will remain illusive in Africa, especially in
West Africa. The international community should give
greater attention to this issue and support and assist
regional and subregional organizations in combating
the illicit trade in small weapons and the use of
mercenaries.
The Chinese delegation believes that only an
integrated approach, with a regional dimension, can
effectively solve the question of small arms and
mercenaries in West Africa. Therefore, better
coordination and cooperation among members of the
community, especially among the West African
countries, are of critical importance. As a matter of
priority, the countries concerned in this region should,
in accordance with the Programme of Action adopted
by the 2001 United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, as well as the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Moratorium on the

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

importation, exportation and manufacture of small
arms and light weapons, develop an update of their
domestic legislation on the manufacture, possession,
transfer and stockpiling of small arms in their
countries, in light of their specific circumstances, and
take effective and reliable measures to ensure their
scrupulous implementation.
The Security Council should continue to
strengthen its cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations; actively promote the West
African peace process; implement disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes in areas
of conflict; and strengthen its monitoring of the
enforcement of arms embargoes. From a long-term
perspective, the international community — while
remaining committed to assisting West African
countries to eliminate tension and conflict — should
actively help the countries of the region to develop
their economies, pull themselves out of poverty and
achieve sustainable development. That is the only
approach capable of resolving the issue of small arms
and mercenaries in West Africa at the root level and of
restoring and safeguarding peace and security in the
subregion.
China has always opposed the illicit manufacture
of and trafficking in small arms, as well as the
recruitment and use of mercenaries. We have great
sympathy for the people of Africa, and especially for
those of West Africa, who have long suffered from the
proliferation of both small arms and mercenaries.
China supports regional and subregional efforts aimed
at resolving these issues. We also support strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations and the
countries of the region. We are ready to work with the
international community to reach an early and
appropriate solution to the question of small arms and
mercenaries in West Africa.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of China for his kind words addressed to
me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Sierra Leone. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Pemagbi (Sierra Leone): I wish to apologize
for the absence of the Foreign Minister of Sierra
Leone. He was looking forward to attending this
meeting. Unfortunately, developments in his schedule

did not make it possible for him to be here. I am
therefore delivering this short statement on his behalf.
Let me join previous speakers in congratulating
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. In so doing, I am
fully conscious of the fact that you are occupying the
chair during one of the most disturbing — and indeed
one of the most critical — periods that the world has
faced in the last three decades. My delegation would
therefore like to commend you for the admirable
manner in which you have been performing your
difficult task under extremely tense circumstances.
My delegation welcomes the initiative by Guinea,
our good neighbour, to have the Security Council
consider two interrelated issues that pose a serious
threat to peace, human security and stability in the
West African subregion. That initiative is timely
because it reminds us of the efficacy of the Security
Council, an organ whose primary responsibility is, and
remains, the maintenance of international peace and
security. Like every other man-made institution, the
Council may have weaknesses. That notwithstanding,
Sierra Leone continues to have faith in the United
Nations as a centre for harmonizing the actions of
nations. We also have faith in the Council’s ability to
contribute to our collective effort to prevent, combat
and eradicate the menace of the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons.
The current situation in the West African
subregion compels us to reiterate to the Council and
the international community at large that the illicit
trade in and proliferation of those weapons, especially
among roving bands of rebels that practice their deadly
activities within and across national frontiers, is not
merely a West African subregional problem. It is a
problem that is inherently international. That will be
the focus of my short contribution to today’s
discussions.
We of course realize that it is the responsibility of
States of the subregion to take all necessary measures
at the national and subregional levels to prevent,
combat and eradicate these weapons. However, we
cannot, and should not, underestimate the international
or global dimension of the problem and its implications
for international peace and security. The characteristics
of proliferation clearly indicate that national and
regional measures are not enough to deal with the
problem. Such measures and initiatives must be

21

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

strengthened
through
sustained
international cooperation.

and

effective

Members of the Security Council may wish to
comment on this and, if time permits, perhaps suggest
how best the Council can further contribute to the
implementation of the global measures already
identified in the Programme of Action of the 2001
United Nations Conference held to promote the
prevention, reduction and eradication of the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons.
We acknowledge the critical role that
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes play in that regard. In Sierra Leone the
success of our disarmament and demobilization of excombatants, followed by the equally successful
community arms collection and destruction campaign,
was due primarily to the level of international
assistance and cooperation extended to the Government
and people of Sierra Leone. However, I should add that
unless such cooperation is accelerated with regard to
the reintegration component of the DDR programme,
many ex-combatants could easily be recruited to fight
in new and ongoing conflicts in the subregion. We
recall that the Programme of Action of the 2001
Conference on small arms called for international
assistance and cooperation in support of DDR
programmes, as well as arms for development projects
in post-conflict areas.
Much ground has already been covered with
regard to the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light
Weapons in West Africa, which has been extended for a
further three-year period. It is obviously in the interest
of the member States of ECOWAS to scrupulously
implement the Moratorium. The idea of extending it
indefinitely or making it a legally binding regional
instrument could also be in the interest of the
Community. However, the fact is that virtually all the
estimated 8 million illicit small arms in circulation in
West Africa, including those that are in the hands of
rebels, bandits and other non-State entities, were
manufactured outside the West African subregion.
Therefore, the implementation of the ECOWAS
Moratorium and similar regional initiatives should be
seen in the context of continued collaboration between
ECOWAS and arms-manufacturing States. The
implementation of the Moratorium should also be

22

considered in the context of efforts aimed at securing
legally binding international agreements on the
marking and tracing of small arms and light weapons.
In the view of my delegation, those are core issues that
must be actively pursued if we are to make any
significant progress in curbing the illicit transfer and
trade in these weapons. As part of the global approach,
due consideration should continue to be given to the
question of the adequacy of existing machinery to deal
with the related problem of brokering.
Recognizing the importance of these issues, the
Security Council had requested the Secretary-General
to include in last year’s report on small arms, among
other things, an analytical assessment of the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons in such areas as
availability, lines of supply, brokering, transportation
arrangements and financial networks for these
weapons. Again, this underscores the fact that the
responsibility for dealing with controlling the illicit
circulation of these weapons in the West African
subregion is not ours alone.
Finally, several speakers have referred to the role
of Security Council arms embargoes and similar
measures in controlling the proliferation of these
weapons. This is one area that falls directly within the
responsibility of the Council.
By resolution 1171 (1998) the Government of
Sierra Leone was required to mark, register and notify
a Security Council monitoring committee of all arms or
related material imported by the Government through
named points of entry registered with that committee.
The Government complied with those requirements. At
the same time, the Council prohibited States and their
nationals from supplying or selling arms to nongovernmental forces in Sierra Leone. However, the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) rebel movement
was able to acquire a considerable amount of arms and
ammunition to maintain its vicious campaign of death
and terror, with the direct and indirect support of a
network of international and regional arms dealers. In
short, the embargo was deliberately and successfully
violated.
All my delegation can say at this stage is that in
reviewing any existing arms embargo the Security
Council should take into consideration the prevailing
situation and any continued serious threat to peace and
security in the West African subregion as a whole.

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Sierra Leone for his kind words
addressed to me.

efforts that have been made in ECOWAS and urge the
United Nations to take a more proactive role to find a
comprehensive solution to West Africa’s problems.

Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Let me at the outset
welcome you, Sir, back amongst us in the Security
Council. Your presence here to preside over the debate
on the proliferation of small arms and light weapons
and the phenomenon of mercenaries’ threats to peace
and security in West Africa is one indication of the
importance of this issue to the region from which you
hail.

Efforts must focus on the implementation of the
Programme of Action adopted by the United Nations
Conference on Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons. We also endorse several of the
recommendations in the Secretary-General’s report on
small arms, submitted to the Security Council last year
in document S/2002/1053.

I would also like to extend a very warm welcome
to the Ministers from several other African States and
to the representatives of the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).
We congratulate Guinea, our brother Ambassador
Traoré and you yourself for the initiative to hold this
meeting.
It is alarming that 8 million illicit small arms are
in circulation in West Africa. Intra-State conflicts have
created a staggering demand for small arms and have
contributed to the continued proliferation of bandits,
rebel groups, mercenaries, child soldiers and militia in
the entire subregion. As was succinctly expressed by
the Secretary-General in his opening remarks today,
these problems sustain conflicts, hinder development,
undermine human rights and humanitarian law and
exacerbate violence, especially against women and
children.
Pakistan was affected by the problem of small
arms in the context of the Afghanistan war, which
began in 1979. Two years ago, we adopted a
comprehensive strategy to control and eliminate this
problem. We have had considerable success, although
this is not yet complete. Our campaign against illicit
arms is continuing, but we would be happy to share our
experiences with friendly countries.
We feel that the problems faced by West Africa
are complex and multifaceted, affecting stability and
peace within and outside individual countries. We need
to address peace and stability in the entire subregion,
not one country at a time. We agree with the
assessment of the Secretary-General that efforts must
be made to remove tensions between the concerned
countries and also to find ways to collectively address
their problems. To this effect, we fully support the

With the adoption of the Bamako Declaration on
an African Common Position on the Illicit
Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking of Small
Arms and Light Weapons on 1 December 2000, the
African Union articulated for the first time a continentwide strategy for tackling illicit small arms on that
continent. Similarly, the renewal by ECOWAS of its
Moratorium on the import, export and manufacture of
small arms and light weapons last year is a sincere
effort to address the issue.
The ECOWAS Moratorium can be strengthened
through several of the recommendations that are
reflected in the draft presidential statement before us,
that is, through transparency, better end-user
certificates, effective implementation of United
Nations sanctions and well-conceived disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes.
Arms-producing and exporting countries should also
enact stringent laws and regulations to ensure that their
exports to West Africa do not contribute to
destabilizing the region. The implementation of DDR
programmes in the affected countries needs generous
financial support of the donor community.
We are facing what one could call a series of
complex crises in West Africa and elsewhere. It is
obvious that only a comprehensive approach that takes
into account social, economic, political, security and
other factors can address effectively the problems
associated with small arms and light weapons. The
international community should help deal with the
complex causes of instability in West Africa. In
particular, the economic and social problems afflicting
the region must be tackled through comprehensive
support for development, greater market access, debt
relief, enhanced official development assistance,
human resources development and a focused effort to
eradicate HIV/AIDS.

23

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

We at the United Nations, and especially in the
Security Council, need to devise a new composite
method and a composite approach that draws together
all those who can contribute to solutions to these
complex crises in one place. I suggest that we discuss
this composite approach in the Ad Hoc Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa, which
already exists.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Pakistan for the kind words addressed
to my country and my delegation.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Nigeria. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): Mr. President, I bring
you warm greetings from your colleague, Mr. Alhaji
Sule Lamido, Foreign Minister of Nigeria, who is
unavoidably absent from this meeting. I wish to thank
you on behalf of the Nigerian delegation for your
initiative in organizing this important workshop. It
affords the Security Council an excellent opportunity to
fully address the menace posed by small arms and the
use of mercenaries in the West African subregion. We
look forward to a successful and fruitful conclusion of
the workshop under your able guidance — and that is
already near.
The problem of the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons is of particular concern to Nigeria
because it constitutes a major impediment to peace,
stability, security and economic development in many
developing countries, especially in Africa. These arms
continue to have devastating consequences on the
African continent, considering their capacity to fuel,
intensify and prolong conflicts. Sir, you are no doubt
aware of the millions of lives lost, as well as the
humanitarian crisis created in the region, as a result of
their illicit use. I need not mention the destruction of
catastrophic proportions of economic and social
infrastructure on the continent as a direct result of the
illicit use of these weapons. We know how long and
how expensive it often is to put up such structures.
The West African subregion has more than its fair
share of these conflicts. These conflicts have been
fuelled by the illicit and free circulation of these
weapons in the subregion.
The greatest difficulty in the control of the
proliferation of small arms is their easy accessibility to

24

non-State actors. That was an issue that dogged the
outcome of the General Assembly debate on small
arms and light weapons in 2001. My delegation
therefore believes that for an adequate and effective
control of the proliferation of this class of weapons,
efforts must be made to legally control the sale of these
weapons to non-State actors.
The illicit trade in small arms has always
obstructed the implementation of arms embargoes
imposed by the Security Council. The recent
establishment of an independent panel of experts and
monitoring mechanisms by the Council to promote
compliance with arms embargoes is welcome.
While in West Africa this measure will be useful
in controlling the illegal cross-border movement of
small arms into conflict areas, it will be, however,
ineffective in controlling and eliminating those arms
that are already inside the areas of conflict. We
therefore
emphasize
the
need
for
effective
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
mandates that include weapons collection, disposal and
destruction.
In order to trace the flow of small arms and light
weapons from their sources, it is necessary to identify
the points of diversion into illicit networks. Tracing the
movement of these weapons will help to promote
awareness and accountability in arms transfers and will
deter their illicit transfer to non-State actors. We
welcome the recommendation of the Secretary-General
to develop an international instrument to enable States
to identify and trace illicit small arms and light
weapons that enter their countries so that they can
effectively control such inflows. We hope that the
ongoing work of the group of experts on tracing small
arms will ultimately lead to a legally-binding
international agreement on the subject.
As an additional measure in ensuring success in
this regard, it is important that licensed manufacturers
apply appropriate and reliable markings on each small
arm and light weapon as an integral part of the
production process, as stipulated in the Programme of
Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons. Efforts
should be put in place to ensure that the United Nations
Protocol Against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, which was successfully
concluded in 2001, will complement the Programme of
Action in this vital area when it enters into force.

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

Recent studies have shown that arms brokering
plays a significant role in the illicit arms trade. The
establishment of an effective international regime to
control the practice has therefore become necessary.
We call on Member States to fully abide by their
commitment to enhance international cooperation and
the exchange of information as a prelude to the
establishment of such a regime. That position was
underscored in the 2000 Bamako Ministerial
Declaration containing Africa’s common position on
small arms and light weapons.
This is connected with the issue of licensing and
end-user controls. We believe that developing effective
national, regional and international controls on export
licensing and end use are crucial elements in ensuring
that this trade remains under Government control and
is not diverted to illicit markets or end users. In that
regard, my delegation urges the Security Council to
encourage States that have not already done so to
introduce the use of authenticated end-user certificates
as a means of monitoring the export and transit of
small arms.
It is equally important for the Council to intensify
efforts to investigate and to identify the link between
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and the
illicit exploitation of natural and other resources. The
determination of this linkage and the efforts to control
the use of proceeds from illegal resources to fund the
illicit arms trade have significantly brought the
conflicts in the West African subregion to a successful
end. Such investigation should of necessity apply to all
areas of conflict in the West African subregion, where
there is often interlinkage between one conflict
situation and another.
The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS)
Moratorium
on
the
Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light
Weapons in West Africa has been in existence since
1998, following its renewal two years ago. ECOWAS
member States will continue their best effort to ensure
the success of the Moratorium. It is unfortunate that
conflict situations have persisted in the West African
subregion in spite of the Moratorium. ECOWAS
member States need the cooperation of the
international community to implement the Moratorium.
My delegation therefore wishes once again to call on
the international community to support the
implementation of the Moratorium. In order to succeed,
it is important that the Moratorium is fully respected by

all States, both within and outside the subregion. We
also urge other regions to follow the example of
ECOWAS by imposing similar moratoriums in their
respective regions.
Nigeria has always believed in conflict
prevention measures and the pursuit of negotiated
solution to conflicts as the most effective means of
solving the small arms problem. The international
community should pay particular attention to the need
to adopt these measures as the best strategy for peace.
Connected to this is the need for the creation of a good
political atmosphere that will enhance harmonious
relationships in our countries and a sense of belonging.
The emphasis in this regard should be on promoting
structures and processes that strengthen democracy,
human rights, the rule of law and good governance, as
well as economic recovery and growth as a means of
eliminating conflicts and guaranteeing durable peace.
The task of the Security Council in this regard is quite
enormous and calls for genuine commitment and
concerted action on the part of the Council.
I cannot conclude this statement without
expressing our gratitude to the Secretary-General for
his bold initiative in establishing the Coordinating
Action on Small Arms (CASA) as a mechanism for the
harmonization of the activities of United Nations
agencies to promote the implementation of the
Programme of Action. CASA has a special role to play
in promoting and coordinating assistance to West
African States, especially those most severely affected
by small arms proliferation.We
also
note
with
satisfaction the recent establishment of the Small Arms
Advisory Services to provide advisory services and
formulate
programmes
on
small
arms
for
implementation. As these two bodies rely on
extrabudgetary resources to fund their activities, we
call on Member States in a position to do so to make
voluntary contributions to enable them to fulfil their
mandates.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Nigeria for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Côte d’Ivoire. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Djangone-Bi (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): First let me say that my delegation is very
happy to see you, Sir, presiding over the work of the

25

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

Security Council in March 2003, which has witnessed
the establishment of the Government of National
Reconciliation under the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.
Things have never been so difficult for the
international community, as current challenges, to
which pressures are added, are numerous and seem
insurmountable.
However, assured by your excellent qualities of
diplomatic experience, we do not doubt for one
moment that the proceedings of this distinguished
institution will be completed successfully.
We would also like to congratulate the
representative of Germany who, last month, conducted
the work of the Council with the great competence we
know he possesses.
I would like to begin my statement by saying that
my
delegation
approves
of
most
of
the
recommendations that have been made, particularly
those by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Senegal
and Benin. Since almost everything has already been
said, I will confine my statement to a few words about
the existence of so-called Liberian fighters supposedly
in the Côte d’Ivoire army. In fact, this morning, in his
statement to the Security Council, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Liberia stated, without providing a
shred of evidence and in spite of the denial of the
Government of Côte d’Ivoire that was published by a
number of press agencies, that particularly in the
western part of Côte d’Ivoire, Liberian mercenaries
were fighting alongside the national army of Côte
d’Ivoire.
It is highly regrettable that Liberia has turned this
workshop that has been so carefully organized into a
trial against Côte d’Ivoire. In a spirit of peace, and
despite the averred collusion of fraternal countries with
the aggressors against Côte d’Ivoire, my country has
not deemed it necessary to pour oil on the fire by
publicly denouncing anybody. We are trying to prepare
the post-crisis period, given that teeth and tongues are
condemned to live together, in spite of the accidents
along the way.
Given the falsehoods related by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Liberia aimed at distracting the
international community, my delegation would like to
issue the following clarification.
We do not know the sources of the representative
of Liberia. However, the truth is that Liberian

26

mercenaries are part of the aggressors against Côte
d’Ivoire and have been since the night of 18 to 19
September 2002. All the diplomatic Missions were able
to see on Ivorian television Liberian mercenaries,
among others, that the national armed forces had taken
prisoners after heavy fighting. Some of those
mercenaries even admitted that they belonged to the
Liberian army. President Charles Taylor assured
President Gbagbo that those mercenaries had no
connection with the Liberian army. The Ivorian
authorities noted that. At any rate, if they are not
soldiers of the Liberian army, then they are Liberian
mercenaries.
There can be no doubt, because the English
accent of Liberia is quite different from that of the
other anglophone countries in West Africa. The
majority of those mercenaries can be easily confused
with the border populations of Côte d’Ivoire, given that
they speak the same languages and are part of the same
ethnic groups as those populations.
To then say that Liberia mercenaries are Ivorians
is a large step to take — a step that the critics of Côte
d’Ivoire, including the Minister, blithely took.
My delegation vigorously protests such
fabrications that attempt to present the victim of
aggression, Côte d’Ivoire, as being the culprit in this
matter.
A number of Liberian mercenaries have come
from the ranks of armed groups that are trying to
overthrow President Taylor’s regime. Those Liberian
mercenaries, who have fanned out across West Africa
and are currently aggressing against Côte d’Ivoire, can
be defined in terms of the following paradigm. First,
they are, for the most part, totally under the control of
a drug empire. Secondly, they are merciless. Thirdly,
they systematically pillage plantations, houses, and so
forth.
Fourthly, they kill indiscriminately; one could
even say that they kill for the fun of it, which explains
why there are so many mass grave sites in rebel areas.
Fifthly, they have no regard for women and girls,
whom they rape on a daily basis.
The Liberian Ministry of Foreign Affairs
certainly forgot that since that fraternal country has
been unstable — which has been for at least a
decade — Côte d’Ivoire has taken in refugees; at times
half a million people have been accepted. The United

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

Nations High Commissioner for Refugees can testify to
that.
There is one specific thing that should be pointed
out. Contrary to what is done elsewhere, instead of
putting people into camps in Côte d’Ivoire, Liberian
refugees are received by families and integrated into
the population. At the meeting in Serta, Libya, my
country was congratulated by the African Union for
that hospitality, which was described as being second
to none.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Liberia
certainly forgot to point out to the Security Council
that, for more than a decade, the combatants of the
various factions fleeing the fighting were coming into
Ivorian territory with their supplies of arms and have
largely contributed to the insecurity that is
undermining my country today, and which is
characterized by ambushes, hold-ups and other acts.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Liberia
certainly does not know that, before the aggression that
we are talking about, Côte d’Ivoire did not hesitate to
send regular teams of military doctors and medicines to
Liberia.
The list is long. Therefore, allow my delegation
to conclude with the following. Contrary to partisan
reports that have been made to the Council by actors
who are destabilizing Côte d’Ivoire, first, Liberian
mercenaries that are spreading desolation in the
western part of Côte d’Ivoire have no connection with
the regular army; they should in no way be considered
as extra recruits of the national armed forces of Côte
d’Ivoire. Secondly, in the western part of the country,
as well as at Bouaké, Liberian mercenaries, recruited
and paid by the aggressors against Côte d’Ivoire, are
fighting alongside and are on the payroll of the latter.
Thirdly,
Liberian
thieves
are
acting
independently, profiting from this situation in the
western part of Côte d’Ivoire. Fourthly, Liberian
mercenaries arrested by the French forces in the region
of Duékoué Bangolo have no connection with the
regular forces of Côte d’Ivoire. That is the truth that
the international community should know.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Côte d’Ivoire for the kind words he
addressed to me.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guinea.

In the historic Declaration of the Millennium
Summit, the world’s leaders, meeting here in New
York, affirmed their willingness to work to establish a
climate of peace and security, the fundamental basis for
a partnership for sustainable development. Today, we
must recognize that the international community seems
to demonstrate a certain impotence in the face of
numerous human tragedies and the destruction of
socio-economic infrastructures, the consequences of
the persistence of many flashpoints of tension in the
world.
For more than a decade, West Africa, the theatre
of several conflicts, has been a subject of great concern
because of its disturbing number of refugees and
displaced persons. The causes of this instability have
been diagnosed many times, but the remedies have not
always been applied to restore peace and calm for the
people of the subregion. Today, the constantly growing
number of unemployed youth and the consequences of
conflicts are fertile ground for the development of this
phenomenon. The use of child soldiers also results
from these deep-seated causes.
Faced with this new threat, what remedies should
be proposed to eradicate this scourge? Undoubtedly,
the domestic conflicts in Liberia, Sierra Leone,
Guinea-Bissau and recently in Côte d’Ivoire have had
deplorable consequences, both for those countries and
for neighbouring States, jeopardizing the subregional
balance.
The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
and the increasingly frequent recourse to mercenarism
are unlikely to enhance the restoration of peace and
security in West Africa. The Ivorian crisis is an
unfortunate illustration. While it is recognized that the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons is not in
itself the cause of these armed conflicts, it has
nonetheless been established that it helps to exacerbate
them. The joining of such proliferation with the use of
mercenaries today constitutes factors of destabilization
and insecurity in West Africa.
The holding of this interactive workshop has been
to the point, because it has undoubtedly enabled us to
measure the impact of these scourges and to provide
the necessary incentives to eradicate them. In other
words, we must proceed to an in-depth consideration of
the mechanisms that underlie these phenomena, and we
must adopt appropriate measures with a view to both
prevention and elimination.

27

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

The conclusions of previous studies and debates
on these issues confirm the gravity of the danger and
the scope of the damage caused in West Africa in
particular. It is, in fact, deplorable to note that 500
million light weapons are circulating freely in the
world — 30 million of them in Africa and 8 million in
West Africa. Even worse, 60 per cent of these weapons
are held by civilians, of whom approximately 500,000
die each year; 80 per cent of these victims are women
and children.
That somber tableau surely explains the feeling
that, in Africa, guns are not only weapons of choice,
but weapons with devastating effects. My delegation is
concerned by the uncontrolled and abusive use of small
arms and light weapons, which affect the public
resources of our States — already very limited — and
the implementation of development programmes. We
are of the view that this form of governance has as its
corollary the flight of foreign capital and
disinvestment.
Moreover, we must recognize that the moderate
cost of these weapons and the fact that they are easy to
use and to acquire explain their possession by
everyone, including children, who are often recruited
against their will for armed conflicts. Guinea
subscribes to the view that these conditions
dangerously compromise the implementation of peace
agreements in the subregion, whose failure is often
attributed solely to the absence of political will. How,
in fact, can those agreements be effectively
implemented when the subregion is more concerned
with its safety and stability? Taking that factor into
account is a matter of moral fairness.
We admit that, besides the weak capacity of
security forces, unemployment and poverty promote
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. In
that regard, several initiatives have been undertaken, in
vain, to eradicate this scourge. In October 1998, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) adopted a Declaration of Moratorium on
the Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Light
Weapons in West Africa for a renewable three-year
period. In order to accelerate implementation of the
Moratorium, an action plan for the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development (PCASED) was adopted in March 1999,
thanks to the cooperation of the United Nations system.
Despite the slowness observed in the establishment of
national commissions, years after the adoption of the

28

Moratorium, some progress deserves to be emphasized:
to date, 13 national commissions have been created.
Nevertheless, increased assistance by the United
Nations system is required to make them more
operational.
We understand that the difficulties encountered in
the effective functioning of the ECOWAS Moratorium
are also attributable to the absence of effective and
efficient cooperation among States to harmonize their
policies; to insufficient personnel and equipment at the
ECOWAS secretariat level to oversee implementation
of the Moratorium; and to the absence of binding legal
provisions.
Therefore, my delegation remains convinced that
we need to strengthen the subregion’s institutional
capacities, ensuring a long-term fight against the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons, by
taking the following elements into account: the
introduction of a standardized end-user certificate in
the subregion; the broadening of the Moratorium with
the goal of creating a mechanism for the exchange of
information on all types of weapons acquired by the
States of the subregion, as well as on deliveries made
by the countries exporting them; the computerization of
aircraft registration lists, in conformity with the
provisions of the International Civil Aviation
Organization Convention of 1944; the elaboration of
national action plans; the increased involvement of
national commissions and of local structures in the
implementation of measures taken at the subregional,
regional and international levels; and finally, the
strengthening of unity of action to break the mafia
mechanisms that feed weapons trafficking.
Guinea, for its part, has taken the following
measures: the creation of a national commission on
18 August 2000; the elaboration of an action plan
based on the nine priorities defined by PCASED; the
introduction of legislation and of administrative
procedures on arms possession, soon to be adopted; the
establishment of a training and awareness programme
for the Guinean army; and the holding of numerous
symposiums, seminars and workshops and participation
in those types of events with a view to gradually
establishing a true culture of peace. Regardless of such
efforts, the hoped-for success will essentially depend
on the considerations that we have just cited.
My delegation notes — and deplores — the fact
that people without faith or law, whose sole motivation

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

is enrichment, are selling their services today to parties
in the same conflict. Members will agree with me that
the degrading use of mercenaries has made the security
situation of our States — already so worrisome — even
more fragile. It has been proved that these mercenaries
are, more and more often, turning soullessly against
their own employers. That is to say, the common
enemy of the States of the subregion is now mercenary
activity. We must denounce those who order it or
permit it. We must not forget that these mercenaries
operate in motley groups of various nationalities,
sometimes nurtured by former combatants who have
never been taken in charge by disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.
My country, the Republic of Guinea, has paid a
heavy price for the use of mercenaries. It was the
victim of aggressions in November 1970 and in
September 2000, which enabled us to measure the
danger of mercenary activity to a country’s stability
and security.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to invite
the Security Council to ensure scrupulous compliance
by all States of the subregion with measures taken
against the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons and the use of mercenaries. Therefore, it is
essential that our States give due consideration to the
recommendations and observations that have resulted
from this workshop, with a view to combating these
scourges — an undeniable reality — and to ensuring a
better future for coming generations.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the Director of the
Programme for Coordination and Assistance for
Security and Development (PCASED), and I would ask
him to give us a very brief assessment of our
workshop.
Mr. Fall (spoke in French): I would like to start
by commenting on the new recommendations having to
do with the Plan of Action that has been drawn up and
then list them in terms of the entities that would have
to act to implement them. I think I would start by
saying that the international community recognizes not
only the importance of security in West Africa but also,
unfortunately, the threats that have been highlighted
here, in particular the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons and mercenaries.

Still, with respect to the international community,
I think there is a need for it to support the Moratorium
on the Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of
Light Weapons — first of all, by supporting the
national commissions responsible for this issue;
secondly, by helping the Secretariat of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to
strengthen its capacity in this domain; and, finally, of
course, by coordinating development assistance within
the United Nations system.
As regards the Council itself, we have noted the
idea of having an embargo on light weapons in conflict
areas. I think this was an early initiative launched here
at a Security Council ministerial-level meeting by Mrs.
Madeline Albright, former Secretary of State of the
United States of America. I think this idea has come up
again, and we should note it, while at the same time
penalizing the mercenary operations in West Africa.
I also note the willingness to contain mercenary
activities and proliferation through the adoption of
appropriate legal instruments. Of course, the Security
Council would need the assistance of the Conference
on light weapons as regards the definition of standards
and so forth.
Finally, there was mention of developing
independent mechanisms, evaluation and sanctions. Of
course, this mission would naturally fall under the
auspices of the Security Council.
At the subregional level, specifically for
PCASED and ECOWAS, two things are very
important: improving the procedure for monitoring of
import controls and the end-user certificates, and
starting in the next semester, we will look at reviewing
and improving these procedures as part of our agenda.
Finally, as regards ECOWAS, PCASED and the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
together, I see the need to evaluate risks in the
subregion and to report annually on arms trade flows
and mercenary activities in the region.
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
thank the Director of the Programme for Coordination
and Assistance for Security and Development
(PCASED) for his contribution.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2003/328, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s
prior consultations.

29

S/PV.4720 (Resumption 1)

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my

There being no objection, it is so decided.

list.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations on Iraq, immediately following the
adjournment of this meeting.

In favour:
Angola, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Chile, China,
France, Germany, Guinea, Mexico, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, Syrian Arab Republic,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

30

The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1467 (2003).

The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.
