S/PV.8529

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8529

th meeting
Monday, 20 May 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Djani. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Indonesia)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Tshabalala
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/264)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-14554 (E)
*1914554*

S/PV.8529

Ukraine

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The President: I give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements in connection
with the provisional agenda.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
objects to the adoption of the agenda for this meeting.
The Russian delegation’s request that we hold an
open meeting on the law on the use of Ukrainian as
the national language specifically today, the day of
the inauguration of Mr. Volodymyr Zelensky as the
new President of Ukraine, democratically elected in a
transparent electoral process, is clearly not intended to
contribute to resolving the crisis between Russia and
Ukraine.
While France supports retaining the crisis in
Ukraine as an item on the Council’s agenda, we believe
that the call for a meeting without prior notice by Russia,
a party to the conflict, would not allow us to have an
in-depth discussion and above all is clearly intended to
make life difficult for the new President of Ukraine.
The urgency of the law on the status of the Ukrainian
language, which was enacted on 25 April and will enter
into force on 16 July, is not comparable to that of the
humanitarian and security situation in Donbas. The
Council should remain focused on those two issues,
where we continue to expect concrete action, as the
lives of millions of Ukrainian citizens depend on it. The
language question should be dealt with in accordance
with the commitments that have already been made,
including with respect to the ceasefire, the withdrawal
of heavy weapons, disengagement, the restoration of
control of the border to the Ukrainian Government,
the implementation of decentralization, the departure
of foreign armed forces and the dissolution of illegal
armed groups.
What we expect today from Russia is genuine
openness to dialogue with the new Ukrainian President.
In his inaugural speech in Kyiv only this morning, the
President of Ukraine spoke of restoring peace as one
of his major objectives. We are sorry that the Council
presidency did not respond to the proposal of six
delegations to postpone this meeting to a later date.
In that context, France objects to the adoption of the
agenda of the meeting and calls on the members of the
Council to vote against holding it.
2/8

20/05/2019

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): As we are working
very closely with France on this issue, I would like to
express my support for the statement just made by my
French colleague and say that Germany also objects to
the adoption of the agenda item that you just read out,
Mr. President.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): As we have
made clear to other members of the Council, we, like
France and Germany, do not see a need for this briefing.
In our view, Russia’s request for this meeting is a clear
attempt to distract from the peaceful, democratic
transfer of power happening today in Ukraine. The
United States congratulates Mr. Zelensky on his
inauguration today as President of Ukraine. We look
forward to working with him and welcome his express
commitment to promoting national unity. Accordingly,
the United States joins our colleagues in urging Council
members to vote against the adoption of this agenda.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would first like to remind my French
colleague that there is no Russian-Ukrainian conflict.
There is an internal Ukrainian conflict and a crisis
in the relations between Ukraine and Russia that was
created by the former Ukrainian leadership. In the
context that the representative of France referred to, it
does not exist. If he continues to repeat it, I will continue
to remind him of that. Secondly, the law that we are
discussing was approved on 15 May, not 25 April. The
law was enacted on 25 April by the Verkhovna Rada.
The Russian Federation asked for this meeting to
be convened in connection with the signing on 15 May
by Ukraine’s outgoing President, Petr Poroshenko, of a
law establishing the status of the Ukrainian language
as the country’s national language. It is true that the
law does not come into force until mid-July, and it
will be a number of years before some of its provisions
come into force at all. However, that does not negate
its essence. That is why we consider it essential for
the Security Council to give its opinion of the law
today, pre-emptively, because we firmly believe it is a
direct violation of the spirit and letter of the package
of measures for fulfilling the Minsk agreements,
which the Security Council approved and supported
through its adoption of resolution 2202 (2015) and its
presidential statement of June 2018 (S/PRST/2018/12).
We are therefore talking about a violation of Security
Council decisions.
19-14554

20/05/2019

S/PV. 8529

Ukraine

It may appear to some that a violation of the
language provisions of the Minsk agreements is less
significant against the backdrop of the Ukrainian
armed forces’ daily shelling of the peaceful citizens
of Donbas and of Kyiv’s unwillingness to establish
a lasting ceasefire, legislate special status for parts
of the Donetsk and Luhansk areas, finalize prisoner
exchanges and so forth. However, the importance of
the issue at hand goes far beyond the framework of
this Ukrainian law. We want to point out that it is not
accidental that the right to language self-determination
is directly established in the package of measures. If
we consider it carefully, the language issue is precisely
what triggered the centrifugal trends in Ukraine in
2014.
As we know, one of the Maidan authorities’ first
decisions was repealing the law on the status of the
Russian language, officially entitled “On the principles
of the State language policy”, which had come into
force on 10 August 2012. It was after that decision that
people’s silent dissatisfaction with the Maidan events
began to be transformed in Ukraine’s eastern regions
into a struggle to preserve their national and cultural
identity. In other words, the language issue is one of
the underlying causes of Ukraine’s internal conflict.
We believe that it is essential that the Security Council
send a clear message to Ukraine’s new leadership on
the importance of setting a course of inclusion, aimed
at unity and bringing Ukrainians together rather than
dividing them. After all, a united society is the best
guarantee of a lasting political settlement. As far as
we can judge, that was the central message expressed
today by Ukraine’s newly elected President, Volodymyr
Zelensky, at his inauguration. However, for the time
being that is far from everyone’s view, and the calls
from nationalists for ousting the Russian language are
as loud as ever.
We hope that Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs Rosemary DiCarlo and
Lamberto Zannier, High Commissioner on National
Minorities of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, will provide an honest and
objective assessment of Mr. Poroshenko’s swan song
and the possible consequences of his actions and plans
for a settlement in eastern Ukraine.
We know that not all the delegations around this
table are dying to hold today’s meeting. I would like to
remind them that a month ago (see S/PV.8516), when it
was proposed that we discuss President Putin’s signing

of a decree on the modalities of granting Russian
passports to the citizens of Donbas, the Russian
delegation did not object, despite the fact that the issue
is strictly internal to our country and has nothing to
do with the parties’ fulfilment of their obligations
under the Minsk package of measures, as the ensuing
discussion eloquently demonstrated. We firmly believe
that every Council member has the right to submit for
the Council’s consideration any issue that it believes
could be a threat to international peace and security.
A refusal to have that discussion today would not only
be a gross example of double standards, it would also
undermine the authority of the Security Council.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Like many of our
colleagues on the Council, we were surprised by the
Russian Federation’s request for holding a meeting
today on Ukraine, as we strongly believe that Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity is a direct threat to international peace and
security, while the fact that Ukraine’s legitimate
authorities have signed a bill into law is not. Like other
Council members, Poland objects to having a discussion
of this subject in the Council today.
The President: In view of the requests and
comments by members of the Security Council, I intend
to put the provisional agenda to a vote.
The Council is ready to proceed to a vote on the
provisional agenda for today’s meeting. I shall put the
provisional agenda to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
China, Dominican Republic, Equatorial Guinea,
Russian Federation, South Africa
Against:
Belgium, France, Germany, Poland, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Côte d’Ivoire, Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru
The President: The provisional agenda received
five votes in favour, six votes against and four
abstentions. The provisional agenda has not been
adopted, having failed to obtain the required number
of votes.

19-145543/8

S/PV.8529

Ukraine

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We deeply deplore the fact that a number
of delegations have nonetheless displayed double
standards with regard to our discussion of the issue
of Ukraine in the Security Council. It is obvious to us
that they find the subject unpleasant because it does
not allow them to excuse their protégés in Kyiv. The
gross violation of the rights and freedoms of millions of
Ukrainian citizens is already all too clear.
We cannot accept the arguments we have heard
that delegations need more time to study the law.
That is all just weaselling and excuses. The text of the
Ukrainian law exists and has been publicly available
since the autumn of last year. The fact that it threatens
Kyiv’s ability to fulfil its obligations under the Minsk
agreements has long been well known, which is why a
number of politicians and international officials have
already spoken about it, including Mr. Zannier, who
was invited to participate here today, and who will
now obviously not be able to express his position on it,
although this issue falls directly under his purview. Not
to mention that the law has already been discussed by
the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
on 2 May.
It is also extremely odd to hear it claimed that the
Ukrainian law has not been translated into English. I
do not recall similar comments when the Council was
preparing to discuss President Putin’s decree granting
Donbas residents Russian passports the very day after
he had signed it. How did those members arrive at their
decision then? Were they criticizing a document that
they had not even read? The question seems to be what
the connection is between language and the Security
Council. It is a direct one. We believed it necessary
to propose the convening of this meeting considering
that the latest move by the Verkhovna Rada and the
outgoing President, Petr Poroshenko, exiting in shame,
directly undermines the spirit and letter of the Minsk
agreements, approved in resolution 2202 (2015). The
fact is that the issue of language rights was one of the
main reasons that led to Ukraine’s loss of Crimea and
the conflict in Donbas.
On 15 May, Mr. Poroshenko played yet another
dirty trick on his successor by signing a decree on the
entry into force of the law establishing the status of the
Ukrainian language as the country’s national language.
4/8

20/05/2019

The Verkhovna Rada had enacted it not long before,
rejecting the majority of the amendments aimed at
somehow or other giving a nationalistic masterpiece
a civilized veneer. The law violates Ukraine’s own
Constitution and many of the international obligations
whereby Kyiv has to guarantee respect for national
minority rights. This move is hugely worrying for
Ukraine’s Russian-speaking citizens, who in the
recent presidential elections categorically rejected the
policies of the now former President of Ukraine, which
artificially incited and cultivated hostility towards
Russia. I would like to point out that practically every
Ukrainian citizen understands and speaks Russian.
According to the most conservative estimates, Russian
is the first and mother tongue for more than a third of
Ukrainians, and the real number is higher than that.
Incidentally, that includes the former and the newly
elected President.
In spite of all the Maidan authorities’ efforts
for the past five years to eliminate Russian from the
public and indeed the personal arena, they have not
succeeded. This event was a particularly sensitive one
for the residents of the southern and eastern parts of
the country, who have not given up hope that in living
in a so-called renewed Ukraine they can preserve their
identity, continuing to educate their children in Russian
and communicate in Russian in their daily lives and in
State and municipal bodies. The Ukrainians living in
those regions clearly expressed those hopes through
their votes for Mr. Zelensky, who, unlike the outgoing
Head of State, is not afraid to speak Russian, as he
demonstrated during today’s inauguration ceremony.
The President: I wish to remind Council members
to consider limiting their statements to issues of a
procedural nature.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): During his inauguration today, President
Zelensky spoke out specifically against attempts to
sow division in Ukrainian society based on language.
The fight against Russian language and culture and
the desire to destroy the all-embracing ties between
these two brother countries became the hallmark of the
outgoing Kyiv regime.
The Maidan authorities built their policies on a
total rejection of everything Russian and of everything
in common with Russia. They rejected our common
origin from a single ancient Russian root with
Kyiv as the mother of Russian cities, accused us of
19-14554

20/05/2019

Ukraine

stealing and usurping Ukrainian history, saying that
Ukrainians and Russians are in fact not brothers but
completely different peoples, that Ukraine lived for
centuries under occupation by Muscovy. They cursed
the Soviet regime, which, let me point out, created
Ukraine’s current borders. We heard the deluded
theories of Ukrainian so-called historians about the
origins of the ancient Ukrs, who supposedly originated
45,000 years ago and are more ancient than all the
ancient civilizations — Sumerian, Egyptian, CretanMycenaean, Indic, Hellenic, Roman and more. When
we heard that we chuckled, assuming we were dealing
with nationalistic scum and borderline personalities.
Today a number of those ideas are official ideology and
historical and philosophical doctrine in Government
and social science institutions in Kyiv.
Some hasty decisions and statements in 2014 by
nationalist members of the Verkhovna Rada provoked
the centrifugal tendencies in Crimea, which led to
the referendum on reunification with Russia. And
the Maidan authorities’ unwillingness to engage in
dialogue with the people of Donetsk and Luhansk,
whose appeals for a hearing were met with bullets and
shells, became the prime cause of the current civil war
in Donbas.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The Council has
voted on whether to have a meeting on this subject, and
we know the result. There is no meeting on the subject.
The representative of the Russian Federation is not
giving an explanation of vote. He is giving a substantive
intervention on a meeting that is not happening. In
so doing, Mr. President, he shows disrespect for the
Council and for the ruling that you just gave him,
asking him to limit his remarks to procedural concerns.
I would therefore like to ask you to ensure that the
Russian representative follows the rules of the Council,
limits his remarks to an explanation of vote and does
not give a substantive intervention for a meeting that is
not happening.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I have a rhetorical question for my British
colleague. What are his criteria for judging whether
my statement is substantive or an explanation of vote?
I consider it to be an explanation of vote and I would
be grateful for a ruling from you permitting me to
complete my statement, Mr. President.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation may continue his statement.

S/PV. 8529

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): What will the Russian-speaking Ukrainians
have to deal with once the new law comes into force?
Let me say it straight out, they will be dealing with
the forced total Ukrainization of social life. In a short
time they will be able to use Russian only in private
conversations and religious rites. A commissioner in
charge of protecting the State language, with a broad
range of controlling functions, will monitor compliance
with the law. He will be permitted to interfere in the
activity of social organizations and political parties by
requiring internal efforts to comply with the established
rules. There will be a draconian system for enforcing
measures through stiff administrative fines for breaking
the law. Concern about a nation’s primary language is a
responsibility of the Government of any country, but let
us call a spade a spade. What is happening before our
eyes in Ukraine is a language inquisition.
Council members may consider that normal, but
that situation does not work for Russian-speaking
Ukrainians. It is putting a time-bomb under all the
efforts to restore stability and social unity in our
neighbouring State, for which the new President of
Ukraine has appealed many times. We believe it is
essential to bring what is going on in Ukraine to the
attention of our colleagues on the Council, which is,
essentially, a guarantor of the Minsk agreements and
responsible for ensuring compliance with its measures
by all parties. That is because what is involved is a
measure that directly contradicts paragraph 11 of the
package of measures for the fulfilment of the Minsk
agreements and the right of the inhabitants of various
districts of the Donetsk and Luhansk areas to linguistic
self-determination. No more than a month ago everyone
in this Chamber was criticizing the decision by Russia’s
President to introduce a simplified procedure for
granting Russian citizenship to the residents of these
regions (see S/PV.8516), despite the fact that it does not
damage the Minsk agreements in any way. And today
we are dealing with a direct attack on those agreements,
not a speculative one.
Furthermore, the new law also signals an end to
Kyiv’s fulfilment of other obligations under the package
of measures, such as paragraph 8, on assistance for
the economic and social development of the eastern
regions, and paragraph 5, on banning the persecution
and punishment of individuals in relation to events in
Donbas. But the law is also an open violation of Ukraine’s
own Constitution, in particular part 2 of article 10,

19-145545/8

S/PV.8529

Ukraine

which states that Ukraine guarantees the freedom to
develop, use and protect Russian and other languages
of Ukrainian national minorities. Article 11 establishes
that the Government will assist in the development of
the ethnic, cultural, linguistic and religious identity of
the native peoples and national minorities of Ukraine.
According to article 22, any enactments of laws or
changes in existing legislation should not reduce the
content or scope of rights and freedoms. Article 24
states that citizens have equal constitutional rights
and freedoms and are equal before the law, including
linguistically. In addition, the new law is a violation
of article 6 of Ukraine’s law on national minorities,
which enables them to receive schooling in their native
language in State educational institutions. I should also
point out that the Ukrainian law was not submitted for
evaluation by the Venice Commission and does not
meet basic European standards.
It would be interesting to take advantage of this
occasion to ask our Belgian colleagues how they would
react if for some reason Brussels suddenly decided to
ban French or Flemish in their country, and how people
would react to that in Paris or The Hague. And how
would our German colleagues react if German were
suddenly outlawed in Switzerland? Imagine if Swedish
were banned in Finland, where about 10 per cent of the
population speaks Swedish. I am giving these absurd
examples so that the Council can fully understand the
level of disappointment and concern that the Russianspeaking people of Ukraine are feeling now. The
enactment of this law is an obstacle to attaining peace
and social comity in Ukraine, leading to excessive
polarization of its peoples, not to mention the fact that for
a country that has declared its aspiration to the highest
European standards, such steps are unacceptable.
Against that backdrop, it is even more understandable
why the Crimeans made a historic choice to rejoin
Russia and thereby preserve the possibility of using
the Russian language, which is the mother tongue of an
overwhelming majority of the peninsula’s inhabitants.
Incidentally, Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar are also
State languages in Crimea, and the representatives of
those communities, however few their numbers, have
no problems preserving their identity.
I propose that we undertake a frank, impartial and
fair assessment of the Ukrainian law and the linguistic
inquisition it provides for with the aim of prevent
any further deterioration in the social and political
situation in Ukraine, which is creating a real risk of
6/8

20/05/2019

civil confrontation throughout the country, not just in
the east.
Lastly, in spite of the fact that we did not have a
full discussion of this issue in the Council today, we
are not disappointed. In their attempt not to allow a
discussion, the members have once again demonstrated
their hypocrisy with regard to discussing Ukraine in
the Council, a subject they have often convened us
for. They felt that their Ukrainian protégés would find
the subject of today’s meeting would be unpleasant,
and the result clearly highlighted the true goals of the
outgoing Ukrainian Government, which are to sow
enmity between Russians and Ukrainians and drive
two brother peoples even further apart. They have
thereby once again confirmed before the whole world
that they have no interest in Ukraine and Ukrainians.
They are concerned only about their geopolitical aims
and their ability to inflict even more pain on Russia. I
thank them from the bottom of my heart for such a clear
demonstration of double standards.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): Belgium was compelled to vote against the
adoption of the agenda today. We have called several
times for today’s meeting to be postponed for a few days,
for two reasons. First, there is a lack of information on
the law in question and we wanted delegations to be
able to prepare as well as possible. Secondly, as has
been noted, the new President of Ukraine took office
today. We do not feel that holding a briefing on the very
day he takes office creates an environment conducive to
resuming dialogue. We regret that such considerations
were not taken into account, which is what led us to
vote against holding a briefing today.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
letter from the Permanent Representative of Russia
addressed to the President of the Security Council and
contained in document S/2014/264 is an item on the
Council’s agenda. Russia, as a member of the Security
Council, asked for a meeting to be held under this agenda
item and proposed a time for the meeting, in line with
the rules of procedure. China therefore supports the
decision by Indonesia, President of the Council for this
month, to convene a meeting this afternoon. We regret
the fact that the meeting cannot be held as scheduled.
We hope that Council members will respect one another,
maintain their solidarity and effectively implement and
fulfil their obligation to maintain international peace
and security. China voted in favour of the provisional
agenda based on the following three considerations.
19-14554

20/05/2019

Ukraine

First, on the question of Ukraine, China has
always maintained an objective and impartial position,
respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all countries, including Ukraine.
Secondly, China believes that the parties concerned
should work to implement resolution 2202 (2015) and
the Minsk agreements comprehensively, keep to the
general direction of a political settlement and actively
seek a comprehensive, lasting and balanced solution
to the issue of Ukraine. The situation in Ukraine has
a complex background, both historically and today.
China supports all parties concerned in their efforts
to resolve their differences as soon as possible and
reach a final settlement that is acceptable to the parties
through dialogue and negotiations, taking into account
and accommodating the legitimate concerns of all the
various regions and ethnic groups in Ukraine.
Thirdly, and more importantly, we believe that the
Council should play a constructive role by creating an
external environment conducive to the proper resolution
of the relevant issues, promoting peace, stability and
development in Ukraine and achieving harmonious
coexistence among Ukraine’s various ethnic groups,
as well as peaceful coexistence between Ukraine and
other countries in the region.
Ms. Tshabalala (South Africa): We supported the
request for this meeting on the basis of consistency,
having acceded to requests from other delegations
for briefings on matters that they regard as urgent
and important. We also support the meeting based on
the fact that Ukraine is on the agenda of the Security
Council and on rule 2 of the provisional rules of
procedure, which provides for such a meeting.
With regard to the matter brought to our attention
today, South Africa continues to encourage all the
parties to strengthen all their diplomatic efforts to avert
an escalation of tensions and work for an inclusive,
sustainable and peaceful solution based on cooperation
and dialogue. We want to encourage all the parties
to approach their dialogue in a spirit of compromise,
in order to move the process forward. My delegation
would like to reiterate that a failure to implement
the existing agreements will unfortunately lead to
unintended consequences. In this regard, we emphasize
the obligations of all the parties to fully implement their
respective commitments under the Minsk agreements,
which provide the most promising road map for the
peaceful settlement of the current hostilities, including

S/PV. 8529

in eastern Ukraine, and to advance the cause of peace
and stability in the border region.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I should like to respond
to the accusation that we are applying double standards
and to say that we are very consistent in our policy
here. As my French colleague said earlier, we were not
against the agenda item, we just wanted to postpone it.
Why did we want to postpone it? Because today is the
day on which President Zelensky assumes office. But
Russia insisted on holding it today.
To come back to what I said about consistency,
Russia is very consistent. It is very consistent, because
right after President Zelensky won the election, as a
first welcoming step Russia announced its new decree
on passport procedures and, in a cynical move, saw
it signed by the President on the day on which the
United Nations celebrated the International Day of
Multilateralism and Diplomacy for Peace. So having this
debate today, and insisting on having it today, is again
consistent with Russian policy, which is to welcome the
new Ukrainian President with an act of intimidation.
I should point out that as my Russian colleague
said, it is not a Russian-Ukrainian conflict but an
internal Ukrainian conflict. However, I also want to
remind members that four years and two months ago,
when the Minsk agreements were signed — and today
Russia has been invoking the Minsk agreements and
their implementation — a ceasefire was agreed to, but
it was Russian forces that violated that agreement on
the very first day by attacking the town of Debaltseve
and fighting until it was taken. So it was violated from
the very beginning, and to this very day the Russian
troops and their allies have not respected the ceasefire.
To this very day there has been no withdrawal of heavy
weapons, and we know where those heavy weapons
come from. To this very day — and we heard this last
time, when Mr. Apakan, the head of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
Special Monitoring Mission, briefed the Council (see
S/PV.8516) — Russia’s allies in Luhansk and Donetsk
are making the lives of the OSCE observers very
difficult by obstructing their work.
So instead of appealing here for Minsk to be
implemented, I think that Russia should focus on itself
and ensure that its allies actually implement what is
contained in the Minsk agreements — establishing a
ceasefire, withdrawing heavy weapons and allowing the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to actually do its job.

19-145547/8

S/PV.8529

Ukraine

There is perhaps one point on which we can agree, which
is to return to the Minsk agreements and to Normandy
format meetings and to make real, substantive progress.
But that progress can be achieved only if Russia and
its allies actually respect the ceasefire, withdraw heavy
weapons from where they are supposed be withdrawn,
and allow the OSCE Mission to do its work.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): We fully support all
the arguments presented by the representative of the
United Kingdom. The statement just delivered by the
Russian Federation pertained to substance and was not
an explanation of vote.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I will be very brief, Mr. President. Today we
have witnessed an attempt to introduce censorship into
the Security Council. We do not consider that the way it
was done helps to maintain a businesslike atmosphere in
the Security Council. That is my first point. Secondly,
I have no illusions that I will succeed in changing the
views of my German colleague about who is complying
with the Minsk agreements and who is not. He will still
say that he sees things the way he sees them, which is
apparently through the prism of the hourglass, which
somewhat distorts his perspective, although it is true
that it is no longer in the Security Council Chamber.
I wanted to ask one question and make one
comment. It is a rhetorical question, because the answer
is obvious. I want to ask the Permanent Representative
of Germany where he saw any intimidation of President
Zelensky in our statement. Perhaps he did not listen to
us very carefully. On the contrary, we said that with
respect to the issue that we wanted to consider today,
President Zelensky had demonstrated good instincts,

8/8

20/05/2019

and not merely good instincts but good sense, which
was completely absent in the preceding President.
Secondly, we have taken note of the view expressed
by several delegations to the effect that today’s discussion
was not well timed, but that there is nothing to prevent
us from discussing the issue at an appropriate moment.
We reserve the right to return to this issue when the
Council feels that the time has come to discuss it. We
would like to think that the most appropriate time will
be when that law enters into force. We are grateful for
the suggestion.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Indonesia.
We note that the request from the Russian delegation
was addressed to the Council. In accordance with rule
2 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, “[t]he
President shall call a meeting of the Security Council at
the request of any member of the Security Council”. The
President has done so in previous cases, as requested by
various members of the Council.
At the same time, we strongly believe that the
discussion in the Council can be efficient and effective
only if all Council members have had enough time to
consider all developments in the field. Moreover, the
discussion can be effective and productive only if all
members of the Council are united in the decision to
proceed with the discussion.
Based on those considerations, we abstained in the
voting on the provisional agenda of this meeting.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

19-14554
