S/2012/402

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 June 2012
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
1.
The members of the Security Council reaffirm their commitment to enhancing
the efficiency of the Council’s work and agree on the following:
Conference resources
2.
While ensuring the capacity to hold Council meetings at any time and at short
notice, in accordance with rules 1 and 2 of its provisional rules of procedure, the
members of the Security Council, during their respective presidencies, should
ordinarily request the Secretariat to plan not more than four days per week of
Council business, with Fridays normally being reallocated to facilitate the work of
the Council’s subsidiary organs.
3.
Where appropriate, the members of the Council should ordinarily seek to avoid
the need for draft resolutions or other documents to be translated over the weekend.
Interactivity
4.
The members of the Security Council encourage the President of the Council,
with the assistance of the Secretariat, to actively promote additional appropriate
measures to increase interactivity and a more efficient use of time in briefings
during informal consultations of the whole.
5.
The members of the Security Council intend to resort more often to the use of
video teleconferencing for briefing the Council, where appropriate, while preserving
a balanced approach between video teleconferencing and briefings in person,
including during open meetings in the open chamber.
6.
The members of the Security Council encourage briefers to be succinct and to
focus on key themes rather than reading out lengthy pre-prepared statements. They
invite the Secretariat to follow the practice of circulating the briefing texts at
briefings and, in particular, where their statements contain extensive or complicated
factual information, encourage briefers to circulate written summaries of that
information, whenever possible in advance, to allow for a more focused discussion
during informal consultations. In cases where requested information or clarification
by Council members is not readily available during the briefing in informal
consultations, briefers may provide it at a later time.
7.
The members of the Security Council plan to minimize, to the extent possible,
the reading out of lengthy pre-prepared statements in informal consultations of the
whole.
12-36075 (E) 060612

*1236075*

S/2012/402

8.
The members of the Security Council encourage the use of practical measures
such as those above, which would make it feasible, whenever possible, to hold
informal consultations on two issues in a three-hour Council meeting, notably with
regard to situations routinely on its agenda, thereby promoting planning accuracy
and overall efficiency in the Council’s work.
9.
The members of the Security Council express general support for continuing
the practice of holding monthly “luncheons with the Secretary-General”. Members
of the Council and the Secretariat should continue to use the “any other business”
agenda item during informal consultations to raise issues of concern. The members
of the Security Council will continue their consideration of additional ways to
increase interactivity in informal consultations.
10. The members of the Security Council will consider ways and means of further
enhancing interaction with and seeking the views of non-Council members,
particularly the interested or concerned States, on issues on its agenda.

2

12-36075
