United Nations

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5916th meeting
Thursday, 19 June 2008, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Khalilzad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lammens
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. Pan Jingyu
Mr. Weisleder
Mr. Vilović
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Spatafora
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Rogachev
Ms. Lazouras
Ms. Cross
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Letter dated 4 June 2008 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2008/364)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-39081 (E)

*0839081*

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have just received letters from the
representatives of Mauritania and San Marino, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers, as I
indicated this morning, to limit their statements to no
more than five minutes, in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate the
texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Spain, to whom I now give the floor.
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain welcomes the choice of the topic of women and
peace and security for this thematic debate during the
United States presidency of the Security Council in the
month of June.
I should like to begin by saying that this morning
we heard some extremely important statements,
including those made by the Secretary-General, the
Deputy Secretary-General, the presiding officers of
important bodies of the Organization, the United States
Secretary of State and, in particular, such individuals
as the Ministers from Liberia and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as Major General
Cammaert, who have very closely experienced this
problem in various places, especially Africa.
Spain of course associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Slovenia
on behalf of the European Union.

2

Almost eight years after the Security Council’s
unanimous adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), and in
spite of greater awareness of the problem we are
addressing today and improvements in prevention
mechanisms, fully and effectively protecting women in
conflict situations continues to be an unfinished task.
Violations of the rights of women and girls in those
situations continue to increase, despite the legal
framework that the international community has put in
place and the growing awareness of the severity of the
problem. That awareness was reflected in the General
Assembly’s recent adoption of its resolution 62/134, on
eliminating rape and other forms of sexual violence in
conflict situations, of which Spain was a sponsor.
Responding comprehensively to the use of sexual
abuse as a weapon of war continues to pose a challenge
for the international community. Along with the ad hoc
measures adopted in extreme cases in given
peacekeeping operations, it is imperative that the
United Nations decisively address the question of how
to structure and institutionalize an efficient response by
the international community to this very serious
problem. Among other things, we need to wage a
frontal war against the impunity that, in too many
conflict situations, is enjoyed by those responsible for
committing crimes against civilians, especially women
and girls.
International law has appropriate mechanisms at
its disposal. Among them, the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court categorizes systematic
rape as a war crime and a crime against humanity and,
in certain circumstances, even an act of genocide.
Universal accession to the Rome Statute would be a
crucial step towards combating impunity; as is the
implementation of the principle of universal justice by
States that have incorporated that principle in their
legislation, as Spain has.
With regard to my country, and in the broader
framework of the policy of equality that my
Government has promoted and strongly defends, in
November 2007 Spain adopted a national action plan to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) within the context of
the objectives of Spain’s organic law for effective
equality between men and women. In line with
resolution 1325 (2000), Spain’s action plan reflects the
beliefs that peace is inextricably linked to equality
between men and women and that women’s equal
access and full participation in power structures and
their complete involvement in efforts to prevent and
08-39081

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

resolve conflicts are essential for the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security.
In that regard, allow me to briefly refer to some
of the measures that the Government of Spain has
adopted to respond to the pending challenges. Those
measures focus on six basic objectives: promoting the
presence of women in peace missions in which Spain
participates; mainstreaming the gender perspective in
all phases of those missions; specific gender training of
personnel participating in missions; full respect for the
human rights of women and girls in conflict situations;
promoting the principle of equality in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes; and
promoting greater participation by civil society groups
in this area.
Spain supports the establishment of special units
within peacekeeping missions to specifically cater for
women and girls who have been victims of sexual
violence. Such units should be composed of specialized
personnel and, moreover, should serve as coordination
centres for the activities both of the United Nations
system and of the donor community as a whole.
With regard to cases where crimes against women
and girls have been committed by personnel of United
Nations peace missions, the Organization has now
begun to provide an integrated response to the
problem. In that connection, we welcome the General
Assembly’s recent adoption of its resolution 62/214,
the Comprehensive Strategy on Assistance and Support
to Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by United
Nations Staff and Related Personnel. The Government
of Spain firmly supports the zero-tolerance policy on
this matter.
Spain is determined to promote new efforts to
implement the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000).
We are also finalizing an action plan on women and
peacebuilding aimed at all actors participating in
Spain’s system of cooperation for development. The
plan, which will not disregard the status of women as
specific potential victims of violence, will highlight the
particular importance of women as contributors to the
peaceful settlement of conflicts.
In a similar vein, the third meeting of African and
Spanish women working for a better world — which
took place in Niamey last May under the sponsorship
of the Governments of Spain and Niger and which
included the participation of women leaders and
representatives from most African countries, as well as

08-39081

international bodies — adopted a final declaration that,
among other things, stated that the role of women in
peacebuilding and conflict prevention processes must
be recognized and supported, including through the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The Niamey meeting also called for the
establishment of a multi-donor gender and
development fund that would be managed by the
United Nations Development Fund for Women. Spain
will contribute €50 million to that fund.
In conclusion, Spain fully supports the draft
resolution before the Council, of which we are a
sponsor. We hope that it will be adopted unanimously.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Graham (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes this opportunity to focus on women and
peace and security, and once again reaffirms its strong
support for resolution 1325 (2000). New Zealand is
committed to seeking ways to enhance and strengthen
the implementation of the resolution through our
development cooperation programmes, peacekeeping
efforts and domestic policies.
Resolution
1325
(2000)
remains
the
internationally accepted blueprint for a multifaceted
response to the issues facing women in conflict and
post-conflict reconstruction. It has played an
invaluable part in highlighting the important role of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
New Zealand welcomes increased Security
Council attention to the reality of sexual violence
during conflict and to the need to end impunity for
crimes, including sexual violence. Sadly, sexual
violence continues unabated in conflict and postconflict situations around the world. It is a gross
violation of women’s human rights, which further
exacerbates the vulnerability of women and girls in
times of conflict. Sexual violence is an attack not only
on the dignity of women but also on the peace process:
it raises significant barriers to reconciliation and peace.
New Zealand attaches great importance to the need to
eliminate such violence.
We welcome the advances that have been made in
these areas by the United Nations and Member States.
We strongly endorse the Secretary-General’s
forthcoming report on all forms of violence against
women. New Zealand has actively supported General

3

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

Assembly resolutions on the intensification of efforts
to eliminate all forms of violence against women and
on eliminating rape and other forms of sexual violence
in all their manifestations, including in conflict and
related situations.
New Zealand’s response to resolution 1325
(2000) is proactive and includes a number of specific
steps to encourage implementation both domestically
and internationally. Here are four examples of that.
First, New Zealand is committed to encouraging
women to undertake assignments on peacekeeping
missions. Women from the New Zealand Defence
Force, New Zealand Police and our wider society are
an integral part of New Zealand’s regional, United
Nations and other international peacekeeping efforts.
This includes women working in high-risk areas, such
as Afghanistan, and on operational missions, such as in
Timor-Leste. Furthermore, up to 30 per cent of all of
our police peacekeeping deployments are female —
among the highest rate in the world.
Secondly, the New Zealand Defence Force has
worked hard to integrate women at all levels and in all
trades of the Force, including combat. Its diversity
strategy recognizes the full value of integrating women
into the Defence Force and the benefits of having
women at more senior levels.
Thirdly, New Zealand attaches priority to
promoting women’s rights through the delivery of
official development assistance. Gender-based violence
is a core focus area for New Zealand’s International
Aid and Development Agency (NZAID). NZAID
supports a number of initiatives in the Pacific region
aimed at empowering women and mitigating their
exposure to violence. For example, New Zealand is
currently involved in the Pacific Prevention of
Domestic Violence Programme, a joint initiative of
NZAID, the New Zealand Police and the Pacific
Islands Chiefs of Police organization. It seeks to tackle
domestic violence and influence social change.
Fourthly, the NZAID conflict and peacebuilding
policy identifies women and girls in conflict and postconflict areas as a priority group for attention and
specifically includes the need to provide support for
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It
highlights the gender impact of conflict and the role of
women in peacebuilding.

4

In conclusion, New Zealand commends you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity for this debate on
resolution 1325 (2000), but we agree that progress
towards achieving its major goals has been slow and
uneven. There remains an urgent need to increase
political commitment and resources to ensure its
systematic implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Ms. Jahan (Bangladesh): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
women and peace and security, an issue of particular
interest to the delegation of Bangladesh. Allow me to
recall, with a modicum of pride, that Bangladesh was
closely associated with the elaboration and adoption of
that landmark resolution, resolution 1325 (2000), as a
then-member of the Council.
Women and girls are the main victims of conflict
situations. The inherent discrimination and inequalities
that women suffer, by and large, can be and often are
further deepened in post-conflict situations. Also, in
peace and conflict resolution processes, women are the
ones who are the most deprived. Their voices are not
fully listened to, or even heard. The international
community has been increasingly forthcoming in its
resolve to undertake concerted measures to prevent
gender-based violence.
However, eight years since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), sexual violence persists in
conflict situations and in peace. We need to reflect
further on how best we can address the issues of sexual
violence, including its root causes. We need to analyse
the challenges and how those can be overcome. There
is no denying the fact that we need to ensure adequate
representation of women at all levels of decisionmaking in conflict prevention and in post-conflict
reconstruction and rehabilitation. The true measure of
women’s participation in peace negotiations is not
through numbers, but through power in decisionmaking. In the consolidation of peace, although the
role of women remains a vital factor, it is often
ignored.
The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
has recorded some progress. We hope that the
remaining shortcomings will be addressed in the
updated 2008-2009 action plan. A number of
constraints persist. There is an inadequate
understanding of the gender dimension in conflict

08-39081

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

situations. That leads to gaps in capacity at the
institutional and organizational levels to address
various provisions of the resolution. Without adequate
attention to and understanding of gender relations and
inequalities, women will continue to remain excluded
from peacebuilding initiatives. As a result of such
situations, their needs are not fully understood. We
need to further intensify our efforts in incorporating the
gender perspective at all levels of peacebuilding. We
also need to create expertise to address the issues
related to sexual violence. One way to augment
capacity is to facilitate women’s participation in both
formal and informal negotiations in the peace process.
The availability of gender-disaggregated data is
particularly important in understanding the situation of
women and girls who are victims of war and conflict. A
focused examination of issues specifically related to
violence against women is also important in the
formulation of policy guidelines. That is an exercise
that will assist in undertaking preventive measures.
The sharing of experiences, good practices and lessons
learned on a regular basis is useful not only in
sustaining peace but also in guiding policy measures.
Peacekeeping operations are no longer limited to
military activities. They now have broader mandates to
assist in elections, monitor human rights and carry out
police functions. Multifaceted peacekeeping operations
thus have great potential in addressing the security of
women. To that effect, we have successfully integrated
the gender perspective in some aspects of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. However, in postconflict peacebuilding efforts much remains to be
done. As a member of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Bangladesh remains vigilant in our focus on the
provisions of resolution 1325 (2000).
As one of the largest contributors of troops to
United Nations peacekeeping operations, Bangladesh is
ever conscious of our responsibility to incorporate
gender dimensions, particularly the essential elements
of resolution 1325 (2000). At present, Bangladesh has
more than 30 women police personnel deployed in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. The
percentage of women as peacekeepers and police from
Bangladesh are set to increase in coming days.
We recognize that a strong Security Council
mechanism is needed to monitor the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Establishing a working group
on women and peace and security might be useful and

08-39081

a good option in that regard. It is our belief that
integrating the gender perspective across the United
Nations system will keep in view geographical,
cultural and ethnic factors. Adequate resources should
also be mobilized to that effect. The active
involvement of civil society and non-governmental
organizations is a sine qua non. We are of the view that
the role of the media in enhancing the integration of
women in peace processes is quite significant.
In conclusion, let me underline that ending
impunity is a must. However, it is more important —
indeed, crucial — to mobilize leadership, secure
accountability, pool adequate resources, identify
challenges and address root causes in protecting
women and girls in wartime, as well as in peacetime.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. De Klerk (Netherlands): Our thanks go to
you, Mr. President, and to Secretary Rice for having
organized this important debate and for providing an
opportunity for the Netherlands to make some remarks
in addition to Slovenia’s intervention on behalf of the
European Union.
In 2000, resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security was adopted unanimously by the
Council; in 2002, the Rome Statute entered into force;
in 2005, the Peacebuilding Commission was
established; and, most recently, the Secretary-General
launched the Campaign to End Violence against
Women by 2015. Despite all these developments, little
has changed on the ground. Sexual violence against
women in conflict continues unabated and is at
unacceptable levels. The incidence of rape is on the
increase.
For the Netherlands Government, women’s
empowerment is a top priority. Women’s rights are
everyone’s concern. The Netherlands is therefore
taking a firm stand against the horrific violations of
women’s rights and human dignity that are taking place
in countries such as the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Sudan. That is why the Netherlands
supports the United Nations Trust Fund to End
Violence against Women. Also, last December, the
Netherlands Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Defence and
the Interior and 15 civil society organizations agreed
on a national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000). An
increasing number of Member States are elaborating
similar action plans. We now need to focus on

5

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

implementation. We need to join forces. What should
we do?
First, we need to target men. Gender equality and
women’s empowerment cannot be achieved without the
involvement of men. Men need to talk to men, and they
have to speak openly to militia leaders, gang leaders
and sometimes the generals to be better role models. If
we want sexual violence to end, we need to raise
awareness among men about the consequences of their
actions. In situations of conflict, boys and men are
constantly confronted with models of violent
masculinity. Discussions should also take place
between men and women, with boys and girls, within
communities, to start the healing process and break the
cycle of sexual violence.
Secondly, acts of sexual violence should not go
unpunished. We owe this first and foremost to the
numerous victims. But everyone also should know that
if they commit such a crime, they will not and cannot
escape justice. Justice is imperative to ending
impunity. Governments need to take vigorous action.
National judicial systems should be strengthened in
order to ensure that such criminals are caught, tried and
effectively punished. If national systems fail to bring
perpetrators to justice, the International Criminal Court
comes into play. The Rome Statute clearly defines rape
and other forms of sexual violence, when committed as
part of a widespread or systematic attack against
civilians, as crimes against humanity. Fighting
impunity is also one of the key elements of the
resolution on all forms of violence against women that
the Netherlands and France present in the General
Assembly.
Thirdly, acts of violence against women are often
committed by soldiers — the very people who are
supposed to provide protection. The Netherlands
Ministry of Defence invests in promoting gender
equality in the armed forces. Gender training is
mandatory and is included in the curriculum of the
School for Peace Operations. We believe that all
peacekeeping troops and police contingents should be
given
comprehensive
gender
training
before
deployment. Moreover, gender awareness training
should be mandatory for all persons in leadership
positions in conflict and peace building situations,
including civil, military and diplomatic representatives.
Additionally, the United Nations should make an extra
effort to appoint more women to senior leadership
positions in peacekeeping missions. The United

6

Nations should also vigorously implement its zerotolerance policy. Commanders should shoulder on their
responsibility and arrest perpetrators. In this respect, I
would like to highlight the recent report of Save the
Children United Kingdom about widespread sexual
abuse of children and women by aid workers, and
above all, by United Nations peacekeepers. It is
intolerable that persons who should be providing
assistance or protection on behalf of the international
community take advantage of the situation to sexually
abuse women and children.
Finally, women are not just victims. It cannot be
repeated often enough that women and women’s
organizations have to be included in peace and
reconciliation processes. They also need to be involved
in formulating justice and reparation programmes,
including post-rape care.
The Netherlands very much welcomes this open
debate and commends the presidency of the United
States for its effort to put this heinous crime so
prominently on the agenda of the Council. Sexual
violence is linked to peace and security. The adoption
of a draft resolution co-sponsored by the Netherlands
will be an important step in recognizing that link. We
look forward to a report of the Secretary-General
which initiates a process to ensure follow-up by the
Security Council and to improve coordination of
United Nations activities on the ground. Finally, we
hope that this process will also include the monitoring
of actions taken by parties to implement their
responsibilities.
We cannot tolerate what is happening to mothers,
daughters, wives and grandmothers. Sexual violence in
armed conflict has to stop. It is my responsibility, it is
your responsibility; it is the responsibility of us all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Carmon (Israel): At the outset, allow me to
thank the President for having convened this important
debate and also to thank Secretary of State Rice for
presiding over this morning’s debate on such a pressing
issue. I also thank you, Mr. President, for your
leadership during this month of June. My delegation
wishes to thank the Secretary-General, the Deputy
Secretary-General and the President of the General
Assembly for their statements, and especially the
former Force Commander of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of

08-39081

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

the Congo for sharing insights from his personal
experience and helping us to better understand the
challenges before us.

world’s children, at the earliest stages of life, on the
rights, dignity and worth of every human being,
without regard to their gender.

Eight years ago, the Council adopted landmark
resolution 1325 (2000), which, for the first time,
addressed the impact of war on women. Israel
continues to support the full implementation of this
resolution. While progress has been made in some
aspects, much more work needs to be done. One aspect
in particular, which is the basis of today’s debate, calls
on parties to armed conflict to take special measures to
protect women and girls from gender-based violence,
particularly rape and other forms of sexual abuse, and
emphasizes the responsibility of States to put an end to
impunity.

At the recent Wilton Park conference,
recommendations were made that sexual violence be
viewed as a security issue and that the international
community should identify the circumstances under
which sexual violence is a threat to national and
international peace and security. In this context, the
Council can play a greater role in ensuring that
peacekeeping mandates specifically refer to the
prevention of sexual violence, that peacekeepers are
appropriately trained and informed about sexual
violence and that sanctions and other tools are used
against perpetrators. In this regard, my delegation fully
supports the Secretary-General’s call for peacekeepers
to be part of the solution and not part of the problem.

While sexual violence in armed conflict has
occurred throughout history, brutal and systematic rape
has become increasingly commonplace in some
conflict and post-conflict areas. Moreover, sexual
violence as a weapon of war is now perpetuated with
almost universal impunity in some conflicts. Such
actions not only constitute gross violations of human
rights, but they also undermine confidence in peace
processes and raise huge barriers to reconciliation.
While the international community has
recognized that sexual violence can amount to a war
crime, crimes against humanity, or constitutive acts
with respect to genocide, numerous challenges remain
with respect to ending sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict.
One particular obstacle is victims’ reluctance to
come forward. Survivors and victims of sexual and
gender-based violence often feel ostracized, as they are
forced to assume guilt and shame. This silence not only
harms the victims and their families, but also leads to
faulty statistics. Sources in the field confirm that,
indeed, the number of incidents of sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict is greatly underreported.
Hence victims must be empowered to reclaim their
human dignity. States should enforce the rule of law,
bring the perpetrators to justice and end the cycle of
impunity.
Similarly, a change in societal attitudes and
norms regarding sexual violence must be effected,
beginning with, as I just mentioned, the bringing of
perpetrators to justice. Ending impunity will also
encourage victims to come forward to seek justice and
rehabilitation. At the same time, we must educate the

08-39081

Indeed, resolution 1804 (2008) of 13 March
2008, which imposed a travel ban and asset freeze on
individuals in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
who commit serious violations of international law,
including sexual violence against children, is a good
example of how the Council can act more effectively.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs reported more than 32,000 registered cases of
rape and other forms of sexual violence in the province
of South Kivu, Democratic People’s Republic of the
Congo, alone.
Lastly, we must consider the effects of sexual
violence not only on the victims, but also on the
children born of mass rape, sexual slavery and sexual
exploitation. The impact of armed conflict on children
born of rape and exploitation has economic, health and
social implications that must be addressed.
Sexual violence is not an inevitable outcome of
conflict. It can be stopped. States, regional bodies, nongovernmental organizations and even individuals all
have specific roles to play in seeing that an end is put
to this detestable practice.
The Council, in particular, can focus on reporting
on sexual violence and seek to fully implement
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. In that context, my delegation welcomes and
is pleased to co-sponsor the draft resolution currently
before the Council. For its part, Israel pledges to
continue to fully implement resolution 1325 (2000) and
to work to promote women’s rights in all of its political
and development work. Doing so, in concert with

7

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

global efforts, will help to build and sustain an
international commitment to prevent and respond to
sexual violence in conflict situations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.
Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): I have the honour of
delivering the following statement on behalf of all five
Nordic countries — Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Norway and Sweden — each of which is sponsoring
the draft resolution today.
First of all, allow me to thank the United States
presidency of the Security Council for having
organized this open debate.
Women are often victims of armed conflict, but
they can also play a central role in preventing and
resolving violent conflict as actors in conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. The ongoing high
incidence of horrific sexual violence against women
and girls in conflicts demands the attention of the
international community as a human rights matter and
as a question of ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law. It is an issue that has a direct bearing
on peace and security, and it is therefore very timely
and appropriate that the Security Council is addressing
the issue once again. Landmark resolution 1325 (2000)
continues to require full implementation.
It is clear that the use of rape and sexual violence
exacerbates conflicts and also perpetuates them long
after active hostilities are over. Such crimes inflict
indelible scars on individuals, families and societies,
which makes reconciliation and peacebuilding much
more difficult. The scars of sexual violence on the
psyche of the victims, their families, the children it
often results in, and even the perpetrators, are the
explosive remnants of war of the mind, erupting
unpredictably, doing long-term damage and making
reconstruction of a sustainable peace very difficult
indeed.
A climate of impunity on sexual violence
continues to exist. We must all join forces to end
impunity for such crimes. The Security Council should
respond urgently to incidents of sexual violence in
conflicts and bring measures to bear to ensure that
parties to armed conflict understand clearly that they
will pay a heavy price for employing or permitting
sexual violence. All Member States must do their part
in ensuring that individuals suspected of such crimes

8

are brought to justice in accordance with the necessary
legislation at the national level. We also call on States
to cooperate fully with the International Criminal
Court, whose Statute explicitly states that rape and
other forms of sexual violence can be prosecuted as
war crimes or crimes against humanity. Amnesties
should not extend to crimes of sexual violence.
Clear guidance for peacekeeping missions is also
needed on how to make operational the mandate to
protect civilians, including women and girls, from
sexual violence. That approach calls for strong and
specific mandates from the Security Council, as well as
sufficient means and more comprehensive reporting by
the United Nations system. There is a need to make full
use of available expertise, including from human rights
mechanisms such as the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on Violence against Women.
All Member States should ensure that training of
peacekeepers includes training on resolution 1325
(2000). Furthermore, it is vital that peacebuilding and
reconstruction plans include comprehensive victimprotection and support mechanisms, such as shelters
for the victims and their families and gender units
within the police.
A key element in ensuring the protection of
women and girls from sexual violence during conflicts
and in post-conflict situations is the participation of
women in decision-making processes in all areas and at
all levels. Whether it involves practical protection
measures, such as the gathering of fuel in safety, or
more complex issues, such as the reintegration of
combatants into society, the input and experiences of
women are essential to success and sustainability.
The participation of women is therefore directly
relevant to the maintenance of peace and security. In
addition to increasing the presence of women on
military and police forces, new avenues must be
explored on how to deploy more women in
peacekeeping missions, including by establishing
civilian observer components. Stronger efforts must be
made by the United Nations to include women in
discussions on the management and resolution of
conflicts and in peacebuilding, including in rebuilding
societies, security sector reform, transitional justice
and post-conflict political and economic processes.
The Secretary-General and relevant United
Nations bodies should also redouble their efforts to
recruit women to high-level positions. The United

08-39081

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

Nations system as a whole should intensify its efforts
to recruit more women at all levels. The same appeal
goes out to all States Members of the United Nations.
It is our responsibility to ensure that the United
Nations has a solid base from which to recruit.
The Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy on
sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping missions should continue and be
strengthened. There must be no impunity for
peacekeepers either. Again, wider participation by
women in such missions would help. The highly
successful Indian women’s police corps in Liberia is
encouraging in this regard, as is the high percentage of
women in the group of Nigerian police that Nordic and
African police have jointly trained for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. It is
also important to provide appropriate and recurrent
training to all personnel involved in peacekeeping
operations, including on ethical conduct and the zerotolerance policy.
Regional bodies are becoming increasingly
important actors under the mandate of the Security
Council in addressing regional issues of peace and
security. Such bodies should be closely linked to the
discussions and decisions in relation to women, peace
and security. The Secretary-General is encouraged to
take a leading role in this matter.
The Security Council should seriously consider
the establishment of a working group to monitor
conflict situations where sexual violence is widely or
systematically used as a weapon of war, as is the case
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Sudan. Such a working group could assist the Council
in reacting rapidly to urgent cases and making
proposals on appropriate actions, including emergency
obstetric and other sexual and reproductive health
services and measures to prevent and treat HIV and
other sexually transmitted infections, psychosocial
support, as well as early measures to enforce the rule
of law and crime victims’ access to justice.
We support the proposal made by the United
States in its concept paper that Security Council
mandates should be strengthened to prevent sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict and provide
greater protection for women and girls from
widespread and systematic attacks by parties to armed
conflicts. This should be dealt with systematically both
when mandates for ongoing operations come up for

08-39081

renewal and when mandates for new operations are
adopted.
We further encourage the Council to follow up on
the recommendation by the Secretary-General of
developing a monitoring mechanism to improve its
contribution to preventing and redressing violence
against women in armed conflict.
Finally, all the Nordic countries have completed
or are in the final stages of completing national
implementation plans for resolution 1325 (2000) and
encourage other Member States to do the same, as a
matter of urgency. We also suggest that lessons learned
from countries that have such a plan be used in
supporting other countries in preparing their own
plans.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): On behalf of the
Nigerian delegation, I would like to commend the
United States presidency of the Security Council for
having initiated this open debate on women and peace
and security, with a focus on sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict.
Let me reiterate my delegation’s full appreciation
of the concern raised in the concept paper on the
endemic nature of sexual violence against women in
situations of armed conflict, in particular the use of
rape as a weapon of war.
My delegation views violent sexual acts such as
rape, sexual assault, sexual slavery, forced marriages
and forced prostitution are crimes against humanity.
For us, these crimes are as despicable as they are
condemnable, and it does not matter whether they are
committed in time of peace or in time of war. Such
crimes affect not only the victims, but also families and
entire communities. They traumatize people and
degrade lives, leaving behind stigma, humiliation and
social exclusion.
We are equally worried that eight years after the
adoption of landmark Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), which both serves as an action framework and
reinforces other existing mechanisms, such as the
Convention on the Elimination on All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and the Beijing
Declaration, progress towards its implementation has
been slow and uneven.

9

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

Indeed, the objectives of the resolution, including
the need to enhance women’s participation in decisionmaking, integrating gender perspectives into
peacekeeping operations, protecting women from
gender-based violence and mainstreaming gender into
United Nations programme mechanisms, remain
largely unfulfilled. The Nigerian delegation therefore
welcomes this new milestone resolution, to be adopted
later, as a follow-up to resolution 1325 (2000).

and girls and in the number of women pursuing careers
in male-dominated occupations. The country’s national
health policies and plans have also become more
gender-sensitive, and, in the case of HIV/AIDS and
other infectious diseases, due consideration of the
special needs of women have become standard policy
objectives. Nigeria has also made remarkable progress
in the implementation of the Millennium Development
Goals as they relate to women and children.

However, similar to resolution 1325 (2000), the
critical challenge is how to ensure its steady and
widespread implementation, particularly in conflict and
post-conflict areas.

Notwithstanding these modest efforts, the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in Africa’s
conflict environments remains fitful. The most critical
challenge, as we see it, is the concrete implementation
of special measures to protect women and children
against sexual violence and the prosecution of those
responsible for large-scale violations of women’s
rights.

In Africa, the most significant achievements
under resolution 1325 (2000) have taken place in postconflict environments where women now enjoy
considerably enhanced role in decision-making.
Strengthened by the African Union’s 2005 Protocol on
the Rights of Women and the 2004 Heads of States
Solemn Declaration on Gender Equity in Africa, a
number of countries have scaled up women’s
participation in politics and decision-making.
Through specific measures such as a gender
quota and a minimum threshold, some countries have
accelerated the integration of women into national
decision-making processes. Increasingly, women are
also being included in national and continental peace
and security initiatives.
Nigeria has signed and ratified the Protocol on
the Rights of Women in Africa. It has also taken
special measures to guarantee the participation of
women in governance and decision-making. At both
the federal and State levels, efforts are being made to
outlaw discriminatory customary or traditional
practices that are harmful to the physical and mental
health of women and girls.
The federal Government is also working closely
with traditional rulers and non-governmental and faithbased organizations to change long-held attitudes and
negative perceptions about women and to inculcate in
young men respect for the fundamental rights of
women and girls. School curricula and public
enlightenment campaigns are also focusing on positive
gender values, including the promotion of gender
equality in all spheres.
The cumulative effect of those initiatives has led
to a significant increase in the literacy levels of women

10

Another important challenge is how to
institutionalize gender-sensitive policies through the
domestic implementation of relevant international
conventions and mechanisms, such as the Convention
on the Elimination on All Forms of Discrimination
against Women and the Beijing Platform for Action to
prevent violence against women.
In addition, the political will necessary for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) at the
national and regional levels is not evident in many
cases. The fact that there is no requirement in place to
ensure the universal observance of relevant
conventions and principles has created further room for
inconsistency among States.
My delegation considers it imperative that these
challenges be seen as constituting lessons learned that
should guide the United Nations as it seeks to put an
end to this unconscionable aspect of armed conflict. To
meet these challenges, the international community
must
have
a
clear
understanding
of
the
multidimensional nature of the problem to enable it to
take remedial action, as appropriate.
Our responsibilities must include preventing
sexual violence against women, providing protection
for them, assisting and caring for the children born of
rape, including those who are victimized by the culture
of impunity. Indeed, it is our responsibility to comfort
and heal the communities savaged by these crimes.
More importantly, we must strengthen punitive
measures so that perpetrators and those responsible for

08-39081

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

breaches are brought to justice. To enhance such
measures, there is a need for greater participation by
women in the civil and military components of
multilateral peace support operations.
We would also like to see gender sensitive
training imparted to male civil and military personnel
to foster the awareness of gender issues. The need to
integrate gender perspectives and training into
peacekeeping in Africa is critical, considering that well
over 80 per cent of United Nations peacekeepers are
currently deployed in Africa.
I have elaborated on some of the challenges we
face in protecting women from sexual violence in
situations of conflict. There are more. For instance, we
also need to strengthen dissemination, sensitization and
monitoring mechanisms in conflict zones. Conflict
monitoring and early warning systems are also needed
to help avert the prevalence of sexual violence during
and after conflicts. There is also a need to ensure
effective monitoring of the implementation of
humanitarian assistance in camps where women have
been known to be especially vulnerable.
Health and education programmes should be
developed to deal with the effects of sexual violence,
such as HIV/AIDS and psychological trauma.
Additionally, it is necessary to coordinate the efforts of
the relevant agencies and bodies involved in these
efforts by identifying the various actors, programmes
and activities relative to resolution 1325 (2000) in
Africa.
It is also important to make a clear commitment
to move the implementation of the resolution forward.
In this regard, we support the call for the SecretaryGeneral to periodically report to the Security Council
on the use of sexual violence against women in
situations of armed conflict. We also invite the
Secretary-General to utilize existing regional and
subregional resources such as the Economic
Community of West African States early warning
systems and security architecture to strengthen the
protection of women.
We also call on the United Nations to take a more
strategic view of this problem, with clear, actionoriented
commitments
to
ensure
measurable
improvements in the lives of victims.
The challenges we have outlined thus far are
daunting, but they are well within our capacity to

08-39081

address. We can prevent sexual violence and protect
victims because we all have a good idea what the
problems are, and their physical and social costs.
My delegation believes that, by working together,
we can also make perpetrators account for their
misdeeds. Today’s discussion is, therefore, a welcome
first step.
Once again, we thank the United States
delegation for initiating this dialogue and for laying
before us a very helpful draft resolution. My delegation
can associate itself with the draft resolution, and we
expect others to do the same.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I commend the United
States presidency on the initiative of convening this
open thematic debate on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), and express appreciation to
Ms. Rice for her participation and leadership.
This debate is rather timely, as we are witnessing
an increase in the reporting of cases of violence against
women around the globe. In the case of armed
conflicts, the shocking images broadcast by the media
are deeply disturbing and attest to the gravity of the
problem. It is simply despicable. Rape and all other
forms of sexual abuse must be vehemently condemned,
no matter their purpose, and perpetrators punished.
Our collective consternation and indignation must
lead to action. If we are to successfully face this most
daunting challenge, we need to design and implement
practical, concrete measures to adequately address the
issue, with the involvement of the international
community as a whole.
Current international instruments provide an
adequate framework and the necessary basis for such
work. The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women, the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocols
are all important references in the effort we need to
undertake. Also relevant are the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and pertinent instruments
of international humanitarian law, in particular the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War.

11

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) must
play a central role in such a strategy. It should be
carried out in conjunction with that of all General
Assembly resolutions on violence against women, the
Agreed Conclusions of the Commission on the Status
of Women, as well as the 1974 General Assembly
Declaration on the Protection of Women and Children
in Emergency and Armed Conflict, in accordance with
which all forms of repression and cruel and inhuman
treatment of women and children committed by
belligerents in the course of military operations or in
occupied territories shall be considered criminal.
Our common efforts on the ground can also
benefit from the accumulated knowledge, experience
and expertise of the United Nations system, in
particular the relevant agencies, programmes and funds
of the Organization. They are invaluable partners in a
strategy to combat violence against women in armed
conflicts.
Ending impunity must also be part of our
collective efforts. No woman or girl victim of sexual
violence can reconstruct her life unless the cycle of
recurrence is broken. Beyond a lack of respect for the
human being, impunity signals the continuation of a
horrendous crime, which has multiplying negative
effects on family members and the community as a
whole.
For that reason, we must strengthen the crucial
role played by the International Criminal Court in
ensuring accountability and punishing perpetrators of
rape and other forms of gender-related crimes and
crimes of sexual violence, all considered crimes
against humanity, as defined in the Rome Statute.
An effective response to violence against women
requires a comprehensive approach in which peace and
security concerns are integrated into a human-rightsbased perspective. In that regard, empowering women
and girls must be at the centre of any effort to address
gender-based violence. The overall situation of women
and girls will improve only if equal participation in
decision-making at all levels is ensured.
In the specific case of armed conflicts, the fullfledged participation of women in peacebuilding
efforts is critical. In this respect, more interaction is
necessary between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council, under Article 65 of the
Charter. We should also make full use of the
possibilities of cooperation within the Peacebuilding

12

Commission,
which
can
contribute
to
the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). As we see
in the country-specific case of Guinea-Bissau,
peacebuilding can greatly benefit from women’s
perspectives and actions.
In the Americas, Brazil is involved in an initiative
of South-South cooperation carried out within the
scope of the Brazilian contribution to the consolidation
of peace in Haiti. This initiative, based on our domestic
experience, supports the implementation of the Haitian
national plan to prevent violence against women and to
address the needs of women victims of sexual violence.
It is developed through the exchange of experts and
good practices, with the support of the United Nations
Population Fund and OXFAM.
In concluding, I reiterate Brazil’s political and
practical commitment to international efforts designed
to end all forms of violence against women. My
delegation hopes that the Council’s adoption of the
draft resolution, “Women and peace and security:
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict”, will
help us to attain that goal.
The President: I call on the representative of
Switzerland.
Mr. Baum (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank the United States for organizing today’s open
debate and giving us the opportunity to speak on this
very important issue.
Sexual violence in armed conflict shows a very
serious gap in the protection of civilians that was
rightly recognized and addressed in resolution 1325
(2000). We look forward to the adoption today of the
draft resolution, of which we are co-authors, affirming
that the prevention of acts of sexual violence can
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security.
We are deeply troubled that sexual violence
against women and girls is still prevalent in situations
of armed conflict. Such conduct is unacceptable, and
even more so when committed by peacekeeping
personnel.
Switzerland has adopted an action plan for
national implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and
it attaches the highest priority to combating genderbased and sexual violence in the context of armed
conflict.

08-39081

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

Practical measures are urgently needed in order to
strengthen prevention of and protection against sexual
violence. To this end, the following four priority lines
of action should be considered.
First, Switzerland stresses the importance of
fighting against impunity. Acts of sexual violence must
not go unpunished. The prosecution of persons
suspected of having committed such acts is, first and
foremost, the task of States. However, when States are
unwilling or unable to prosecute acts of sexual
violence amounting to war crimes, crimes against
humanity or genocide, such cases must be referred to
the International Criminal Court. The Court clearly has
a crucial role to play in fighting impunity.
It is therefore essential to build up national law
enforcement capacities to ensure that States are able to
prosecute the perpetrators of sexual violence. Without
improved understanding of the root causes, the
mechanisms and the consequences of acts of sexual
violence, the perpetrators of gender-based and sexual
violence will continue to enjoy impunity.
Furthermore, disciplinary measures at the unit
commander level cannot be a substitute for military
criminal prosecution.
Secondly, systematic gender training should be
given to personnel working in the security sector,
including those in the armed forces, police and justice
systems, as well as United Nations personnel. Security
personnel must be able to respond in an appropriate
and timely manner to the different security needs of
women and men. It is therefore crucially important that
senior management personnel be included in gender
training programmes to ensure that dealing with sexual
violence against women forms an integral part of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We welcome
the specific references to the matter in the draft
resolution.
Thirdly, the Security Council should consider
establishing a monitoring mechanism to increase
accountability and ensure the integration of resolution
1325 (2000) into country-specific and related thematic
work. To this end, the Council should also set up a
structure for obtaining timely, accurate and reliable
information on sexual violence committed in situations
of armed conflict. United Nations field missions could
be entrusted with this task and thus serve as an early
warning system.

08-39081

In addition, the Security Council could ask the
Secretary-General to submit reports on best practices,
based on the expertise of specialized agencies or
programmes, such as the United Nations Development
Fund for Women and UNICEF, and take into account
the security assessments of local and international
women’s organizations.
Fourthly, the Security Council may wish to
consider the problem of sexual violence against women
and girls, as referred to in resolution 1325 (2000), in
conjunction with resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1674
(2006), on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
and resolution 1612 (2005), on children and armed
conflict.
Finally, Switzerland supports implementation of
the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy on this
issue and the establishment of conduct and disciplinary
units in all peacekeeping missions. Furthermore,
cooperation with the Office of Internal Oversight
Services should be strengthened. The goal is clear: all
United Nations personnel — military or civilian —
must be trained in the highest standards of conduct and
be held responsible for maintaining them.
The President: I
representative of Ireland.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Kavanagh (Ireland): I am grateful to the
Council for the opportunity to address it on the subject
of women and peace and security. My Government
commends the United States presidency of the Security
Council, under your able leadership, Mr. President, for
the work that it has invested in this important issue.
Ireland aligns itself with the statement made
earlier today by the Permanent Representative of
Slovenia on behalf of the European Union.
Eight years on from the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), it is indeed time to assess progress
towards achieving its major goals. The resolution has
helped to promote the equal participation and full
involvement of women in efforts to advance peace and
security. It has also sought to protect women and girls
from, and indeed to prevent, gender-based violence.
However, it remains a challenge to ensure that the
United Nations, both institutionally and through its
individual Member States, fully implements resolution
1325 (2000). Last October the Council regretted that

13

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

“gender-based violence, particularly rape, and
other forms of sexual abuse ... remain pervasive,
and in some situations have become systematic,
and have reached appalling levels of atrocity.”
(S/PRST/2007/40)
Such a grave situation requires an urgent and effective
response from the international community, in the first
place from the Security Council.
The Irish Government, for its part, is actively
engaged in promoting the role of women in conflict
resolution and post-conflict recovery. The recent
establishment of a major conflict-resolution dimension
within our Foreign Ministry has opened further
avenues for Ireland to support implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) in conflict and post-conflict
settings. Resolution 1325 (2000) is to be one of the
three cross-cutting themes which guide the work of a
new designated Conflict Resolution Unit in the
Ministry. Women’s participation in the Northern
Ireland peace process, together with the presence of a
strong research and activist base, will permit tangible
lessons to be drawn and shared internationally in
helping advance and implement the resolution 1325
(2000) agenda.
As Chair of the 12-member Human Security
Network for the period through May next year, Ireland
will focus its work on the theme of gender-based
violence. In line with the Beijing Platform for Action,
the promotion of gender equality and the elimination of
gender-based violence is a prominent feature of
Ireland’s aid policy and activities overseas, and of our
National Women’s Strategy at home.
In 2004, in response to reports particularly of
rape and sexual violence in the conflict in Darfur,
Ireland established a national Joint Consortium on
Gender-Based Violence. Mary Robinson, former
President of Ireland and former United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, has lent her valuable
support as a patron. This unique body marks the first
time in my country that human rights, development and
humanitarian
agencies
have
cooperated
with
Government agencies, including those in uniform, to
confront collectively the issue of gender-based
violence. Training on gender equality and protection
from such violence is provided to Irish peacekeepers at
the United Nations Training School Ireland, in our
Defence Forces Training Centre.

14

We support the leading role of the United Nations
in ending violence against women, including through
the new multi-year programme launched recently by
the Secretary-General. We strongly support, in
practical ways, the gender equality work of the United
Nations Development Programme, including the EightPoint Agenda for Women’s Empowerment and Gender
Equality in Crisis Prevention and Recovery.
I turn now to the very useful concept paper drawn
up by the United States presidency of the Council in
preparation for today’s debate. It correctly identifies
three priority areas for consideration: understanding
the problem; prevention and protection; and
consequences for accused perpetrators.
As far as understanding the problem is concerned,
Ireland encourages the Security Council to recognize
that sexual and other forms of gender-based violence in
conflict situations have direct and significant relevance
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
Accordingly, in our view the Council should ensure
systematic monitoring and analysis of such violence,
and, where appropriate, take steps, measures and action
to address it.
We also encourage the Council to request the
Secretary-General systematically to include in all
reports
on
conflict
situations
comprehensive
information about acts of gender-based violence,
including sexual violence, against women and girls.
Moreover, Ireland encourages the Council to request
the Secretary-General to reflect on ways to improve the
level and quality of such reporting, using benchmarks,
indicators and monitoring mechanisms.
On prevention and protection, Ireland would
encourage the Council to request the Secretary-General
to report to it on a heightened engagement of the
United Nations in stopping gender-based violence in
conflict situations. Such a report or study could draw
on United Nations action already under way and on
activities of non-governmental organizations and
women’s groups at the local, national and international
levels. Ireland supports the call for the appointment of
an independent expert to lead such a study.
We would also encourage the Council to ensure
that women at the local level can actively participate in
the design, implementation and evaluation of strategies
and programmes to meet their security needs, interests
and concerns.

08-39081

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

Ireland believes that there ought to be
consequences for perpetrators. Accountability by State
and non-State actors should be ensured, including
through effective prosecution and punishment.
Security sector reform and capacity-building for
police and the judicial sector are also called for in this
connection.
The inclusion of sexual violence offences in the
Statutes of the ad hoc international criminal tribunals,
and the considered jurisprudence of those tribunals,
has, over a short space of time, progressively
developed the law in this area in many important
respects. Rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution,
forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization and other
forms of sexual violence are now included within the
definitions of war crimes and crimes against humanity
found within the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. The Council can, of course, refer a
situation for investigation by the Prosecutor of the
Court — an institution which Ireland fully supports.
There should be wider application of best
practices for effective prevention and prosecution of
sexual crimes committed in situations of armed
conflict. Council mandates for conflict situations
should provide that local commanders and their
superiors in the military chain of command of armed
parties to conflict can be held accountable. All too
often, military commanders and other superiors fail to
take necessary and reasonable steps within their control
either to prevent sexual violence against civilians or to
punish the perpetrators of such crimes. Military
commanders and other superiors should be held
accountable for such serious acts of omission on their
part. Impunity can be reduced by ensuring that women
are involved to the greatest extent possible in peace
negotiations and in any associated amnesty provisions.
In conclusion, Ireland welcomes the intended
adoption later today of a draft resolution, which we are
pleased to co-sponsor, on this important issue. We
believe that it should help to empower women to fully
participate in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflict. It must be effectively
implemented to ensure that countless women and girls
in conflict situations receive more adequate and
effective protection from sexual violence.
Adoption of today’s draft resolution will
recognize that the use of sexual violence as a weapon
of war is a threat to sustainable international peace and

08-39081

security. And, under the law, principal responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
rests here, in this Chamber.
Ireland hopes, therefore, that the Security Council
will act on its own analysis and promote with all
necessary vigour wider respect for, and implementation
of, its resolutions so as to halt and eliminate sexual
violence against women and girls in situations of
conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Normandin (Canada): First, Mr. President,
on behalf of Canada I thank you for taking the
initiative of this open debate. It is important that it
mark the beginning of a more concentrated effort on
the part of the Council to combat and prevent sexual
violence.
Such violence, especially against women and
girls, continues at alarming levels in many conflict and
post-conflict situations, including as a deliberate
weapon of war. It is high time that all involved in the
maintenance of peace and security stepped up to
address this issue.
Sexual and other forms of violence against
civilians in conflict-affected situations can, in many
circumstances, constitute a threat to international peace
and security. It is more than clear in the Sudan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region, for example, that sexual violence is a security
problem requiring a security response. It is imperative
that the issue be addressed by the Council.
Resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, adopted in 2000, calls for special measures to
protect women and girls from rape and other forms of
sexual abuse, and emphasizes the need to end impunity
for war crimes, including those relating to sexual and
other violence against women and girls. Eight years
later, there remain significant challenges to the full
implementation of those commitments.
Let us reaffirm our commitment to the equal
participation and full involvement of women in the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security,
including in peace processes, and remind ourselves of
the need to take concrete measures to increase their
role in decision-making with respect to conflict
prevention and resolution.

15

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

Canada was pleased to co-sponsor three weeks
ago a conference on the role of military peacekeepers
in addressing sexual violence. Participants in the
conference came from military, police, civilian and
diplomatic backgrounds. Among the conclusions that
emerged very clearly were that peacekeeping missions
need clear and strong mandates from the Security
Council; that doctrine must be developed to provide
guidance to the missions; and that the Council’s
monitoring of sexual violence and efforts to address it
must become more systematic.
Canada has called on the Council repeatedly to
establish a mechanism to monitor the integration of
resolution 1325 (2000) into its daily work. We reiterate
that call today. In relation to this, information on
violence against women and girls, including sexual
violence, should be systematically included in all
relevant reports of the Secretary-General to the
Council. Rigorous data collection and monitoring
would increase the Council’s capacity to develop
effective peace support mandates that better address
this violence, including by way of prevention.
(spoke in French)
Canada welcomes the most recent renewal of the
peacekeeping mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in resolution 1794 (2007), which gives the
Mission a more explicit mandate for action to eliminate
sexual violence. Unfortunately, the notable absence of
equally strong provisions regarding sexual violence in
resolutions 1795 (2008) on Côte d’Ivoire and 1812
(2008) on the Sudan, both adopted after resolution
1794 (2007), demonstrate that inconsistency in the
Council’s approach to sexual violence in mission
mandates continues.
Canada believes that a report by the SecretaryGeneral to the Council including recommendations to
improve the United Nations response would be useful.
The report should draw on the full breadth of expertise,
including from the United Nations Action against
Sexual
Violence
in
Conflict
and
from
non-governmental organizations. An independent
expert could be appointed to lead the study.
Impunity for sexual violence against women and
girls and men and boys is rampant in conflict
situations. Canada urges countries to cooperate with
regard to the four conflict and post-conflict situations
being addressed by the International Criminal Court —

16

namely, those in the Darfur region of the Sudan, the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Uganda — to ensure that perpetrators of
serious international crimes are held responsible.
In that regard, as co-Chair of the Group of
Friends of the Great Lakes Region, Canada strongly
urges the early implementation at the domestic level of
the binding Protocol on the Prevention and
Suppression of Sexual Violence against Women and
Children adopted in December 2006, which demands
the guarantee that sexual violence in the region shall be
punishable both in time of peace and in situations of
armed conflict.
In conclusion, Canada is resolved to actively
support the efforts of the Security Council to combat
sexual violence in conflict situations. We encourage the
development of a doctrine to address and prevent
sexual violence. It should now be abundantly clear to
all that the systematic use of sexual violence as a
weapon of war requires an effective, timely and
commensurate response by the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you very much, Mr. President, for
having organized this debate.
My delegation believes that the United Nations
plays an essential role in combating all forms of
discrimination and violence against women and girls.
There can be no question that it is essential to bolster
the work of the Organization in this area, as well as to
improve its internal coordination to ensure a more
effective long-term impact.
Ecuador is fully committed to this effort. We are
a State party to all the relevant international
instruments and have co-sponsored several General
Assembly resolutions on this subject. In its own area of
responsibility, the Security Council made a major
contribution to this effort by adopting several
resolutions on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, especially as regards women and children.
More specifically, the Council adopted resolution 1325
(2000), several of whose paragraphs specifically refer
to the subject of this debate, namely, sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict.
Several elements of the draft resolution to be
adopted by the Council today are incorporated in

08-39081

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

resolution 1325 (2000), including the important role
played by women in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and in peacekeeping, the issue of gender
mainstreaming in peacekeeping operations and the
elimination of all types of gender-based violence,
especially rape and sexual violence.
My delegation believes that, with respect to the
need to request a report from the Secretary-General on
this issue, such a report should deal with situations that
fall under the competency of the Security Council and
that are clearly inscribed on its agenda; otherwise,
there could be duplication of effort, as certain
resolutions of the General Assembly also call for
similar reports from the Secretariat on this matter.
Ecuador believes that, despite the major efforts
being made by the Council, it is urgent to achieve
closer cooperation between the main organs of the
United Nations — bearing in mind that the General
Assembly is the universal body responsible for
providing a normative framework underpinning the
decisions of all States on the issue we are debating
today. My delegation therefore shares the view of the
President of the General Assembly that the subject of
sexual violence, including that perpetrated in the
course of armed conflict, should continue to be
considered by the General Assembly in a systematic
and ongoing manner — as was the case during this
session with the consensus adoption of Assembly
resolution 62/134, on the elimination of rape and other
forms of sexual violence in all its aspects, including in
armed conflict and similar situations — as well as in
the thematic debates convened by the President of the
General Assembly on the issues of human security and
human trafficking. The General Assembly also
addressed this issue in its annual resolution on all
forms of violence against women, which was also
adopted by Member States by consensus.
Ensuring an end to impunity and acknowledging
that victims have rights are decisive elements in
combating all forms of sexual violence against women,
including sexual violence as a weapon of war. Ecuador
believes in the essential role of the International
Criminal Court in combating impunity, as well as in its
contribution to peacebuilding processes. The
international community should commit itself to
ensuring that no one enjoys immunity for such crimes
under any circumstances. That should be our
commitment to the victims and our contribution to
peace and justice.

08-39081

Like other delegations, we believe that such a
sensitive subject as the one before us today, which
should be of concern to all countries, including
Ecuador, should be considered in a comprehensive and
systematic manner by all Member States. Such
consideration should not be confined solely to the issue
of sexual violence, but should also address all forms of
violence against women and girls.
One way to prevent armed conflict and all forms
of violence and discrimination they generate is to
address poverty and underdevelopment head-on in the
context of the Millennium Development Goals, to
whose achievement all Member States committed
themselves.
Ecuador will continue to cooperate with the
international community to ensure that all forms of
violence against women and girls, especially sexual
violence, are eliminated from every country and region
of the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): First of
all, Mr. President, I would like to say how very much I
appreciate your timely initiative to convene this
meeting.
As stated in the concept paper, recent reports
indicate that brutal and systematic rape is becoming
increasingly commonplace in some conflict and postconflict situations. In fact, sexual violence in situations
of armed conflict has occurred throughout history,
including sexual slavery during the Second World War.
It is our firm belief that the adoption of the noble
Charter of the United Nations is a clear manifestation
of our strong commitment to preventing the recurrence
of such a brutal and categorical denial of the human
rights of women. However, contrary to our call for
consciousness and commitment, we have witnessed the
horrifying intensity and severity of sexual violence in
armed conflict, which has been exercised as a weapon
of war, in particular in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in Darfur.
My delegation would like to make clear its
position on key issues for today’s deliberations. First,
with respect to the link between sexual violence and
peace and security, the Republic of Korea fully
recognizes that sexual violence is a security issue as
well as a fundamental human rights issue.

17

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

Secondly, based on the recognition of the direct
link between sexual violence and peace and security,
mandates for peacekeeping operations regarding sexual
violence should be further strengthened and clarified.
At the same time, my delegation believes that efforts
should be intensified to implement the zero-tolerance
policy for sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping operations.
Thirdly, on the reporting mechanism, our
delegation is of the view that the Security Council must
institutionalize and systematize its consideration of
sexual violence in armed conflict. For that purpose, an
action plan of the Secretary-General is recommended,
with priority accorded to establishing a mechanism to
collect information and to reporting periodically to the
Council on such situations.
Last but not least is the issue of impunity. My
delegation reaffirms its support for any efforts to end
impunity, recognizing that accountability is a crucial
component in the process of ending the cycle of
systematic sexual violence against women. We believe
that referring cases to the International Criminal Court
or to the tribunals will send a strong and effective
message to the perpetrators, as ending impunity is a
critical element of a comprehensive approach to the
quest for sustainable peace, justice, truth and national
reconciliation. Furthermore, amnesty should not be
granted to the perpetrators of sexual violence. We are
also of the view that, in addition to ensuring, by
putting an end to impunity, that individuals are held
responsible, the responsibility of the State for the
situation and for the protection of victims should also
be further enhanced.
Before concluding my statement, I would like to
draw the attention of the Council to the issue of
children in armed conflict, given the daunting reality
that a large percentage of victims of sexual violence in
armed conflicts are children. I would like to recall that
the Security Council adopted a presidential statement
on children in armed conflict, expressing its readiness
to review the relevant provisions of resolution 1612
(2005) with a view to further increasing the efficiency
of its action for the protection of children from sexual
violence in armed conflict. We look forward to
substantive progress in that regard.
My delegation fully supports and is pleased to
co-sponsor the draft resolution to be adopted today.

18

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Ms. Rovirosa (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico welcomes the convening of this important open
debate on women and peace and security because it
gives us the opportunity to present our views on the
matter.
Gender
equality,
progress
towards
the
empowerment of women and the promotion of
international peace and security are essential elements
of my country’s foreign policy. Mexico recognizes that
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) constitutes a
milestone in gender mainstreaming in connection with
peace and security.
Nonetheless, we are concerned by the limited
progress that has been made in this area. We continue
to witness recurring cases of widespread and
systematic sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict. The international community cannot remain
inactive given this alarming situation. Such abominable
acts of sexual violence constitute war crimes and
crimes against humanity when they are committed as
part of a generalized and systematic campaign against a
civilian population, as stated by the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court.
For that reason, Mexico joins with the Council in
demanding the immediate and complete cessation of all
acts of sexual violence. We cannot tolerate such
abuses, whereby women and children continue to be
the principal victims of deliberate attacks by armed
groups and armies.
However, if that appeal is to be morally effective,
it is necessary to put an end to incidents of sexual
exploitation and abuse committed by United Nations
personnel, in particular peacekeepers. Mexico believes
that, although the United Nations has made progress in
developing standards of conduct for peacekeeping
personnel and in the strategy to protect and support
victims of exploitation and sexual abuse committed by
United Nations personnel, greater efforts must be made
to ensure that we have an effective international
response mechanism that can undertake timely action
to deal with cases of gender violence in conflict and
post-conflict situations. Mexico reiterates that we must
continue to develop and implement mandatory training
programmes on gender issues for United Nations
personnel involved in peacekeeping operations and in
the provision of humanitarian assistance.

08-39081

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

Mexico reiterates its unequivocal rejection of the
use of sexual violence as a strategy of war and joins
the Council’s call on all States to bring the perpetrators
of such acts to justice. Likewise, we agree that
effective measures must be taken to prevent and
respond to acts of widespread or systematic sexual
violence in order to contribute to international peace
and security.
We hope that the report that has been requested of
the Secretary-General through the draft resolution
before the Council will clearly identify practical
proposals regarding strategies to minimize the
vulnerability of women and girls to this type of
violence. It is essential that our political will to
eliminate sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict be reflected in concrete outcomes. We cannot
allow more time to pass. We have a moral obligation to
act now, in a decisive manner.
Mexico is a staunch promoter of international
humanitarian law. My country believes that the use of
sexual violence, because of its very serious
humanitarian consequences, together with the use of
weapons that are excessively injurious or have
indiscriminate effects, such as antipersonnel mines and
cluster munitions, should be excluded entirely from all
military doctrines.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): Austria warmly
welcomes and highly appreciates the initiative of the
United States presidency and fully supports the
measures contained in the draft resolution to be
adopted later today. We are, as the Council is aware,
very pleased to be a sponsor of this important draft
resolution.
The issue of women and peace and security is a
foreign policy priority for Austria. In the past eight
years, visible progress has been made in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We now
have a set of clear rules under international law to
prevent violence against women, including sexual
violence in armed conflict. Nevertheless, as has been
pointed out in today’s debate, the prevalence and
brutality of acts of sexual violence against women and
girls in conflict and post-conflict situations around the
world have reached a level requiring urgent attention
and action by the international community.

08-39081

We all agree that sexual violence is often not only
a mere manifestation of war but, rather, a deliberate
tactic of warfare. That practice and the adverse effects
it has on peace processes, reconciliation and postconflict reconstruction make it clear that sexual
violence against women is indeed a security threat.
We highly appreciate the important efforts
already under way within the framework of the United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict. We
also strongly support the system-wide campaign to end
violence against women and hope to see significant
progress leading up to 2015. Recent measures
strengthening the enforcement of a zero-tolerance
policy against sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations peacekeepers and related personnel constitute
a major contribution. The United Nations must lead by
example. Sexual violence is unacceptable under all
circumstances.
Women must have a seat and a voice at
negotiation tables. Regrettably, women’s representation
in peace processes is still the exception. In its national
action plan on implementing Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), Austria has made a clear
commitment to lobby worldwide for women’s
participation in all peace efforts. Conferences in
Vienna last year, bringing together women leaders from
the Middle East, as well as from Serbia and Kosovo,
were important opportunities to establish networks
which allow for the multiplication of women’s voices
and for enhancing influence.
We are encouraged by the Secretary-General’s
recent
appointments
of
women
as
special
representatives and envoys and to leading positions in
the Secretariat. We hope to see more such
appointments in the future and reiterate our call for
Member States to support, encourage and nominate
women for such positions.
Despite clear rules under international law
outlawing sexual violence, perpetrators still largely go
unpunished. This situation demands further action by
the Security Council to strengthen the rule of law in
order to end impunity. Unfortunately, some of the
existing mechanisms and tools of the Council have
been underutilized. We therefore call on the Council to
make full use of the range of measures and tools
available, including the imposition of targeted
measures and referrals to the International Criminal
Court. We also call on Member States to strengthen the

19

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

rule of law and fully utilize accountability mechanisms
to bring to justice perpetrators of violations against
women and girls.
In this context, I would like to draw the Council’s
attention to our initiative on the Security Council and
the rule of law, which contains 17 concrete
recommendations on how the Security Council could
strengthen the rule of law. Recommendations 8 and 9
specifically address the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping operations. The report was recently
issued as a United Nations document (S/2008/270,
annex) and is available in all official languages.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by thanking the United States
presidency for having organized this open debate,
which clearly reflects the Security Council’s
commitment to full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and, in particular, the growing concern
regarding the use of various forms of sexual violence
against the civilian population, particularly women and
girls, in conflict and post-conflict situations.
In the framework of a human rights perspective,
Argentina places high priority on the situation of
women and girls in conflict situations, and on the
participation of women as key protagonists in peace
processes and in peacebuilding.
Resolution 1325 (2000) provides a legal
framework which allows for the effective participation
of women at the national and international levels,
within the broader and indispensable legal framework
comprising the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action, the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, the outcome
documents of the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly, on women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century
(General Assembly resolutions S-23/2 and S-23/3), as
well as other relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly, specifically
Assembly resolutions 58/185, on the in-depth study on
all forms of violence against women, and 62/134 on
eliminating rape and other forms of sexual violence in
all their manifestations, including in conflict and
related situations.

20

As a reflection of this deep commitment,
Argentina is one of four countries carrying out the pilot
programme for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and has started to take concrete actions,
including the first regional workshop for the
development of a gender policy for peace operations,
held in our country in May with a view to
strengthening alliances at all levels to move forward on
gender mainstreaming in peacekeeping operations.
In this regard, we would like to note that
Argentina has fully incorporated United Nations
recommendations on gender in all aspects of its
participation in peacekeeping operations. The
Argentine Joint Peacekeeping Operations Training
Centre has also incorporated a gender perspective in its
doctrine, both at the administrative level and in the
curricula of its training programmes.
As of January 2008, 26 Argentine women were
participating in peacekeeping missions, particularly the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus. In
2007, 36 per cent of our participants in White Helmet
humanitarian missions were women, a figure which is
expected to reach 43 per cent in 2008.
Increasing numbers of reports from the field alert
us on the use of sexual violence as a political or
military tool in some current conflicts. A regrettable
chapter of our past has shown us that rape and other
heinous forms of sexual violence can be used by agents
of the State as a tool to spread terror, and to torture and
degrade those whom it considers their “enemies”.
Sexual violence as a method of warfare is
categorically prohibited. The widespread and
systematic use of sexual violence is a grave violation
of international law, particularly in the light of the
Rome Statue of the International Criminal Court and
by the Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols.
Considering these realities, Argentina is
persuaded of the need urgently to adopt effective
measures to prevent and respond to such acts of sexual
violence against civilian populations, which will
significantly contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security. Such measures should
include, inter alia, the protection of civilians, in
particular women and girl children; the training of
military and security personnel; the adoption and

08-39081

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

effective enforcement of appropriate legislation; and
community-based work and care for the victims.
In order to ensure that effective measures are
adopted, we consider that a report of the SecretaryGeneral would be particularly useful. It should
organize and analyse the information available to the
United Nations system, with a specific focus on the
shocking phenomenon of sexual violence as a political
and military tool.
Lastly, Argentina is of the view that any effective
response to this question must be two-pronged:
promotion of full respect for the human rights of
victims and an end to impunity for perpetrators. In this
regard, we believe that the draft resolution before the
Council today would have benefited from a
strengthened legal framework, particularly with a firm
reaffirmation of the Rome Statue of the International
Criminal Court, the main tool available to the
international community today to ensure that nobody
can with impunity commit heinous crimes, such as
those which we are considering today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Let me
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for your
initiative in organizing this debate on the subject of
women and peace and security. We particularly
appreciate the presence of the Secretary of State of the
United States of America, Ms. Condoleezza Rice, who
presided over our work this morning.
We would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ban Ki-moon; the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro; the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Liberia, Mrs. Olubanke KingAkerele; and Major-General Patrick Cammaert, former
Commander of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) for their briefings.
Colombia rejects all forms of sexual violence,
including rape and other forms of sexual abuse. On that
basis, my country has been reporting on the progress it
has achieved in implementing resolution 61/143 on the
intensification of efforts to eliminate all forms of
violence against women.
Colombia has also been fulfilling the
commitments set out in resolution 1325 (2000) and has
submitted the corresponding reports pursuant to that

08-39081

resolution, which has allowed us to raise awareness of
the important role of women in the prevention and
settlement of conflicts.
In Colombia, the Presidential Office for Women’s
Equality has strengthened the incorporation of the
gender dimension in all Government bodies,
particularly through the policy on “Women Building
Peace and Development”. That policy reflects the
Government’s determination to include gender
mainstreaming, in a cross-cutting manner, in the
design, implementation and evaluation of public
policies.
In addition, the military relies on a
comprehensive human rights and international
humanitarian law policy and have launched a
programme aimed at strengthening reproductive and
sexual rights and gender equity within that institution.
Also noteworthy is the role of the National
Commission for Redress and Reconciliation, which
was established for the purpose of facilitating peace
processes and the individual or group reintegration of
members of illegal armed groups. The Commission
seeks to guarantee the rights of victims to truth, justice
and redress. It has incorporated a gender perspective in
its work as well as the recommendations contained in
resolution 1325 (2000).
On the basis of the efforts of the Commission,
among other factors, and its work with the Office of
the Attorney General and with women victims, crimes
associated with sexual violence are being addressed in
a more effective manner. As an example, trials are
being held that, in addition to their purpose of
prosecuting the perpetrators of such crimes, also
contribute to preventing them and to protecting the
victims. Many of those victims, in particular women,
have come forward to denounce criminal actions such
as sexual violence.
In addition, the Office of the High Adviser for
Social and Economic Reintegration has provided
humanitarian assistance to more than 2,600 women
who had been partners of members of illegal armed
groups and who have received benefits such as
physical security, shelter, food and psychosocial
support. Special emphasis has been placed on the
provision of support for the settlement of disputes
arising from domestic violence and for the holding of
workshops on the issue of respect for and the integrity
of women.

21

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

Colombia will continue to follow this course of
action, with particular emphasis on the areas of
participation, prevention, protection and the combat
against impunity, in the quest to eliminate all forms of
sexual violence.
The Secretary-General’s most recent report on
women and peace and security highlights the role of
regional organizations in the implementation of the
plan of action 2008-2009 relating to resolution 1325
(2000).
My delegation would like to draw attention, in
this perspective, to the high-level dialogue that took
place in Chile in November 2007, at which the Latin
American and Caribbean authorities charged with
dealing with this subject carried out an assessment of
the developments relating to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) at the national level and shared
experiences on best practices. This type of activity is
particularly useful in developing management and
information systems that take into account each
region’s individual characteristics and priorities.
We would like also to underline the role of the
Inter-American Commission on Women, as the relevant
body of the Organization of American States in this
field, as well as its important efforts in the quest to
eliminate all forms of violence against women.
My delegation notes with interest the increasing
participation of women in tasks related to
peacekeeping. The example of the all-female police
contingent from India in the United Nations Mission in
Liberia constitutes a point of reference on progress in
this area and makes a positive contribution to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We echo the
support expressed for initiatives aimed at ensuring a
higher percentage of women in peacekeeping forces.
Lastly, my delegation would like to underscore
how important it is that the action of the Security
Council on issues related to sexual violence be focused
on situations where peacekeeping missions are
deployed and that are on the Council’s agenda. This
includes due regard for the continuation of zerotolerance policies for sexual exploitation and abuse in
such operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Republic of Tanzania.
Mrs. Kafanabo (United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you for

22

organizing this open debate on women and peace and
security. By focusing our discussion on sexual violence
in situations of armed conflict, the Security Council
will be sending an authoritative message of
condemnation to those parties that are perpetrating or
condoning such acts in conflict situations as well as a
message of hope to the victims. This debate is also
contributing to defining an international code against
sexual violence in conflict situations.
I thank the President of the General Assembly,
the Deputy Secretary-General and all the presenters for
their informative presentations on this subject earlier
today.
The concern for the protection of women and
girls against sexual and gender-based violence has
been reflected in various Security Council documents.
It is unfortunate that, despite the numerous calls made
to protect women and girls, there has been an
escalation of systematic and brutal acts of sexual
violence and abuses as calculated instruments of war
against civilians, especially women and girls. The
Security Council, with the support of Member States,
needs to take bold measures to stop this trend. It is our
expectation, therefore, that this open debate will lead
to recommendations that will enable the Security
Council to respond effectively to the use of sexual and
gender-based violence in conflict situations and to
galvanize concerted international action against such
crimes.
It is high time that we recognized sexual violence
in conflict situations as a pervasive criminal act with
global repercussions. Such acts of targeted violence
add new dimensions to regional and international peace
and security. We call upon all parties to conflict to end
these barbarous acts and to take measures to protect
civilians, including women and girls.
The Security Council needs to send a clear
message to parties in armed conflicts that sexual
violence in any manifestation is not condoned and that
stern measures will be taken against the perpetrators so
as to end impunity. We thus call upon Member States to
comply with their obligations to prosecute perpetrators
and to support the work of the International Criminal
Court in that regard.
It is unfortunate that civilians, and in particular
women and girls, are increasingly being targeted in
current warfare. Humanitarian law is being blatantly
violated and perpetrators escape with impunity. There

08-39081

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

is thus an enormous challenge to the international
community as a whole and to peacekeeping missions in
particular to ensure that civilians are protected.
We are encouraged that sexual violence is
included in some peacekeeping protection of civilian
mandates. These mandates, however, need to be
matched with political resolve and resources, doctrine
and guidance. In the same vein, the national defence
policies of troop-contributing countries need to be
explicit and emphatic on protection of civilians,
including women and girls, in the training of troops for
peacekeeping missions. Equally, national laws must be
robust in dealing with those responsible for such acts
of violence.
Sexual violence in conflict situations needs to be
addressed holistically. In that regard, efforts to
encourage women to report it when they are attacked,
as well as mechanisms to assist the victims, need to be
in place. In addition, programmes to strengthen the rule
of law need to be implemented so as to end impunity
and provide justice for the victims. In the longer term,
community-based interventions to address the health,
psychosocial and educational needs of children and
adults, including men and boys, affected by and
implicated in the violence need also to be in place. This
means that interventions need to be carried out during
and after a conflict.
While we believe that national Governments have
the primary responsibility for the protection of their
nationals, the support of the international community,
as appropriate, is critical in addressing sexual violence
in conflict situations.
Let me conclude by reiterating that the
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania
strongly condemns all acts of sexual and gender-based
violence in all their manifestations. It is in this regard
that Tanzania joined in sponsoring last year’s General
Assembly resolution 62/134, entitled “Eliminating rape
and other forms of sexual violence in all their
manifestations, including in conflict and related
situations”, and is among the sponsors of the draft
resolution to be adopted today. We are willing to work
with the international community to end sexual and
gender-based violence as well as to end impunity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.

Mr. Ney (Germany): Germany welcomes this
open thematic debate on women and peace and
security: sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict. I would like to express Germany’s
appreciation to the United States, which currently
holds the presidency of the Security Council, for this
important initiative. Complementing the statement
made by the Republic of Slovenia on behalf of the
European Union, Germany would like to add the
following remarks.
We are deeply shocked by recent, and recurring,
reports indicating that brutal rapes are increasingly
becoming commonplace in conflict and post-conflict
situations. The pervasive and sometimes systematic use
of sexual violence against women and girls,
particularly rape or even gang rape and other forms of
sexual abuse, does not only belong to the most serious
violations of human rights. Sexual violence can also
constitute a threat to international peace and security,
when used or commissioned in situations of armed
conflict as a method of war in order to deliberately
target civilians or other protected persons or as part of
a widespread or systematic attack against civilian
populations.
We therefore have to recognize sexual violence as
a security problem requiring a systematic security
response, including through attention by the Security
Council and by the International Criminal Court. We
have to increase all our efforts, on all levels, to find
adequate responses and to end impunity for these
crimes.
In this context, Germany highly welcomes the
initiative entitled Stop Rape Now: United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict, launched
last year, as well as the Secretary-General’s campaign
entitled Unite to End Violence Against Women, which
he launched during the recent session of the
Commission on the Status of Women. We particularly
welcome the personal commitment that SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon attaches to this campaign.
The adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) was a milestone in creating awareness of the
urgent need to protect women and girls from sexual
abuse in armed conflicts, but also in acknowledging the
crucial role that women can and should have in all
efforts to promote peace and security.
Germany reaffirms its commitment to the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

08-39081

23

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

We just submitted a comprehensive and detailed report
to the Secretariat on Germany’s contributions to the
individual demands of resolution 1325 (2000). This
report documents a variety of measures both at national
and global level, ranging from efforts to increase
representation of women in all decision-making
mechanisms for the prevention, management and
resolution of conflict, to concrete projects aimed at
ending violence against women. Last year, the German
federal Government also presented its second action
plan to combat violence against women.
The promotion of gender equality and women’s
empowerment is an essential part of the United Nations
mandate. A coherent and effective implementation of
this mandate, including resolution 1325 (2000), needs a
coherent and effective United Nations gender
architecture. Germany supports the strengthening of
the normative and operative work of the United
Nations on gender equality and the empowerment of
women.
This week’s informal debate in the General
Assembly showed once again the broad commitment to
a reform of the United Nations gender architecture. We
now need concrete steps forward in order to enable the
United Nations to better deliver for women and girls all
around the world.
We look forward to further discussion on women
and peace and security within the Security Council.
The topics of gender equality and women’s
empowerment, and, more specifically, of sexual
violence, should not only be part of an annual open
debate, but should be continuously considered and
mainstreamed in the daily work of the Council and in
all discussions of conflict and post-conflict situations.
Germany therefore welcomes the fact that information
on sexual violence will now be systematically included
in the Council’s country situation reports. We had also
supported proposals towards a specific mechanism in
this regard, because we believe that effective
prevention starts with systematic reporting and reliable
data. We hope that the Council will return to this issue
in its future discussions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for having
organized this thematic debate on women and peace
and security: sexual violence in situations of armed

24

conflict. We believe that today’s discussions, like the
previous debate, in October 2007 (see S/PV.5766), will
be a useful contribution to the efforts to focus on the
main issues contained in resolution 1325 (2000).
Kazakhstan attaches great importance to
resolution 1325 (2000), which draws the attention of
the international community to the crucial issue of the
detrimental impact of armed conflict on women and
girls and the importance of incorporating a gender
perspective into peacekeeping operations.
My delegation once again reaffirms its
commitment to the zero-tolerance policy for sexual
violence against women and girls as a tool of warfare.
Since the adoption of the resolution, the Security
Council has organized regular reviews to assess its
implementation. Despite some progress, that
implementation is still slow and uneven. As has already
been pointed out by other delegations, we too agree
that women’s involvement in decision-making with
regard to security issues and the peacebuilding process
has a positive effect on the peaceful resolution of
conflicts and on post-conflict rehabilitation. Having
said that, my delegation fully commends the efforts
aimed at increasing women’s involvement in the
decision-making process in the areas of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.
However, as the most vulnerable group of
civilians due to their gender and social status, women
and girls continue to be the main victims of sexual
assault during conflicts. The situation is further
exacerbated as a result of the fact that gross violations
against women and girls in zones of armed conflict are
often concealed. Because they are stigmatized by local
communities, victims usually tend to disguise
information about abuse out of fear for their lives and
families. There is therefore insufficient evidence to
make the case against perpetrators.
In that regard, we would like to underscore the
importance of developing victim protection systems
similar to existing programmes for witness protection;
strengthening legislation on the responsibility of
perpetrators for crimes against women and girls in
conflict zones; and working with local communities to
disseminate information on abhorrent crimes, including
sexual violence in zones of armed conflict, in order to
raise local awareness and knowledge about the legal
consequences of crimes.

08-39081

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

Recognizing the fact that the consequences of
violence against women and girls in conflict zones has
a serious impact on physical and mental health and are
of a sensitive nature, my delegation would strongly like
to recommend a more vigorous expansion of the role
and contribution of women in field-based operations,
especially among humanitarian personnel, including
medical staff.
We
must
nevertheless
recognize
that
understanding about the magnitude of the problem of
security and the protection of women and girls in
conflict zones has been growing thanks to resolution
1325 (2000). In that regard, we would like to express
our appreciation for the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2007/567) on women and peace and security, as well
as the efforts of the United Nations system to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) at all levels.
Addressing sexual violations in armed conflict is not
the responsibility of a given country or region alone,
but a humanitarian imperative for every stakeholder.
The side to a conflict that encourages the violence must
be strongly condemned.
In conclusion, I would like to express the hope
that the full and successful implementation of the
resolution by all Member States will help to
significantly increase protection for women’s and girls’
rights and dignity in zones of armed conflict, as well as
to eliminate such crimes, including sexual abuses.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): At the outset, allow me to
thank you, Mr. President, and Secretary of State Rice
for convening this timely and important meeting,
which, in my delegation’s view, is crucial and
necessary at a time when women and other vulnerable
groups have become the main victims of armed
conflict.
Women’s advancement, security and living
conditions in Iraq had declined during the past three
decades. Wars and economic sanctions and negligence
and oppression by the former regime had eroded
conditions for women. There had been systematic
breaches of human rights, in particular against women,
who were subject to gender-specific abuse and
violence. In the past few years, thousands of Iraqi
women lost their lives and suffered from terrorist acts,
which have targeted the most vulnerable groups in
society, namely, children, women and the elderly. More

08-39081

recently, terrorist groups have been recruiting and
using Iraqi women to commit suicidal attacks against
civilians. According to statistics, about 17 women have
committed such acts. Terrorists have even used women
with mental disabilities to commit suicidal attacks in a
market crowded with women and children.
With regard to the new Iraq, equality between
women and men and protection against discrimination
were enshrined in the Transitional Administrative Law
and in the new Iraqi constitution that has been adopted.
However, violence against women is rooted in some
traditional practices and tribal codes, and is
compounded by the socio-economic and security
situation in the country.
Throughout the difficulties the country has faced,
Iraqi women have shown resilience, courage and
determination. For the past few years, they have been
playing a larger and more effective role, as they are
part of the political process in the new Iraq. They hold
no less than 25 per cent of parliamentary and
provincial council seats.
They have recently become more empowered,
with the creation of the cross-party women’s caucus
composed of 73 women members of parliament. In a
joint effort with United Nations agencies, that party
will advance the development of policies to help
victims of conflict, including widows, orphans, the
families of war victims and Iraqi refugees. The
establishment of the cross-party women’s caucus will
enable Iraqi women members of parliament to emerge
as more effective and influential actors in the
legislature, by bridging different viewpoints held by
the various parties to which they belong.
For the first time, Iraqi women have also been
playing an effective role as ministers of important
ministries, including those responsible for human
rights, municipalities and public works, women,
housing and construction and the environment.
I should also mention that the country has for the
first time experienced the establishment of women’s
organizations, through which Iraqi women have proven
their capabilities in defeating challenges by taking on
difficult responsibilities on different levels. Those
organizations have been playing an important role in
advancing and empowering women in Iraq. My country
is going through the phase of institutional
reconstruction, and my Government realizes that
without the effective participation and full role of

25

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

women, many of the long-term goals will not be
achieved.
Iraq’s current political situation provides an
opportunity to redress persistent violations of women’s
rights, as the Iraqi constitution will be further amended
as part of the political process. It will open space to
continue to influence the process of addressing
women’s rights and promoting gender equality as part
of Iraq’s institutional rebuilding. It is anticipated that
60 laws will be either revised or formulated, as
stipulated in Iraq’s new constitution, providing an
unprecedented opportunity to influence further the
constitution and legislation and to align them with
international conventions — in particular the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and both Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
which my Government recently ratified.
The Government of Iraq, in partnership with the
United Nations Development Fund for Women, is
implementing programmes and projects to promote the
role of women by strengthening the role of civil society
organizations in mitigating violence and by
contributing to building peace in Iraq. Support for that
effort is provided in line with the framework of
resolution 1325 (2000), the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the Beijing Platform for Action.
That partnership also includes capacity-building
for women’s non-governmental organizations to
promote women’s participation in peacebuilding and
conflict mitigation.
Another programme implemented in Iraq by
various
United
Nations
agencies
involves
disseminating knowledge on emerging issues and
innovative solutions towards conflict resolution and
increasing tolerance, in order to enhance the capacity
of community groups and women’s non-governmental
organizations that promote the culture of peace and
foster dialogue among various groups.
As we are discussing sexual violence and rape as
war crimes under international law, my delegation is of
the view that such crimes against women should be
considered as crimes against humanity, as those actions
cannot find a place in any culture and should not be
excused under any circumstances.

26

Eight years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. Its purpose was to address the atrocities
committed against women and girls during conflicts
and even after peace agreements and in post-conflict
situations. We agree that since the adoption of that
resolution, progress towards reaching its main goals
has been slow.
We believe that one of the major problems facing
our endeavours to stop these crimes is the issue of
shame and the social exclusion of victims. Since we
are discussing the issue of data collection on rape and
sexual violence, we believe that due consideration
should be given to cultural differences and to
awareness-raising campaigns undertaken with the help
of community leaders in post-conflict situations, in
particular among the most vulnerable groups in society.
Preventing and eliminating these atrocities must
be the main goal of our endeavours, and to achieve that
goal we must act globally. We commend the efforts of
the United Nations in that regard, but we call upon all
relevant United Nations agencies, the Special
Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and
consequences, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
civil society and non-governmental organizations to
combine their efforts to combat these crimes and to
establish early warning mechanisms to enable the
international community to prevent these crimes from
taking place.
We also believe that an end must be put to
impunity for the perpetrators of these crimes and that
they should be held accountable for their actions.
To conclude, we would like to express our full
support for an action-oriented resolution that will put
an end to these crimes and atrocities against women
and girls, and my delegation hopes that this important
debate will bring this issue to the world’s attention and
make it globally recognized.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda): My delegation
welcomes this opportunity to participate in this open
debate on women and peace and security and wishes to
express our appreciation to the delegation of the United
States for organizing the debate. We also commend the
President of the General Assembly, the Secretary-

08-39081

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

General, the Deputy Secretary-General, His Excellency
the Liberian Minister for Foreign Affairs and MajorGeneral Cammaert for their briefings.
Throughout history, gender-based violence, in
particular violence against women, has a component of
armed conflict. In Rwanda, the 1994 genocide was
marked by horrific forms of violence, particularly
against girls and women. An estimated 500,000 girls
and women were victims of rape by the Interahamwe,
and up to two thirds of those victims were also infected
with HIV by perpetrators carrying the virus. It is now
evident that rape was part of the genocidal plan and
part of the systematic degradation of women and of
girls. This plan was then exported by members of the
former Rwandan Armed Forces (ex-FAR) and
Interahamwe across our borders into the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and continues to be
exacted by the ex-FAR/Interahamwe, under its new
denomination the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda, the Rally for Unity and Democracy
(RUD-Urunana) and other militias on the women and
girls of the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Fourteen years on, survivors of the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda continue to live with the effects of that legacy.
Therefore, addressing the specific protection
needs of women in armed conflict remains a critical
matter for the United Nations system. My delegation
therefore reiterates its support for the continued
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security and the Protocol to the African
Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of
Women in Africa.
It is within that context that my Government has
set out to elaborate a national policy on gender-based
violence and violence against women. The
development of that policy is situated within a
national, regional and international context and is
linked to peacebuilding and economic development and
growth. Article II of the Rwanda genocide law
stipulates that gender-based violence, violence against
women and sexual violence must be dealt with in the
first category under article I, as a crime of genocide or
crime against humanity, punishable under article 95 of
the penal code with a maximum term of life
imprisonment.
Rwanda, as one of the major troop-contributing
countries to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
has a vested interest in ensuring the protection of

08-39081

women in situations of armed conflict. Gender-based
violence and violence against women are therefore
considered by the Rwanda Defence Forces as a key
component of the security threat. In that respect, the
gender desk at Rwanda Defence Forces headquarters
devises training programmes, with the support of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), to raise awareness of gender-based
violence and violence against women in the armed
forces. Awareness and training on responding to
gender-based violence and violence against women has
now been mainstreamed into the curricula of all
Rwanda’s military schools and training institutions and
is integral to the preparation of all Rwanda Defence
Forces battalions preparing for peace missions abroad.
The leadership of the Rwanda Defence Forces has also
undertaken the fight against gender-based violence and
violence against women as a command responsibility.
My delegation therefore calls upon the United
Nations system to take concerted action on addressing
the plight of women in armed conflict through
enforcing resolution 1325 (2000), rejecting impunity
through support to and strengthening of national
jurisdictions and the provision of support to victims of
sexual violence.
We also strongly believe that in order for the
United Nations system to respond in a more
coordinated, coherent and effective manner, urgent
attention needs to be placed on strengthening the
United Nations system’s work on gender.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Cato (Philippines): The Philippines would
like to begin by congratulating the United States and
commending it for having convened this debate on the
important issue of sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict. We thank you, Mr. President, for giving
the Philippines the opportunity to address the Council
on this issue.
The Philippines joins previous speakers in
condemning acts of sexual violence inflicted on women
and girls by parties involved in armed conflict. Sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict is something to
which the international community should not close its
eyes. As we speak, reports on how women and girls
have found themselves victims of sexual violence and
on how they remain vulnerable to increased risk of
violence from parties involved in armed conflicts

27

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

continue to stream in from various hotspots around the
world.
The sexual abuse committed against women and
girls is deeply rooted in a pervasive culture of
discrimination, highlighted by the unequal power
equation which denies females equal status. This
inequality is manifested in a number of ways during
conflict, particularly through the social, political and
cultural norms that identify women and girls not only
as the property of men, but also as sexual objects. This
inequality also finds form as a tool of war, with
violence directed at women being considered an attack
against the values and honour of a society.
While it is easy to see the vulnerabilities of
women, there is a tendency to regard them only as
victims of violence, most especially sexual violence.
Unfortunately, this obscures the many positive roles
that women play in conflict situations, especially as
agents of peace and reconciliation, as called for under
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security.
The Philippines continues to regard resolution
1325 (2000) as an important contribution by the
Security Council to addressing the complex issues
affecting women in countries torn by conflict.
Resolution 1325 (2000) is an instrument that brings a
United Nations gender perspective to conflict analysis,
monitoring and resolution. This has had a great impact
on the transformative responses that are needed to
address the gender dimension of conflict.
The fundamental strategy of the Philippines in
pursuing the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
lies in enabling more women to systematically
participate in conflict prevention, management and
resolution and in post-conflict peacebuilding, while at
the same time rehabilitating their communities and
ensuring basic services and livelihoods. Women are
empowered to take part in local peace processes by
building
capacities
and
mobilizing
peace
constituencies. Women in indigenous communities, for
instance, are even serving as intermediaries in local
peace dialogues and as mediators in the restoration of
broken peace pacts. The roles that women play in
addressing the issues surrounding them are critical;
therefore, the Philippines remains convinced that
women must be utilized as active agents in confronting
gender-based violence.

28

The response to sexual exploitation in conflict
situations necessitates a comprehensive approach. As
this entails a response which should address the
various dimensions of the problem, the United Nations
must mobilize the entities within its system and build
on their comparative advantages to address the root
causes, manifestations and consequences of conflict.
The Philippines recognizes the role of the
Security Council in addressing conflict in its various
dimensions, including the gender dimension, to the
extent that this is in accordance with the Council’s
mandate. It should be emphasized that, since the issue
of sexual violence requires a more holistic response,
including political, economic, social and cultural
aspects, the Security Council’s actions, which comprise
only part of the response, must be coherently
coordinated with the efforts of other bodies, such as the
development-oriented agencies.
The Philippines also wishes to underscore the
importance of the regional context in assessing and
addressing conflict, as well as in coming up with the
appropriate responses to the gender dimensions of
conflicts. In this connection, the Philippines urges the
Security Council to work closely with the relevant
regional
intergovernmental
and
civil
society
organizations in areas of conflict.
While the Philippines recognizes the need to
urgently confront sexual violence in conflict, it
believes that the Security Council must also exercise
caution to ensure that it does not confront the conflict
situation narrowly by focusing on palliatives to address
the issue of gender violence. As sexual violence is part
of the bigger context of conflict, the Security Council
must see to it that it also uses its mandate mainly to
assess and address this broader picture. Bearing in
mind the need to evaluate the effectiveness of targeted
measures and sanctions, the Security Council must be
cognizant that these, if contemplated, must not
exacerbate the conflict or give rise to negative
consequences for the civilian population.
The Security Council can concretely contribute to
gender-sensitive conflict prevention and resolution,
including
post-conflict
reconstruction
and
peacebuilding, by taking the necessary steps to put an
end to impunity by going after all violators without
exception. This could also be accomplished by
integrating gender issues in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, incorporating

08-39081

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

the necessary gender training in the security sector and
facilitating the establishment of necessary infrastructure
and capacity for women’s access to justice, as well as
cooperative work with non-governmental organizations
and other community groups.
To further address the issue of sexual violence,
the Security Council could support systems for gendersensitive monitoring of conflicts, including the
collection of sex-disaggregated data and information
with the engagement of national and local authorities.
This is important to facilitate national ownership and
accountability. The Security Council could also
advocate for the inclusion of gender violence issues in
peace accords and peace processes between parties to
conflict.
The Philippines believes that the Security
Council can help address the issue of gender violence
in conflict areas by seeing to it that the design and
training of peacekeeping missions include the
deployment of more female police and military
personnel, the necessary gender-sensitivity training by
troop-contributing countries and the enforcement of a
zero-tolerance policy towards sexual exploitation and
abuse involving peacekeepers.
In the case of the Philippines, gender sensitivity
is incorporated in the predeployment training for
personnel of our armed forces and our national police
whom we send out to support United Nations
peacekeeping operations. As early as four years ago,
the Philippines had put in place a zero-tolerance policy
on misconduct, especially on sexual exploitation and
abuse that could be committed by our peacekeepers.
This policy of zero tolerance, which is firmly
embedded in the revised policy framework and
guidelines governing Philippine participation in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, serves as a guarantee
that no Filipino peacekeeper will go unpunished for
misdeeds committed in mission areas.
Finally, the Philippines, as one of the largest
contributors, if not the largest contributor, of individual
police officers to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, could also support calls for the deployment
of more female police officers, especially those
experienced in handling gender violence cases. We
hope that such a contribution would help to bring about
better monitoring, reporting and response to cases of
gender violence in conflict areas.

08-39081

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the United States for having organized
this open debate on a very important protection gap,
that related to sexual and gender-based violence in
armed conflict and in post-conflict situations.
In situations of armed conflict and periods of
instability, armed groups often use violence against
civilians, especially women, as a deliberate tactic of
war. In Afghanistan, the devastating impacts of three
decades of armed conflict have particularly affected the
most vulnerable part of our population, namely women
and children. During this period, the basic rights of
Afghan women have been undermined, even denied,
due to the vicious cycles of violence which allowed
groups with power to act with impunity in the face of
women’s vulnerability. Under the Taliban regime,
Afghanistan was a graveyard for human and women’s
rights, where barbaric atrocities against women
constantly occurred. No one can forget the images of
innocent Afghan women being slaughtered in Kabul’s
stadium and the images of the inhuman Taliban
bludgeoning women in the street for so-called
unvirtuous behaviour. Today the results of widespread
violence during years of conflict are still affecting the
private and public spheres of women’s lives in
Afghanistan.
In several armed conflict situations, acts of sexual
and gender-based violence have been used to humiliate
and forcibly relocate civilian members of a community
or ethnic group. In Afghanistan, sexual violence was
not a predominant method employed by armed groups
in conflict, due to the strong cultural bounds within our
society. However, sexual violence was used by some
individuals and groups as an instrument of war.
Afghanistan recognizes that sexual and genderbased violence is a threat to international peace and
security and condemns all sexual and gender-based
violence committed against civilians in conflictaffected situations. We would also like to acknowledge
that, in countries in armed conflict as well as in postconflict countries, violence against women has
multiple dimensions that extend beyond a sexual
nature.
It has been eight years since the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1325 (2000) and about
seven years since the fall of the barbaric regime of the

29

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

Taliban and the beginning of the peace process,
democratization and reconstruction efforts in
Afghanistan. Our vision is a peaceful and progressive
nation where women and men enjoy security, equal
rights and opportunities in all spheres of life.
The Government of Afghanistan has made
considerable achievements in protecting women from
violence and in ensuring a secure environment where
their rights are protected and their participation in
decision-making bodies and in the peacebuilding
process is guaranteed. The fact that 28 per cent of the
seats in the Afghan Assembly are held by women is
testament to this claim. This places Afghanistan as the
twentieth-ranked country in the world in terms of
female representation in parliament.
Afghanistan has undertaken several initiatives in
addressing violence against women, as embodied in its
constitution, the Millennium Development Goals, the
Afghanistan Compact, the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy that was recently launched in
Paris, and international treaties. The Afghan Ministry
of Women’s Affairs is leading our efforts in achieving
this goal and chairs the ministerial task force created in
2005 to eliminate all forms of violence against women.
We would like to take this opportunity to express
our gratitude to all relevant organizations, including
United Nations agencies, in particular the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, as well as to
the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission,
for assisting us in advancing the status of Afghan
women.
Progress in the process that involves the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants and the disbanding of illegal armed
groups has contributed to minimizing violence against
civilians, particularly women and children. However,
the successful completion of this process will help to
create an environment where women will be
empowered to exercise their rights.
The Afghan Government recognizes that security
sector reform is crucial to strengthening the rule of law,
to ensuring the protection of women’s rights, to
improving law enforcement bodies and to ending the
culture of impunity.
But at the same time, we would like to underscore
the need for women to participate in the security sector
reform process. In this regard, initial steps have been

30

taken by the Ministry of the Interior to increase the
recruitment of female law enforcement officers and to
provide gender sensitivity training in the police
academy. Police family response units are staffed by
women who are trained to deal with domestic violence
and to respond to female victims of crime.
The escalation of violence and insecurity in some
parts of the country as a result of the terrorist activities
carried out by the Taliban and Al-Qaida hinders the
implementation of the rule of law and consequently
makes women vulnerable to all forms of violence.
Various methods of violence against women are used
by the Taliban and Al-Qaida to intimidate, terrorize and
force Afghan women to retreat from public activities
and limit their access to health care, education, justice
and economic and social endeavours, particularly in
the southern and eastern parts of Afghanistan. The
terrorist campaign of the Taliban and Al-Qaida has
particularly affected girls’ school enrolment and
attendance. Schools are burned, and female teachers
and students are attacked and threatened.
The legacy of the long conflict, including access
to weapons, difficulty in stabilization efforts and
rampant poverty, is reflected in some parts of the
country in self-immolation, forced marriage, domestic
and other forms of violence. In order to be successful
in our efforts to eliminate these practices, we request
the international community to continue its assistance
so that we may strengthen our national capacity in
ensuring a secure environment, improving economic
and social conditions and implementing human rights
and the rule of law in Afghanistan.
The protection of civilians, including women, is
highlighted as an inherent part of the NATO-led
International Security Assistance Force mission
operating in Afghanistan. We would like to emphasize
on the need to integrate specific strategies for the better
protection of women from all forms of violence,
including sexual violence. We also encourage
peacekeeping forces to receive predeployment gender
sensitivity training.
Sustainable peace in Afghanistan cannot be
achieved without the participation of half of its
population, namely Afghan women. Afghanistan
recognizes the importance of the positive contribution
of women to conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and the promotion of peace and security. As SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon justly stated this morning, the

08-39081

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

most effective way to combat violence against women
is to make women messengers of peace instead of
victims of violence. That reflects our vision for Afghan
women.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador.
Mrs. Gallardo Hernández (El Salvador) (spoke
in Spanish): El Salvador welcomes the initiative to
hold an open Security Council debate on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security. That resolution is a cornerstone
of the call for full and equal participation of women in
all peace and security initiatives, together with
mainstreaming the gender perspective in the context of
armed conflict, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and
also in post-conflict reconstruction and reconciliation.
The resolution emphasizes the need to increase
the role of women in the political participation process
and in decision-making with regard to conflict
prevention and resolution.
El Salvador’s post-conflict situation enables us to
confirm that women and men experience peace and
conflict in different ways and that, therefore, they have
different vulnerabilities and needs and require different
mechanisms to address their security.
Thus, in the context of armed conflict and in
peacebuilding processes, we may wonder whether
gender roles and relations differ, since men and women
adapt to changes in situations according to
circumstances. Resolution 1325 (2000) is thus a
landmark which enables us to consider the increasing
complexity of conflict situations and the transition
from conflict to development in a broad and integral
manner and from a gender perspective.
El Salvador recognizes that since resolution 1325
(2000) was adopted, limited progress has been made in
implementing it. The results have been mixed, as
confirmed by studies carried out by the United Nations
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women, particularly the study entitled
“Securing Equality, Engendering Peace: A guide to
policy and planning on women, peace and security”. It
should be noted that this study helps facilitate the
development of national action plans that are realistic
and effective in implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
through good practices, specific recommendations and
a six-step process.

08-39081

Additionally, as the debate on the gender
perspective in the context of armed conflict continues,
related problems come to light, such as a lack of
prevention and protection, in particular for women and
girls, from violence of all kinds, including sexual
violence, which unfortunately is, in some cases, used
as a weapon of war.
In this connection, my delegation joins other
delegations and civil society organizations in
requesting the Secretary-General to systematically
include full information on acts of sexual violence and
gender-based acts against women and girls in all
reports on conflict situations.
El Salvador recognizes the need to broaden the
framework of action derived from the promotion of a
holistic approach to the issue of the gender perspective
in the context of armed conflict and transitional and
peacebuilding situations. However, we are aware that
in progressing along this path, we are liable sometimes
to duplicate the functions of other principal organs of
the United Nations, including the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council, both of which
have specific mandates to deal with these matters
under the Charter.
In that light, further efforts should be made to
ensure coordination and cooperation among the
principal organs of the United Nations in order to
tackle these issues in an holistic manner while avoiding
overlaps in the mandates and functions of each organ.
Thus, in El Salvador’s view, the special position
of the Peacebuilding Commission, deriving from its
organic link with the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council, make it,
in a way, the proper forum for promoting and assessing
on the ground the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in a broad-based and holistic manner.
In concluding, allow me to restate the political
will of the Government of El Salvador to continue
making progress in the promotion and implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and in strengthening the
political participation of women in decision-making
processes which will ensure that women become active
players in their own development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tonga.
Mr. Tupouniua (Tonga): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Pacific small island developing

31

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

States, comprising Fiji, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Nauru, Palau, Papua New Guinea, the
Republic of the Marshall Islands, Samoa, the Solomon
Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and my own country, the
Kingdom of Tonga.
I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your strong leadership in
convening this open debate. We share the concerns
raised in the presidential statement of October 2007
(S/PRST/2007/40), wherein the Security Council
condemned all acts of gender-based violence in
situations of armed conflict committed against women
and girls, including killing, maiming, and sexual
violence and abuse. We commend the work that
Security Council has done in addressing gender-based
violence with the adoption of resolutions 1325 (2000)
and with the more recent adoption of resolutions 1468
(2003), 1493 (2003) and 1590 (2005).
Gender-based violence in situations of armed
conflict is a violation of women’s basic human rights.
It is also a concern raised by the Secretary-General in
his report containing an in-depth study on all forms of
violence against women published in 2006
(A/61/122/Add.1). The report recognized that there are
many forms and manifestations of violence against
women in a wide range of settings, including the
family, the community, State custody and institutions,
armed conflict and refugee and internally displaced
persons situations. The Secretary-General emphasized
that
“violence constitutes a continuum across the
lifespan of women, it cuts across both the public
and the private sphere and one form of violence
often reinforces another.” (A/61/122/Add.1,
para. 365)
What we are seeing in some parts of the world is
the use of rape and sexual assault as systematic war
tactics in destroying the cohesion of communities. In
some cases, women who were raped or sexually
assaulted during situations of armed conflict face
rejection by their families and communities. They are
often ostracized and left to fend for themselves. These
women face debilitating poverty and discrimination,
and many subsequently fall into the vicious cycle of
further exploitation and abuse by working in the sex
trade; many are exposed to the danger of human
trafficking.

32

In the light of women caught in situations of
armed conflict, we urge the Security Council to
recognize gender-based violence as a threat to the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
recommend that, where appropriate, the Security
Council systematically monitor incidents of genderbased violence in situations of armed conflict.
Furthermore, we recommend that, where appropriate,
the
Secretary-General
systematically
include
comprehensive information on gender-based violence
in his reports on conflict-affected situations and that he
prepare a special report to the Security Council with
timely information on sexual and gender-based
violence, thereby initiating the process of follow-up for
the Security Council and United Nations agencies.
We congratulate the sponsoring countries for
taking the initiative to put forth today’s draft
resolution, which reaffirms the important role of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
and peacebuilding and highlights the fact that violence,
intimidation and discrimination may erode women’s
legitimacy and their capacity to participate in postconflict public life, reconciliation and post-conflict
peacebuilding processes.
In our efforts to support the victims of sexual and
gender-based violence, we must provide women with
psychological care to help them achieve long-term
stability.
I would like to take this opportunity to highlight
the importance of taking a preventive attitude towards
sexual and gender-based violence and other factors that
may endanger the security of women. Sexual and
gender-based violence does not occur in a vacuum.
Unfavourable political, social, cultural, economic and
environmental exerts pressure and therefore reinforce
existing vulnerabilities and gender inequalities.
It is important for the Security Council to address
cross-cutting issues such as climate change in relation
to women’s security. Climate change is an emerging
cross-cutting issue with serious security implications.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, in its
fourth assessment report, highlights the vulnerabilities
of developing countries and states that poor
communities are especially vulnerable due to limited
adaptive capacities and are more dependent on climatesensitive resources.
Women and children account for an estimated
70 per cent of the world’s poorest population. Women

08-39081

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

in developing countries are responsible for an
estimated 45 to 80 per cent of household food
production. Women are arguably much more dependent
upon agriculture for their livelihoods and survival.
Thus far, the effects of climate change are mostly
likely to erode women’s capacity to provide for
themselves and their families, due to the loss of their
livelihoods.
It is important to recognize gender differences not
just in terms of differential vulnerability but also as
differential capacity to adapt and to mitigate the effects
of climate change. Climate change is not genderneutral; rather, gender is an important determinant in
climate change mitigation and adaptation. The lack of
provisions for integrating a gender perspective into
adaptation and mitigation strategies will seriously
threaten the security of women. Women need to be
empowered economically and must receive training
and capacity-building to better adapt to the effects of
climate change. It is also imperative to increase
grassroots assistance to women in their efforts to
preserve their livelihoods.
The link between climate change, the security of
women and gender-based violence in situations of
armed conflict is closer than one would expect. The
developing world is facing more exogenous threats and
risk factors than ever before. During the Food Security
Forum in April this year, the Food and Agriculture
Organization warned that long-term food insecurity
would lead to the chronic undernourishment of the
world’s poor. An estimated 850 million people
worldwide suffer from hunger, and the number is likely
to increase by 4 million each year. Experts at the
Forum cautioned that without proper mitigation and
adaptation strategies and resources to implement such
strategies, many developing countries will see their
coping capacity diminish over time. The loss of arable
land, the increased frequency of natural disasters,
weakened infrastructure, increases in epidemic
diseases, population displacements, the increase in
poverty and competition for natural resources are
drivers of conflict.
Since nearly one third of the world’s poorest
population live in countries that are fragile or conflictaffected, they will also be the ones most likely to be
affected by or to engage in resource wars — armed
conflicts over the use of natural resources, including
oil, water and arable land. In a recent interview,
António Guterres, the United Nations High

08-39081

Commissioner for Refugees, reinforced the likelihood
of the situation as he explained that climate change
could also uproot people by provoking armed conflicts
over increasingly scarce resources.
Such conflicts will have a devastating impact on
developing countries, and it is very likely that women
will be exposed to physical and psychological harm
and sexual and gender-based violence. We therefore
urge the Security Council to take a preventive approach
in dealing with sexual and gender-based violence by
considering climate change as a threat to women’s
security and to the maintenance of international peace
and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Prica (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me commend you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate on such an important issue
as women and peace and security.
My delegation fully aligns itself with the
statement already delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Slovenia on behalf of European
Union. At the same time, I would like to add some
points reflecting our own national activities.
Bosnia and Herzegovina recognizes the
importance of resolution 1325 (2000) and will continue
to work towards its full implementation. We welcome
the advances that have been made in this area by the
United Nations system and Member States since the
historic adoption of the resolution, eight years ago.
Generally speaking, we can clearly see from the
Secretary-General’s reports that the United Nations has
supported the systematization and institutionalization
of efforts to strengthen action in solving the gender
problem; but the work is still far from done. We have
to ensure that the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000)
are implemented completely and that women can fully
participate at all levels of decision-making. We must
also strengthen the status of women in all fields.
We are very concerned at the fact that systematic
sexual violence against women and girls in armed
conflicts has been, and still is, used as a war strategy
and that it remains a direct threat to international peace
and security. Speaking from our own experience from
the 1990s, Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly condemns
all acts of violence against women and girls in armed
conflicts and post-conflict situations. From the very

33

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

beginning, therefore, Bosnia and Herzegovina
sponsored and supported General Assembly resolution
62/134, entitled “Eliminating rape and other forms of
sexual violence in all their manifestations, including in
conflict and related situations”, which was adopted on
18 December 2007.
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative to launch a multi-year global
campaign with the goal of bringing together the United
Nations, Governments and civil society to end violence
against women.
Two years ago, the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina adopted a five-year gender action plan
incorporating the main provisions of resolution 1325
(2000). Much has been achieved in the area of adopting
appropriate legislation on the protection of civilian
victims of war. The law now gives women victims the
status of civilian victims of war and helps them on
their path towards full reintegration into the
community, giving them a chance for professional
improvement and providing them with monthly
allowances and medical and psycho-social assistance.
Under the plan, expert teams have been established to
engage in analysis, provide legal assistance to victims
and conduct workshops on the basis of, among other
things, sharing lessons learned.
In addition to the Government’s activities, the
non-governmental sector is successfully involved in
improving the situation regarding the issue. A very
good example is that of a project carried out by the
non-governmental sector that has established a
database of women victims in my country. In spite of
society’s traditional attitude towards women victims,
3,000 women have already been inscribed on this
database, which remains open. Privacy is guaranteed,
and all women were granted long-term financial aid.
Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly believes that
women should be more involved in the prevention and
resolution
of
conflicts,
peace
negotiations,
peacebuilding in post-conflict situations and the
promotion of sustainable peace. However, women still
need considerable support and capacity-building to be
effective in today’s society, which traditionally has
been dominated by men.
In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s full commitment to close
cooperation with the States Members of the United

34

Nations in the comprehensive implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union.
Mr. Lamamra: On behalf of the Commission of
the African Union (AU), I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. I would also like to join previous
speakers in commending the United States presidency
of the Council and Secretary Rice for organizing this
open debate on the crucial question of women and
peace and security.
I wish to say how honoured I am to address a
formal meeting of the Council for the first time in my
new capacity as the African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security. Indeed, I feel fortunate that I am
assuming office in a climate of increasing cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations, and
with the Security Council in particular. I am confident
that we will continue to strengthen our relations as we
move forward.
The protection and empowerment of women is
indeed one of the founding principles of the African
Union, as enshrined in our Constitutive Act, the
Protocol on the Establishment of the Peace and
Security Council and other instruments of the African
Union. As Council members are aware, the Adoption of
the protocol on the rights of women to the African
Charter on Human and People’s Rights and of the
declaration on gender equality, adopted following the
historic presidential debate of the Assembly of the
African Union in 2005, were important milestones in
that respect.
A clear vision and mandate on the issue of
women and peace and security in the continent have
thus been established in the African Union, which
stresses gender parity at all levels of our organization.
We continue to develop the necessary instruments and
the operational environment for their implementation,
as an integral part of our overall agenda for a peaceful,
united and prosperous Africa.
Furthermore,
our
regional
economic
communities, African women and civil society
organizations have been the driving forces behind our
efforts and achievements, and we are committed to
continue to strengthen efforts towards addressing the

08-39081

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

well-known range of challenges of peace and security
for women and for our peoples as a whole.
We therefore welcome the seriousness with which
the Security Council continues to address this question,
which also ranks high on the list of priorities of the
African Union. In that connection, we have launched
the preparatory process for the convening of an
important conference on women in post-conflict
reconstruction and development, to be held in 2009.
I would now like to focus on the theme of today’s
debate: on some of the opportunities and challenges
which lie on the path ahead, from the peace and
security perspective in particular.
First, we have been greatly honoured by the
leadership and important contributions of women in
recent peace processes in Africa, such as in
Mozambique, Angola and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and in ongoing efforts for lasting peace and
security in the Sudan and Somalia. I should, however,
like to underscore the need to strengthen the
involvement of women in such processes in the future.
Indeed, the efforts of the international community on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
related instruments have made possible a deeper
understanding of the centrality of the gender
perspective in the maintenance of international peace
and security. The wide range of issues involved, such
as the specific challenges facing women in armed
conflict situations and sexual slavery and abuse, are
now well known. We must take concrete actions in
ensuring that the knowledge gained thus far is fully
integrated in the new and emerging era of closer
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. That includes the participation of
women in peacekeeping operations at all levels. The
coordination of efforts between the United Nations and
the African Union would be crucial in that aspect.
Secondly, we in the African Union face the
challenge of ensuring that our emerging peace and
security architecture, which includes the African
standby force, the Continental Early Warning System,
the Panel of the Wise and our subregional
arrangements for peace and security, adequately reflect
our vision on women and peace and security. We are
determined to address this challenge and continue to
count on the support of the Security Council and our
international partners in that respect.

08-39081

Furthermore, the ongoing efforts for the reform of
United Nations, and of Security Council in particular,
also offer an excellent opportunity to address this
crucial question, through adequate representation and
participation of regions, such as Africa, that are facing
serious peace and security challenges for women and
for their nations as a whole, due to persistent conflict
situations. We also believe that the elevation of the
United Nations mandate on gender equality to the
highest possible level within the Secretariat could be a
major step towards addressing the issue of gender
equality as a whole, and we call on the Security
Council to encourage the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral on this question.
Finally, as part of ongoing efforts towards
strengthening the mobilization of resources and
support for international peace and security, I would
like to underscore the importance of ensuring that
efforts centred on women and peace and security are
adequately supported by the entire international
community.
With those few remarks, I wish to reiterate the
commitment of the African Union to our cooperation
with the United Nations and with our international
partners on this matter and other questions, and I wish
every success for this timely and important open
debate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Than Swe (Myanmar): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to take part in
today’s open debate. The issues of women and of peace
and security are issues of particular importance for my
country.
The need to prevent armed conflict and to bring
to a speedy conclusion situations of armed conflict
cannot be overemphasized. Resolution 1325 (2000)
calls for all parties to armed conflict to take special
measures to protect women and girls from rape and
other forms of sexual abuses and to end impunity
whenever such dastardly crimes are perpetrated. In
situations of armed conflict, the most vulnerable
among the population include women and girls.
Therefore, we firmly believe that tackling the root
causes of conflict, which include disunity, poverty,
socio-economic
and
gender
inequality
and
underdevelopment, is extremely important.

35

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

Myanmar fully supports a zero-tolerance policy
with regard to violence against women and girls.
Myanmar’s traditions, culture and values strongly
favour our efforts to promote gender equality. They
also contribute strongly to the Government’s
endeavours to protect women and girls from genderbased violence, including sexual exploitation and
abuse. In order to promote and protect the rights of
women and girls, the Government established the
Myanmar National Committee for Women’s Affairs in
1996 as a national mechanism to carry out the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action. In 2003, in order
to comprehensively carry out the measures laid out by
the National Committee, the Myanmar Women’s
Affairs Federation was formed. One of the key areas
actively dealt with by those organizations is violence
against women.
My delegation has repeatedly stressed here that
the best way to protect civilians, particularly women
and children, in armed conflict is to put a speedy end to
such conflict. We also believe that national
reconciliation is the only way to end conflict in a
speedy manner. My country experienced the
devastating effects of an insurgency that raged in our
country for over 40 years. It is only recently that,
owing to the national reconciliation policy of my
Government, we have emerged from a conflict
situation and are able to put a virtual end to the
insurgencies that had ravaged the country for so long.
Currently, 17 out of 18 major insurgent groups
have come back to the legal fold. With regard to the
remaining Karen National Union (KNU) insurgent
group, its two main factions have opted for peace,
leaving only a small remnant of the KNU and former
narco-trafficking armed groups outside the legal fold.
Peace and stability now prevail in almost all corners of
Myanmar. That
has
resulted
in
significant
improvements in the daily life of civilians, in particular
women and children.
My delegation joins the rest of the international
community in its condemnation, in the strongest terms,
of all sexual and other forms of violence committed
against civilians in armed conflict, particularly women
and children. We must work together to prevent such
violence. Here, I wish to stress the importance of
avoiding the politicization of this important issue.
Sexual violence as a weapon of war must be strongly
condemned. In the same vein, fabricating allegations

36

and using disinformation as a weapon of political
pressure warrant strong condemnation.
My delegation therefore takes exception to the
unfounded allegations regarding sexual violence
levelled against the Myanmar armed forces. We
categorically reject them. The allegations levelled at
the Myanmar military come from groups associated
with the insurgents. Failing in their attempt to topple
the Government by force of arms, they have embarked
upon a disinformation campaign by fabricating
allegations. The Security Council has had first-hand
experience showing that reports emanating from exiles
are at variance with reality.
Rape is regarded by Myanmar people and
Government as a most dastardly and abhorrent crime.
Whenever such a crime is committed, we make sure
that the full force of law is applied against the
perpetrators. Whenever there are allegations,
investigations are carried out by the authorities and
organizations concerned, including the Myanmar
Women’s Affairs Federation; where there were genuine
cases, perpetrators were prosecuted and given
sentences ranging from 10 years to life imprisonment.
Rape and any other form of sexual violence are
unlawful in any circumstance and in all places. They
are also an offense against the dignity and integrity of
the victims. The international community, national
Governments and the United Nations system must all
work together to protect women and girls from genderbased violence, particularly rape and other forms of
sexual abuse.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Mansour (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
would first like to take this opportunity to convey to
Ms. Condoleezza Rice, Secretary of State of the United
States, my sincere congratulations on her country’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I
would also like to thank her for having taken the
initiative to organize this debate on a topic that is as
important as it is topical and which calls for a response
from the entire international community.
I also welcome the participation of SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, Mr. Srgjan Kerim, President of
the General Assembly, and many ministers this
morning. The active and involved participation in this
debate of so many delegations of Member States

08-39081

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

reflects the primary interest that we all attach to issues
of peace and security and to the central role of women
in achieving this and in achieving the ideals of our
universal organization. But it also highlights the role
that we must play in order to promote women’s rights
in general and to protect and provide care for the
victims of the horrors and brutalities of conflict in
particular.
While it is understood today that the international
community must make greater efforts to promote the
status and rights of women and to take appropriate
action in that context, even more so must we protect
them during times of conflict. Violence against women
is, by definition, a dehumanizing and unacceptable
practice and an abject violation of basic human rights.
Such practices must be fought and forcefully punished.
The efforts made to that end by the United
Nations and its Member States can only be praised and
encouraged. However, reports issued by the United
Nations and its specialized agencies give us alarming
statistics on the treatment of women and on their
sufferings and call upon us to redouble our efforts to
put an end, once and for all, to the violence and abuses
committed against women. We should recall, in this
context, that at the 2005 World Summit our heads of
State or Government reaffirmed the importance of
protecting civilians, particularly women, in conflict
and post-conflict situations. They also emphasized the
need to promote women’s rights as an essential
precondition for peace, security and development
worldwide.
The international community possesses an
impressive legal arsenal for eliminating all forms of
discrimination against women and for protecting them
as a vital force in every society. It is thus up to us to
ensure rigorous implementation of the provisions of the
relevant international legal documents and instruments,
and to ensure that women in our societies, particularly
those affected by war and conflict, finally benefit from
the protection and attention that they deserve in order
to bring about lasting peace and stability in our world.
Today’s debate makes it incumbent upon us to
make a collective commitment to ensure that women,
wherever they are, are no longer vulnerable, are no
longer placed in an inferior position and are no longer
exposed to discrimination, threats or terror. In this
framework, our civilizations must choose to genuinely
participate in the global move towards ensuring that

08-39081

women get the place and role that they deserve in
today’s societies as full-fledged citizens, partners
benefiting from equal opportunities and holders of
responsibilities in all sectors and at all levels. This is,
of course, a blueprint for a civilized society where
women are a guarantee of modernity, a vehicle for
development, a guarantor of political stability, and
especially a preventive security shield against any
obscurantist and retrograde tendencies — in other
words, the spearhead of a society mobilized for
progress and prosperity.
That, in any case, was the path taken in
promoting the status of women in Tunisia, launched
immediately after Tunisia achieved its independence in
1956, with the adoption of a personal status code. This
is one of the basic pillars of the new plan for our
society that is being undertaken by independent Tunisia
thanks in large part to the reformist revival brought to
our country by President Ben Ali. The principle of
gender equality under the law was thereby enshrined
and women were given a position at the forefront of
the social and political modernization of the country.
This has secured the position of Tunisian women in
political life, making them an essential component of
society and an effective, genuine agent of progress and
stability.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Benin.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation congratulates the United States of America
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We are particularly pleased, Sir, to see you
presiding over this public debate.
If there is one area where the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) leaves most to be desired, it is
that of the many forms of unconscionable violence and
abuse which parties to armed conflict continue to
inflict against women and young girls. This situation is
in complete contravention of international standards.
The most heinous and most traumatizing form of abuse
against women is sexual violence. The seriousness of
this abominable phenomenon is multiplied when it is
perpetrated on a large scale. But all of that still does
not compare to the use of mass rape as a weapon of
war or as an instrument for ethnic cleansing or outright
genocide.
The international community must acquire the
means to gain access to the lawless regions where such

37

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

crimes are committed and must carry out investigations
of reported cases. In this context, the Council should
be able to order special operations, by virtue of the
principle of the responsibility to protect, in order to
establish and document the involvement of armed
groups committing sexual violence against women.
Such investigations would aim also to determine the
nature and the scope of the action to be taken to put an
end to these criminal practices.
Synergy should also be established between the
activities of human rights advisers, where they are
deployed, and the monitoring and information
mechanism established within the framework of
resolution 1612 (2005), which was initiated by my
country, Benin. This mechanism has been proven itself:
it has enabled us to identify the perpetrators of abuse
against children in situations of armed conflict.
Strengthening the legal provisions to fight
impunity would be of great use, because the credibility
of these provisions could serve as a deterrent to the
parties to conflict. The International Criminal Court
has a crucial role to play in this context.
At the same time, we must put an end to the
stigmatization of women who are victims of rape and
give them back their dignity by organizing awarenessraising campaigns and by establishing structures for
psychological rehabilitation. This type of assistance to
victims and to communities affected by armed conflict
should be taken into account in the mandates of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations.
In general terms, protection against sexual
violence is an essential aspect of protecting civilians.
United Nations missions should analyse such violence
in order to define the concrete measures that can be
taken to prevent sexual attacks. It nearly goes without
saying that the deployment of women in the
contingents would make the fight against sexual
violence more effective because it could facilitate
contact and the gathering of sensitive information. But
the absence of women in these contingents should not
impede the development of effective strategies to
counter this phenomenon.
While amnesty for warlords is often the price to
pay in concluding peace accords, it is important to
ensure that serious crimes not be covered up, as long as
they are properly documented. These crimes should be
made imprescriptible worldwide so that those who are
suspected of having committed such crimes may be

38

brought to account as soon as possible in an
international or national jurisdiction as appropriate.
That said, we must enhance the awareness of law
enforcement agencies on the issue of sexual violence to
ensure that they effectively protect the population,
because it is not rare for all parties to an armed conflict
to be guilty of serious crimes against civilian
populations — who are just as fearful of Government
forces as of rebel forces.
The fight against sexual exploitation attributed to
members of peacekeeping operations must be
intensified. We must act more preventively than we
have by improving the awareness of contingent
members before they are deployed.
Care for victims of sexual violence is best
provided by women and by women’s civil society
organizations. They should regard this as a field of
action in which they have a clear comparative
advantage. Their participation in negotiations to
conclude and implement peace accords and to establish
truth and reconciliation bodies would be an additional
guarantee of the mainstreaming of gender-specific
issues. They could also help to ensure that effective
prevention policies are adopted.
In this context, my delegation believes that it is
entirely appropriate for the Security Council to adopt a
resolution on this issue on the basis of the draft text
(S/2008/403) circulated by the United States as part of
the preparations for this public debate. This initiative,
as a whole, has the support of my delegation.
Last year, it was an honour for Benin to have
contributed to bringing about consensus in the General
Assembly on the resolution on rape (General Assembly
resolution 62/134) that was initiated by the United
States. The Security Council’s adoption of this new
draft resolution will give the United Nations the tools
to ensure better monitoring of zones of conflict with a
view to better protecting civilians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mauritania.
Mr. Ould Hadrami (Mauritania) (spoke in
French): Owing to the lateness of the hour, I will be
brief.
At the outset, I congratulate you, Mr. President,
on having organized this important meeting on women
and peace and security: sexual violence in situations of

08-39081

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

armed conflict. I would also like to congratulate the
United States Secretary of State, Ms. Condoleezza
Rice, and the other ministers for their outstanding
statements and for having given them some of their
time to this important debate. I would also like to thank
Mr. Srgjan Kerim, President of the General Assembly,
and Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for the particular
attention they are devoting to combating sexual
violence against women in armed conflict.

moreover, are not limited to a single region of the
world.

The presence this morning of a great number of
ministers from States members of the Security Council
was a sign of the importance that the Council attaches to
this issue, because sexual violence can, to varying
degrees, pose a threat to international peace and security.

The Special Rapporteur on violence against
women has done remarkable work, but the persistence
of rape of women in armed conflict has reached a level
that requires a strengthening of the capacities of the
Office of the Special Rapporteur, particularly in human
resources; here, women should be the focus of the
choices that are made. That is why my delegation
believes that the proposal made by the Minister for
Development Cooperation of the Kingdom of Belgium
to appoint a woman special investigator on sexual
violence is appropriate as an effective means for
eradicating this practice.

In this respect, I would add the voice of
Mauritania to the chorus of those who have preceded
us to condemn the degrading and inhuman treatment
inflicted upon women through sexual violence
committed in armed conflict. Despite all of the legal
instruments — which Mauritania has ratified — and
despite the actions and initiatives taken by the
international community on the protection and
advancement of women, we must note that much
remains to be done. Women remain victims of the
abominable practice that is sexual violence.

Women must also play an active role in
peacekeeping operations. Such participation is
currently limited; this is especially linked to language
issues. To work for the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur as a military adviser, it is
not enough to speak two official languages of the
United Nations. This linguistic obstacle must be
overcome to allow women who have the qualifications
and who speak at least two United Nations languages
to apply for a post in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations if they wish.

We are against all forms of violence against
innocent civilian populations, all the more so when it is
women who are the victims. Islam, our holy religion,
orders us to cherish and protect women, who are after
all the mother, the sister, the wife, the daughter — in
short, those who are the dearest to us in human society.
Sexual violence against women exposes society as a
whole to serious dangers: early and unwanted
pregnancies for many women, HIV/AIDS infection for
mother and child, the spread of sexually transmitted
diseases, the total demoralization of women victims,
negative social repercussions for victims, and so on.

The President: The last speaker on my list is the
representative of San Marino, to whom I give the floor.

Statistics show that in recent armed conflicts it is
civilian populations, that is to say non-combatants,
who represent the majority of the victims. Women, who
are the main targets of sexual violence in these
conflicts, along with children, account for the greatest
number of victims.
In this face of this shameful phenomenon, the
international community should take all necessary
measures to put an end to it and adopt mechanisms
where zero-tolerance is required for perpetrators of
these abominable crimes against women, crimes which,

08-39081

Mr. Bodini (San Marino): I would like to thank
the Secretary of State of the United States of America,
Ms. Condoleezza Rice, and you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting today.
Over the years, the Republic of San Marino has
been a strong supporter of all campaigns against any
type of violence against women. As President of the
Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, our
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Fiorenzo Stolfi,
spearheaded the Council of Europe campaign against
violence against women.
San Marino welcomes the now United Nations
initiative on this subject initiated by the SecretaryGeneral. In that context, we recently organized an
event here at the United Nations, linking the work of
the Council of Europe with the activities of this
Organization.
I am happy to report that yesterday our
parliament adopted a very comprehensive law against
violence against women.

39

S/PV.5916 (Resumption 1)

San Marino, a small country without an army, has
been able to maintain its independence for more than
17 centuries. We condemn war and violence in general,
but, more than anything else, we condemn violence
against women and girls. Our women are the pillars of
our society and of our families, and our families are the
cornerstone of our society. Allowing violence against
women destroys the very fabric of our society and all
the dreams for our children’s peaceful and prosperous
future.

In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Viet
Nam

We are very proud to be among the sponsors of
today’s Security Council draft resolution on this very
important matter.

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1820 (2008).

The President: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution before it (S/2008/403). Unless I hear any
objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote
now.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

40

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m.

08-39081
