UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/772
18 August 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 17 AUGUST 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

In view of the key role that the United Nations continues to play in
providing support to the Government of Sierra Leone in its efforts to restore
peace and stability throughout the country, I am writing to inform you of the
Special Conference on Sierra Leone that I convened in New York on 30 July 1998.
The meeting was organized in close consultation with the Government of
Sierra Leone, whose delegation was led by President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah, and also
the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). It was attended by
representatives of 55 countries, including those of ECOWAS, the European Union
and the Security Council, the Secretaries-General of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and the Commonwealth and the Executive Secretary of ECOWAS, as well
as representatives of the European Commission, the Bretton Woods institutions
and relevant United Nations departments, programmes and agencies.
Representatives of several non-governmental organizations operating assistance
programmes in Sierra Leone participated as observers.
The purpose of the meeting was to focus international attention on the
situation in Sierra Leone and the Government’s initiatives aimed at resolving
the conflict, restoring secure conditions and effective administration countrywide and implementing a rehabilitation and recovery programme. Priority was
given to consideration of the following issues: the Government’s programme for
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of former combatants and its
peace-building initiatives; the role of the Monitoring Group of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOMOG) in re-establishing basic security; the
actions necessary to help ECOMOG meet its manpower and logistical needs; the
humanitarian situation and refugees; and further steps to be taken by the
international community in mobilizing and coordinating support for Sierra Leone.
In my opening statement, I noted that President Kabbah’s Government had
taken a number of steps to combat the effects of nine months of junta misrule
and sought to lay a lasting foundation for national reconciliation,
reconstruction and rehabilitation. Many obstacles needed to be overcome, and
the Special Conference would ensure that the problems would be attacked by the
Government and international community with a collective unity of purpose.
President Kabbah said that the Conference was an act of solidarity with the
people of Sierra Leone, where remnants of the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council
98-24245 (E)

190898

/...

S/1998/772
English
Page 2

(AFRC) junta and the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) were continuing to
perpetrate atrocities against civilians. Despite those gruesome actions, the
rebel forces had recently been granted a two-week amnesty by the Government. He
outlined the emergency needs of the country, including funding for the
Government’s disarmament and demobilization programme, logistical support for
ECOMOG, repatriation of refugees, emergency humanitarian aid and resources for
the rehabilitation of physical infrastructure. The Permanent Representative of
Nigeria to the United Nations, on behalf of the Chairman of ECOWAS, and the
Secretaries-General of OAU and the Commonwealth also addressed the opening
session.
Peace and security
The Foreign Minister of Sierra Leone, Mr. Sama Banya, provided an update of
political and security developments. Normal conditions had returned to Freetown
and the provincial and district headquarters towns except Kailahun, Kono and
Kabala. Parliament was functioning and a multi-party Cabinet had been
appointed. Trials for members of the illegal junta and their collaborators were
being carried out with due process in the presence of international monitors.
My Special Representative briefed the meeting on the role of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL) and the status of its deployment.
Following those presentations, general statements were made by representatives
of 16 Member States, as well as the European Union and the European Commission.
Major-General Timothy Shelpidi, ECOMOG Force Commander, outlined the role
of ECOMOG in reinstating the legitimate Government and restoring basic security
in Sierra Leone, indicating that 80 per cent of the country was now free from
rebel activity. He noted with appreciation contributions for the provision of
logistical assistance to ECOMOG made by the United States of America and pledged
by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland at the Conference
and appealed for further aid to meet the force’s needs, as listed in a document
that he made available to interested donors. He noted that there were currently
about 10,000 ECOMOG troops in Sierra Leone, mainly from Nigeria and Guinea, and
that an additional 5,000 were needed to enable the force to carry out its
mandate effectively. Several ECOWAS countries were prepared to contribute
additional troops but were unable to deploy or sustain them owing to financial
constraints, and Major-General Shelpidi appealed for donor assistance to
overcome those problems.
Mr. James Jonah, Minister of Finance and Economic Development of Sierra
Leone, gave an overview of the Government’s disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration plan for an estimated 33,000 former combatants, which was
developed in close consultation with major donors. He appealed for funding for
the programme, which will run for three years and cost approximately
$33.6 million. The initial phase, under which 5,000 members of the former army
and RUF who have already surrendered to ECOMOG will be demobilized, was already
under way. My Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict noted that
one of the most pressing challenges facing the Government of Sierra Leone was
the "crisis of the young", including child soldiers. He recommended that Sierra
Leone be adopted as a pilot case to which the international community would give
concerted political attention and resources to meet the needs of children and
women affected by armed conflict. The Executive Director of the United Nations
/...

S/1998/772
English
Page 3

Children’s Fund also noted that the important task of reintegrating the
estimated 4,000 child soldiers into society would require an intensive and longterm commitment of resources.
Promoting recovery
The Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs briefed the meeting on
the enormous humanitarian needs that the country continues to face, as access by
humanitarian organizations to some areas of the country remained restricted as a
result of continuing rebel activities. Displacement and security problems have
also limited the access of farmers to their fields, and a serious food shortage
is expected. He urged donors to fund the 1998 consolidated inter-agency appeal
for humanitarian assistance, which calls for $20.2 million in donations but has
received only $1 million. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
indicated that the Sierra Leone refugee crisis had been the largest in Africa in
1998. Since the beginning of the year there had been an outflow of 209,000
Sierra Leonean refugees to Guinea, bringing the total to 401,000, and an outflow
of 57,000 to Liberia, bringing the number to 184,000. The total number of
Sierra Leonean refugees was now 595,000. She called upon donors to contribute
to the appeal launched by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees for $7.2 million for Sierra Leonean refugees, in which $3 million had
so far been received.
Mr. Jonah also briefed the meeting on the Government’s peace-building
efforts and stressed the need for a revitalization of the economy, job creation
schemes, particularly for youth, and strengthening of the judiciary. The UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs noted that the Government’s programme
for rehabilitation and recovery was aimed at addressing the underlying causes of
the conflict and consolidating peace and should not be allowed to falter because
of a lack of resources.
Conclusions and follow-up action
The Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, in his capacity as
Chairman of the meeting, summarized the main points made by participants during
the proceedings. He noted that the Conference had been welcomed as a timely
initiative and that the degree of interest shown was reflected in the high level
of attendance and the participation of ministers and delegations sent from the
home Governments of various countries. The restoration of President Kabbah and
his Government on 10 March 1998 was warmly welcomed, and the steps taken since
then to restore security, re-establish constitutional order and begin the
process of reconciliation, reconstruction and rehabilitation were commended.
The continued resistance of remnants of AFRC and RUF, and especially their
perpetration of appalling atrocities, was strongly condemned, and they were
called upon to lay down their arms and surrender to the Government. The
meetings between President Kabbah and President Taylor of Liberia, held in Abuja
on 1 July and in Monrovia on 20 July, were welcomed, and the two leaders were
urged to continue to work towards improving relations between their two
countries and improving regional security. The importance of stopping the entry
of illegal supplies of weapons into Sierra Leone and ending direct or indirect
support of neighbouring countries to the rebels was stressed.
/...

S/1998/772
English
Page 4

The need for the Government to pursue policies directed at promoting
national reconciliation while at the same time ensuring that those responsible
for crimes and atrocities against the civilian population are brought to justice
was acknowledged. All those accused had to be given fair trials with full
respect for due process. In this regard, the Government’s invitation to the
United Nations and human rights groups to monitor the trials was welcomed.
The achievements of ECOWAS and the efforts of ECOMOG in the restoration of
the legitimate Government and basic security in many areas of the country were
commended. Re-establishing secure conditions was a top priority, and the
provision of technical assistance to ECOMOG to enable the force to meet its
manpower and logistical requirements was urgently needed. ECOWAS countries that
had yet to contribute troops to ECOMOG in Sierra Leone were urged to do so. The
deployment of UNOMSIL was strongly supported, and the need for good coordination
and cooperation between ECOMOG and UNOMSIL was stressed. Several countries
indicated their willingness to provide military observers and police advisers
for UNOMSIL.
The Government’s disarmament, demobilization and reintegration plan was
welcomed as a critical element in ensuring durable peace, and the importance of
providing adequate resources for it was stressed. Programmes aimed at meeting
the needs of youth and women affected by the conflict were of particular
importance. The humanitarian situation and the plight of the large number of
refugees remained a serious cause for concern for which donor assistance was
urgently needed. Appreciation was expressed to those countries providing
sanctuary for the refugees, particularly Guinea and Liberia. Finally, the
general view was that, while the political, military, humanitarian and social
challenges faced in Sierra Leone were daunting, they were not insurmountable. A
well-coordinated international response involving the United Nations and other
international organizations, non-governmental organizations and the private
sector was urgently needed.
It was encouraging that several countries and organizations expressed their
readiness to support the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the country, in
some cases by restarting their bilateral assistance programmes that had been
suspended following the military coup in May 1997.
At the end of the meeting, participants expressed their support for the
establishment of an international contact group to mobilize and coordinate
further support for Sierra Leone and noted that discussions should be held by
interested Member States in the near future to consider its composition and
modus operandi.

(Signed)

-----

Kofi A. ANNAN
