S/2019/549

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 July 2019
Original: English

Activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report covers the period from 1 January to 30 June 2019 and
provides an overview of developments and trends in West Africa and the Sahel. It also
outlines the activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) and progress made in the implementation of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel. In addition, it provides an update on the situation in
the Lake Chad basin, pursuant to Security Council resolution 2349 (2017).

II. Developments and trends in West Africa and the Sahel
2.
Since my previous report (S/2018/1175), the peace and security environment in
most of West Africa and the Sahel has remained relatively stable, despite worsening
insecurity in several parts of the Sahel. Raids and kidnappings by terrorist groups,
banditry and spreading intercommunal violence accounted for much of the volatility.
Terrorists and other unidentified armed groups continued to carry out raids on military
targets and civilian infrastructure in Burkina Faso, Mali, the Niger and Nigeria.
3.
A number of electoral processes unfolded in several countries during the
reporting period. Presidential, legislative and guber natorial elections were held in
Nigeria. A presidential election was held in Senegal, while legislative elections were
conducted in Benin and Guinea-Bissau.

A.

Political and governance trends
4.
On 28 April Benin held legislative elections, in which only two coalition parties
participated, namely Bloc républicain and Union progressiste, allies of President
Patrice Talon’s Mouvance présidentielle. Opposition parties were disqualified from
the poll because of new financial and other requirements imposed by amendments to
the electoral code and the adoption of a new charter governing political parties in
2018. Their disqualification was strongly contested, including by key opposition
leaders, notably the former Presidents, Boni Yayi and Nicéphore Soglo. At least two
people were reported to have been killed in the ensuing post -electoral violence.

19-09446 (E)

120719

*1909446*

S/2019/549

5.
In Burkina Faso, on 18 January, the Prime Minister, Paul Kaba Thieba, and his
Cabinet resigned amid widespread criticism of the Government ’s response to
worsening violence in the northern and eastern parts of the country. On 21 January,
the President, Roch Marc Christian Kaboré, appointed Christophe Joseph Marie
Dabiré as Prime Minister. A new 23-member Cabinet, which included 3 women, was
formed three days later. The Government acceded to the opposition’s demands to hold
a national dialogue before the 2020 presidential elections, and a committee was
formed to prepare the format and agenda of the discussion. Meanwhile, the President
accused the former President, Blaise Compaoré, of maintaining links with some of
the terrorist groups destabilizing the country in efforts to weaken the Government.
Judicial processes against Mr. Compaoré and some figures of his regime remained
pending.
6.
The Government of Côte d’Ivoire launched a political dialogue on 21 January
towards a reform of the Independent Electoral Commission, with the participation of
representatives of the Government, political parties and civil society. On 1 March, 22
opposition parties, including the Parti démocratique de Côte d’Ivoire –
Rassemblement démocratique africain of the former President, Henri Konan Bédié,
called for a broad and consensual reform of the Commission. On 8 February, the
Speaker of the National Assembly, Guillaume Soro, resigned. On 7 March, the
Assembly elected Amadou Soumahoro of Rassemblement des républicains, the party
of the President, Alassane Ouattara, to replace him. Opposition parties boycotted the
vote.
7.
In a Cabinet reshuffle on 15 March, the President of the Gambia, Adama Barrow,
dismissed several people, including the Vice-President and leader of the United
Democratic Party, Ousainou Darboe, amid mounting political tensions between them.
Key allies of Mr. Darboe in the Cabinet and other arms of the State were also
subsequently removed from office. Meanwhile, the country’s Truth, Reconciliation
and Reparations Commission commenced public hearings on 7 January and heard
some 57 witnesses, including 8 women, on human rights violations and crimes related
to the coup d’état in 1994. The Peacebuilding Fund provided financial support to the
Commission.
8.
In Ghana, the ruling New Patriotic Party and the main opposition party, the
National Democratic Congress, held consultations on 9 and 29 April, mediated by the
National Peace Council, on political vigilantism in the country. They agreed, inter
alia, on the need for continued dialogue on options for the total eradication of
vigilantism in the political sector and all other sectors of society.
9.
In Guinea, incremental progress was made in the implementation of the political
agreement of 12 October 2016. The political environment, however, became
increasingly polarized following the postponement of the legislative elections, which
were due in January, to November 2019, amid fears th at the presidential camp was
pushing for the replacement of the Constitution of 2010 to pave the way for a possible
third term of office for the President, Alpha Condé.
10. Following the release, in Liberia, of reports and presidential investigations into
the alleged disappearance of 16 billion Liberian dollars (approximately $102 million),
three senior officials of the Central Bank of Liberia were detained on 1 March but
later released on bail. On 29 March, the Associate Justice of the Supreme Court
Kabineh Ja’neh was impeached for misconduct, amid growing criticisms of the
Government.
11. In Mali, following concerns about the Government’s response to persistent
social tensions and worsening insecurity in the central part of the country, the Prime
Minister, Soumeylou Boubèye Maïga, and his Cabinet resigned. The President,
Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, subsequently appointed the outgoing Minister of Economy
2/17

19-09446

S/2019/549

and Finance, Boubou Cissé, as the new Prime Minister on 22 April. On 2 May, the
Prime Minister signed a political agreement with representatives of several opposition
parties which, inter alia, called for a national political dialogue to be held to discuss
the state of the nation and a revision of the Constitution. This enabled the formation
on 5 May of a new Government.
12. In Mauritania, on 28 January and 2 March, respectively, the President, Mohamed
Ould Abdel Aziz, and the ruling Union pour la République endorsed the Minister of
Defence, Mohamed Ould Cheikh Ahmed, as the party’s candidate for the presidential
election to be held on 22 June. Despite concerns that the Government was stifling
dissent, in particular after the arrest on 27 March of two bloggers for publishing
information allegedly smearing the reputation of the President and his family, civil
society activism persisted. On 31 December, the leader of the Initiative for the
Resurgence of the Abolitionist Movement in Mauritania and opposition presidential
candidate, Biram Dah Abeid, was released from detention.
13. Preparations continued for the presidential and legislative elections to be held
in the Niger in December 2020. However, the stalemate in political dialogue persisted,
with the opposition continuing to boycott the National Council for Political Dialogue
and the Independent National Electoral Commission.
14. Presidential and legislative elections were held in Nigeria on 23 February, while
gubernatorial and state assembly elections were held on 9 March. The incumbent
President, Muhammadu Buhari, of the All Progressives Congress, was re -elected. The
People’s Democratic Party rejected the results and contested them in court. The ruling
party also won a majority of the seats in the Senate and in the House of
Representatives, as well as 15 of the 29 gubernatorial positions. The elections were
generally peaceful despite isolated incidents that reportedly resulted in some loss of
life in some states. The President was sworn in on 29 May.
15. In Senegal, the President, Macky Sall, won the presidential election held on
24 February. On 2 April, he was sworn into office for a second five -year term, in
accordance with the Constitution, and, on 7 April, announced his new 35 -member
Cabinet, which included eight women. A constitutional amendment proposed by the
Government, approved by the Parliament on 4 May and promulgated into law on
14 May abolished the post of Prime Minister. On 28 May, the President presided over
the opening ceremony of a national dialogue he organized in the period following the
presidential election.
16. In Sierra Leone, political tensions between the Government and the opposition
All People’s Congress persisted. On 29 January, the President, Julius Maada Bio, of
the ruling Sierra Leone People’s Party, launched the Commission of Enquiry to
investigate allegations of corruption during the preceding 10-year administration of
the All People’s Congress. On 9 May, the President announced his first Cabinet
reshuffle. Nabeela Tunis was appointed Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation, and her predecessor, Alie Kabba, was appointed the Permanent
Representative of Sierra Leone to the United Nations in New York. From 23 to
25 May, a national dialogue on democratic consolidation for peace and national
cohesion was held in Freetown. It was attended by government officials, political
parties, civil society organizations, women’s groups and youth groups, religious
leaders, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Mano
River Union, diplomats and other members of the international communi ty. My
Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel attended the meeting, during
which the creation of an Independent Commission for Peace and National Cohesion
was approved, a decision that will be enacted by Parliament.
17. In Togo, preparations were launched for local elections announced for 30 June.
On 20 March, the President, Faure Essozimna Gnassingbé, met the leaders of
19-09446

3/17

S/2019/549

opposition parties, including members of the coalition of 14 opposition parties that
boycotted the legislative elections held on 20 December 2018, to discuss the situation
in the country. The new National Assembly elected Yawa Djigbodi Tsegan as the first
woman Speaker of Parliament. On 28 March, 17 members of the Independent
National Electoral Commission were sworn in. On 8 May, the National Assembly
adopted a constitutional reform which, inter alia, limited the presidential term of
office to five years, renewable once.

B.

Security trends
18. The security situation in Burkina Faso, Mali, the Niger and Nigeria remained
volatile. Violent non-State actors, including terrorist groups, criminal networks and
community-based and tribal militias, perpetrated repeated attacks against civilians
and security and defence forces. Security forces were also accused of extrajudicial
killings, brutality and forced disappearances of civilians. Meanwhile, the
Multinational Joint Task Force and the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
continued to conduct joint cross-border operations against violent extremists.
19. Despite government and community efforts, intercommunal violence increased,
fuelled by activities of violent extremist groups in Burkina Faso and central Mali.
Over 67 persons were killed in an attack in Yirgou, Burkina Faso, in early January,
while 160 people lost their lives in similar attacks in Ogossagou and Welingara, Mali,
on 23 March, increasing ethnic and community tensions in both countries. On a
number of occasions, I condemned attacks against places of worship and stressed the
fundamental right of religious freedom.
20. According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, from
January to March, 86 security incidents were registered in Burkina Faso, resulting in
376 deaths and injuries to 187 persons. Over 300 deaths caused by community -related
conflict were also recorded from January to May, according to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs. Owing to the deteriorating security situation, on 11 January, the
Government extended the state of emergency in 14 provinces in the country ’s six
regions for six months. It also launched Operation Otapuanu against terrorists and
other violent groups.
21. Despite counter-terrorism efforts, the “Islamic State West Africa Province”
faction of Boko Haram expanded its area of operations over the reporting period.
Boko Haram briefly took control of the city of Rann, in Nigeria, in January. The group
continued to use women suicide bombers against civilians and security and defence
forces in Borno State. According to the Nigeria Police Force, 189 terrorist attacks
were conducted in the northern states of Nigeria from January to April, resulting in
453 deaths and 201 kidnappings. The so-called Islamic State West Africa Province
increased the use of suicide vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices against
national security forces and the Multinational Joint Task Force in the countries of the
Lake Chad basin.
22. In the Niger, national and regional armed forces continued to carry out
operations against Boko Haram and the so-called Islamic State West Africa Province
in the islands of Lake Chad, resulting in civilian and military casualties. A number of
attacks leading to multiple deaths and kidnappings occurred in the country during the
reporting period.
23. Violent incidents between farmers and herders resulting in heavy huma n and
material losses and displacements were reported in many states in the Middle Belt
and north-east of Nigeria. In Kajuru and Kachia, in Kaduna State, 117 people were
killed and several houses, farms and livestock destroyed. In Zamfara State, armed
bandits, cattle rustlers and militia attacks on civilians reportedly resulted in about 497

4/17

19-09446

S/2019/549

casualties and 385 kidnappings between January and April. As part of the measures
against rising insecurity, the Government of Nigeria launched or scaled up military
operations in the affected areas.
24. There was a rise in piracy, armed robbery against vessels and other maritime
crimes in the Gulf of Guinea. According to the International Maritime Bureau, 22
incidents were reported in the first quarter of 2019. The regio n also accounted for all
worldwide crew kidnappings, with reports of 21 crew members seized in separate
incidents in Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Liberia, Nigeria and Togo in the first quarter
of 2019.
25. Transnational organized crime and illicit trafficking increased in West Africa
and the Sahel during the reporting period. Some 9.75 tons of cocaine were seized in
Praia, Guinea-Bissau, on 31 January. On 7 March, the Narcotics Control Board of
Ghana reported the largest confiscation of drugs in the country’s history with the
seizure at the Tema port of 5,851 compressed slabs of suspected cannabis with a street
value of $34.2 million. Trafficking in wildlife was also reported in the region.
According to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), t he Hong
Kong customs services seized more than $8 million worth of elephant tusks and
pangolin scales in a shipping container from Nigeria.

C.

Sustainable development trends
26. According to the African Development Bank, the region’s economic growth is
projected to reach 3.6 per cent in 2019 and 2020, thanks in large part to improvements
in the production and service sectors, as well as higher commodity prices, although
challenges and uneven performance are expected to remain. Côte d ’Ivoire and Ghana
continue to be among the highest-performing countries, with expected growth rates
of 7 per cent and 7.3 per cent, respectively, in 2019.
27. Challenges to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals in West
Africa and the Sahel included a low level of financial support and domestic and
external investments compared with other regions, in addition to security concerns,
which have also hampered regional economic integration, including the free
movement of persons, goods and services. Sustainable development remains a priority
in order to address the root causes of the crisis in the Sahel.

D.

Humanitarian trends
28. During the reporting period, the humanitarian situation, in particular in the
Sahel, was of grave concern. An upsurge in armed attacks caused massive population
displacements, compounding food insecurity and malnutrition, cyclical epidemics
and vulnerability to climate change and shocks. About 4.4 million people were
displaced across the Sahel, up from 3.2 million in 2018. The escalating violence had
a negative impact on civilian lives, heightening risks of abuse and rights violations,
severely affecting basic services and often depriving vulnerable people of critical
assistance.
29. In Burkina Faso, a spike in armed attacks in the northern and eastern provinces
since December 2018 triggered an unprecedented humanitarian emergency. More than
170,000 people were uprooted from their homes, most of them since the start of 2019.
The attacks and insecurity badly affected education and health services. More than
1,000 schools in the regions affected by violence remained closed, leaving 145,000
children without education, while about 150,000 people were deprived of access to

19-09446

5/17

S/2019/549

medical care. In February, the Government and humanitarian organizations appealed
for $100 million to assist around 900,000 people hardest hit by the crisis.
30. In the central and northern regions of Mali, armed raids and intercommunity
clashes forced thousands of people from their homes and severely affected education
and health services. As at March 2019, 100,000 people were internally displaced,
representing almost a threefold increase in one year. Owing to increasing insecurity
in Burkina Faso, around 8,000 Malians returned to their country, raising the number
of internally displaced persons in Mali to 100,000. In the northern Gao, Kidal,
Ménaka, Taoudénit and Timbuktu regions, one in four he alth centres was closed. As
at February 2019, 857 schools were closed in Gao, Kidal, Koulikoro, Ménaka, Mopti,
Ségou and Timbuktu regions because of insecurity. In the western part of the Niger,
attacks and insecurity displaced 70,000 people in the regions of Tillaberi and Tahoua,
in addition to the 55,000 Malian refugees hosted in the region.
31. In the Lake Chad basin, as at 31 May 2019, 2.5 million people were uprooted
from their homes. Some 1.7 million people continue to be internally displaced
because of the conflict in north-eastern Nigeria. The influx of displaced people into
camps in Borno State severely strained capacity and infrastructure, with newly
displaced people surviving in deplorable conditions. A rise in armed attacks in the
Diffa region, in the south-eastern part of the Niger, forced around 18,500 people to
flee from several villages. More than 100,000 people were internally displaced in the
region, which hosts almost 120,000 Nigerian refugees. The United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) developed stabilization plans for the Lake Chad
basin to address socioeconomic, conflict prevention and recovery needs for
communities newly liberated from insurgents, for which funding is needed.
32. Around 14 million people in Burkina Faso, Mali, the Niger and Nigeria will
require assistance in 2019. The humanitarian community requested $1.6 billion to
assist 11 million people, but only 23 per cent of the request had been received by June
2019, including 26 per cent for Nigeria.

E.

Human rights trends
33. Various perpetrators of violence continued to operate with impunity in the
region, in particular in the context of the deterioration of the security situation in the
Sahel, especially in Burkina Faso, the Niger and Mali, undermining the respect o f
international human rights and humanitarian law. Prolonged strikes by teachers ’
unions over wages and conditions of service led to the closure of schools for
significant periods of time, undermining the right to education in some countries and
having an adverse impact on the human rights situation in the region. Security forces
deployed excessive and disproportionate force in handling public demonstrations in
some countries, undermining respect for the rule of law and the enjoyment of
fundamental rights, such as the freedoms of association, assembly and expression.
34. Despite largely peaceful electoral processes, some violent incidents were noted
during recent elections in Nigeria, which had an impact on the rights to life, to
physical integrity and to vote. The National Human Rights Commission reported that
about 176 persons had been killed in election-related violence across Nigeria; other
sources reported higher figures. In Senegal, two people were reported to have been
killed in violent incidents during the presidential election. About four people were
reported to have been killed during the legislative elections held in Benin on 28 April.
35. Clashes between farmers and herders, banditry and cattle rustling continued to
contribute to systematic human rights abuses in the region. Local and international
human rights groups raised concerns over ongoing threats to the freedoms of the
press, association and expression, as illustrated by the assassination on 16 January of

6/17

19-09446

S/2019/549

Ahmed Hussein-Suale, a renowned investigative journalist in Ghana, and the alleged
infringements of the rights of certain media in Liberia and Benin. In Benin, Guinea
and Togo, local and international human rights groups raised concerns over the
alleged excessive and disproportionate response of security forces in the maintenance
of law and order during demonstrations organized by the political opposition or civil
society organizations. In Sierra Leone, human rights defenders raised concerns about
the shrinking political space following the general elections held in 2018 and the
harassment of and physical assault against their members, which they said were
perpetrated by State actors.
36. Nonetheless, some positive steps were taken by countries in the region to
improve the overall human rights situation. In the Gambia, the Truth, Reconciliation
and Reparations Commission began its hearings, with at least five public hearing
sessions held during the reporting period. In addition, the National Human Rights
Commission was finally established and made operational through the appointment
and swearing-in of its Commissioners. Likewise, in Sierra Leone, after the
controversial removal of Commissioners of the Human Rights Commission by the
Government, new Commissioners were appointed. In Togo, stakeho lders commended
the creation of the National Mechanism for the Prevention of Torture, which will
ensure that Togo meets its obligations under the relevant treaty. In Mauritania, Biram
Dah Abeid, the antislavery activist, was released from detention.
37. Challenges persisted in relation to efforts against impunity in the region. In
Burkina Faso, the trial of the alleged plotters of the attempted coup on 16 September
2015 continued. On 29 March, the African Court of Justice and Human and Peoples ’
Rights ruled against the conviction by a court in Benin of the renowned businessman
and prominent opposition figure Sebastien Ajavon, who remained in exile. In Côte
d’Ivoire, on 4 April, a group of three non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
petitioned the Supreme Court on the legality of the President’s decision to grant
amnesty to 800 individuals implicated in crimes committed during the post -electoral
crisis of 2010 and 2011. On 18 April, the Code of Conduct Tribunal in Nigeria
convicted the country’s Chief Justice, Walter Onnoghen, of a false declaration of his
assets. In Guinea, the trial of those indicted for the massacre on 28 September 2009
has yet to commence, despite the establishment of a steering committee for the
process.

F.

Gender issues
38. During the reporting period, UNOWAS and its partners continued to monitor
and advocate the enhanced participation of women in decision-making and leadership
across the region. Togolese parliamentarians elected the first woman Speaker of
Parliament in the country, while the new Governments formed in Burkina Faso,
Senegal and Togo saw a slight increase in the number of women compared with the
previous Governments. In the Gambia, the former Minister of Health and Social
Welfare Isatou Touray was appointed Vice-President on 15 March. In Côte d’Ivoire,
8 women were among the 33 senators appointed on 3 April. On 2 May, the National
Assembly of Guinea adopted a gender parity law for elective posts.
39. In Sierra Leone, on 14 February, the National Assembly unanimously ado pted a
resolution on women and peace and security based on Security Council resolution
1325 (2000). On 10 April, legislation was published in Cabo Verde on the
implementation of its criminal policy, which classifies gender-based violence as a
priority prevention crime.

19-09446

7/17

S/2019/549

III. Activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel
A.

Good offices and special assignments of my Special Representative
40. My Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel continued to support
efforts to sustain peace in the region, in collaboration with regional and international
partners, including through advocacy and support for inclusive processes in national
dialogues and elections, access to human rights and constitutional and institutional
reforms.
41. My Special Representative undertook a joint pre-electoral mission to Senegal
with the President of the ECOWAS Commission, Jean-Claude Kassi Brou, from 12 to
15 January. In their meetings with the President of Senegal, opposition parties and
the Chairperson of the Independent National Electoral Commission, they urged
stakeholders to address any contentious issues arising from the electoral process
through peaceful means and encouraged them to take stock of lessons learned after
the polls, including with regard to women’s participation. My Special Representative
subsequently conducted courtesy visits to the campaign headquarters of the five
presidential candidates between 7 and 10 February.
42. My Special Representative also visited Sierra Leone on 18 and 19 January, on a
joint preventive diplomacy mission with Mr. Brou. In their meetings with the
President, political parties, national institutions, civil society and the diplomatic corps
on the political environment and the reform agenda, they highlighted the importance
of political consensus and reconciliation to facilitate continued development.
43. In his capacity as my High-level Representative for Nigeria, my Special
Representative held consultations with key national stakeholders to promote an
environment conducive to peaceful elections in 2019. He visited Nigeria from 20 to
31 January, from 10 to 18 February and from 23 to 28 February and participated in
high-level dialogue forums organized by the United Nations and the National Peace
Committee to promote peaceful elections. On 13 February, he attended the second
signing event organized by the Committee, in which candidates committed to
accepting the results of the election. He also co-hosted, with the Committee, highlevel dialogues on peaceful elections in areas of concern, including in Benue, Kaduna,
Kano and Kwara States. A peace accord was signed during the event in Kano.
44. My Special Representative addressed the fifth ordinary summit of Heads of
State of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G5 Sahel), organized in Ouagadougou on
5 February. He urged the leaders to promote dialogue between State institutions and
vulnerable border communities, especially young peo ple, women and traditional
leaders, and offered United Nations support towards that end.
45. My Special Representative travelled to Abidjan from 14 to 17 April for meetings
with government officials, political parties and civil society organizations and ur ged
all to continue efforts to consolidate peace by strengthening national cohesion,
including through inclusive dialogue.
46. On 7 and 8 March, my Special Representative travelled to Guinea -Bissau on a
solidarity visit ahead of the legislative elections o n 10 March. He met the President,
José Mário Vaz, and political parties, the National Electoral Commission and key
stakeholders to discuss the political environment and technical conditions ahead of
the elections. He highlighted the importance of peaceful and inclusive elections and
called upon all parties to respect the outcome of the vote and to work together in
pursuing the country’s development goals.

8/17

19-09446

S/2019/549

47. My Special Representative visited Togo on 17 and 18 March as part of his good
offices efforts. He met the President, other national authorities and political actors to
discuss electoral, constitutional and institutional reforms. He encouraged
stakeholders to continue the political dialogue and ensure an inclusive and consensual
process for the envisaged local elections. He visited Benin on 19 and 20 March, ahead
of the legislative elections held on 28 April. He met the President and political
stakeholders and encouraged all parties to prioritize consensual and inclusive
electoral arrangements. In both countries, he also highlighted the need for a regional
approach and solidarity to stem threats posed by increased terrorist activities in the
subregion.

B.

Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission
48. The Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission continued to work towards fully
implementing the judgment of the International Court of Justice of October 2002,
which will culminate in a statement about the boundary. Planned field operations were
pursued under reinforced security protocols.
49. The parties continued to work towards the pillar construction targets, despite
insecurity and tensions along their common land boundary. During the reporting
period, the construction and placement of a total of 353 pillars were completed (for
the 335 initially projected). In addition, the parties met in Douala, Cameroon, from
23 to 26 April and in Calabar, Nigeria, from 24 to 30 May, to assess ongoing field
operations and plan for the next phase, in which construction will be resumed in
October 2019. The trust fund for pillar construction was replenished with a
contribution of $3 million by the Government of Cameroon. Nigeria is expected to
finalize payment of a second instalment of $1.5 million, which will make the next
phases of construction possible.
50. My Special Representative, who also serves as Chair of the Mixed Commission,
pursued his engagements with the heads of the Nigerian and Cameroonian delegations
towards resolving outstanding areas of disagreement in the remaining 100km of the
boundary. A mediation team travelled to Yaoundé in March to follow up on earlier
discussions.

C.

Enhancing subregional capacities to address cross-border and
cross-cutting threats to peace and security
51. During the period under review, UNOWAS continued to enhance its
collaboration with regional partners and United Nations country teams in the region
on issues of common interest, notably women and youth, climate change, human
rights, security and conflict prevention. UNOWAS collaborated with the
Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding Fund to support national and
cross-border programmes on addressing tensions related to the impact of climate
change, preventing violent extremism, addressing conflicts related to transhumance
and empowering young people and women in peacebuilding processes and conflict
prevention mechanisms. Around $90 million from the Peacebuilding Fund was
allocated to West Africa and the Sahel in 2018. Of that amount, $65 million was given
to 9 of the 10 countries of the Sahel that were prioritized.
52. UNOWAS provided technical and financial support to partners in Benin, Ghana,
Guinea, the Gambia and Togo for a project launched on 29 January aimed at involving
young people in peace processes in West Africa and the Sahel, including through
awareness-raising activities on Security Council resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419

19-09446

9/17

S/2019/549

(2018) on youth and peace and security. It was focused on data collection at the
national level and partnership building with national and local media.
53. Following the assumption by Burkina Faso in February 2019 of the presidency
of the Conference of Heads of State of the G5 Sahel, UNOWAS undertook an
assessment mission to the country in March to identify areas for United Nations
support. The United Nations and the G5 Sahel signed agreements on support for the
secretariat of the Burkina Faso presidency of the Group and on organizing a forum on
the issue of the inability of children to attend school in areas affected by conflicts in
the Sahel subregion. The United Nations and the G5 Sahel also decided to jointly
support community dialogue projects in cross-border areas and to assist in
transferring the Sahelian Centre for Threat Analysis and Early Warning from
Nouakchott to Ouagadougou.
54. As part of its support for the G5 Sahel in building resilience in the prevention
of radicalization and violent extremism, the Office of Counter-Terrorism, in
collaboration with UNOWAS, launched a process to develop a manual of best
practices for the process. In that context, experts of the Regional Cell for the
Prevention of Radicalization and Violent Extremism from G5 Sahel countries met in
Nouakchott from 26 to 28 March. They shared experiences and identified more than
30 best practices. A validation workshop to complete the process was subsequently
organized in Nouakchott in May 2019.
55. On 10 May, at the invitation of my Special Representative, the biannual meeting
of the heads of United Nations peace missions in West Africa and the Sahel was held
in Guinea-Bissau, with the participation of my Special Representative in the country
and United Nations resident coordinators for Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia. Participants
exchanged views on the peace and security situation in the region and agreed to
continue cooperation and strengthen information-sharing on key issues, including
cross-border criminality.
56. Pursuant to requests in two Security Council documents (S/2018/749 and
S/PRST/2018/3), UNOWAS, with support from the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, formed a close partnership with the World Food Programme,
the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), UNDP, the World Bank,
national Governments and other key partners, including independent experts, for a
possible response to climate-related security risks in West Africa and the Sahel region.
UNOWAS and ECOWAS also launched a joint effort to explore ways of introducing
conflict-sensitive approaches to national climate change adaptation plans in West
Africa.
57. The United Nations System Staff College, UNOWAS and ECOWAS jointly
developed a capacity enhancement programme in conflict analysis and prevention for
women. On 4 and 5 December 2018, UNOWAS hosted a design workshop in Dakar
to develop the methodology for the programme, which was subsequently rol led out
from 13 to 17 May at the Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training Centre in
Accra.
Security sector reform
58. During the reporting period, UNOWAS continued to facilitate security sector
reform processes in the region. In the Gambia, the United Nations security sector
reform advisory team provided support to national authorities, including in finalizing
the national security policy and strategy to guide short - and long-term reforms in the
security sector, ensuring that institutions attain the capacities necessary to
independently provide security services to the population, in anticipation of the future
withdrawal of the ECOWAS Mission in the Gambia. The national security policy was
launched by the President on 10 June. The security sector reform team also worked
10/17

19-09446

S/2019/549

closely with the Government to strengthen its national coordination bodies and
mainstream gender into the security sector reform process, including through regular
training and advisory meetings. The United Nations worked with inter national
partners, including ECOWAS, the African Union and the European Union, to develop
joint analysis and enhance coordination in the delivery of security sector reform related assistance to the country.
59. In response to the challenging security situation in Burkina Faso, the United
Nations security sector reform strategic advisory team focused its support for national
authorities on developing a national security policy and architecture, as well as
sectoral strategies for justice, defence and internal security, with a view to enhancing
national capacities to protect citizens against threats posed by violent extremist
groups and illegal self-defence groups. The team also intensified efforts to strengthen
security sector governance and oversight, including capacity-building for
parliamentarians and support for the establishment of a civil society platform in which
members were trained and deployed to local communities in various regions of the
country.
60. In Guinea, the security sector reform advisory team continued to provide
support by reinforcing the oversight mechanisms for the parliament and the General
Inspectorate of Security Services. The team also provided support to the Government
for the preparation of a draft bill against terrorism, which was submitted to
parliament, and for the elaboration of a presidential decree establishing a training
centre for peacekeeping operations, as part of the country’s contribution to
international peacekeeping.
61. In Côte d’Ivoire, the United Nations security sector reform advisory team
provided support to national authorities for the enhancement of civilian control over
security forces, as well as the socioeconomic reintegration of ex -combatants.
62. The support given to the above-mentioned countries was facilitated by resources
from the Peacebuilding Fund and assistance from United Nations entities.
Conflicts between herders and farmers
63. During the period under review, UNOWAS continued discussions with
ECOWAS on the organization of a joint experience-sharing workshop to identify best
practices in ECOWAS member States for a regional approach to preventing and
resolving disputes between farmers and herders. Meanwhile, the Peacebuilding Fund
provided funds to develop projects to operationalize the analysis and
recommendations of a study on pastoralism and security in West Africa conducted by
ECOWAS and the Economic Commission for Africa. Implementation of related
projects funded with $10 million by the Fund in 2018 continued during the first
semester of 2019.
64. In November 2018, I requested my Special Representative to bring together the
United Nations system to develop a road map to address the long -term causes and
drivers of the conflicts between herders and farmers, including through analysi s and
information-sharing, prevention and advocacy, with a focus on strengthening regional
and cross-border efforts and linking regional efforts to the country level through the
engagement of my resident coordinators.
Lake Chad basin
65. During the reporting period, implementation of Security Council resolution
2349 (2017) on a regional response to the crisis in the Lake Chad basin continued. A
joint technical assessment mission of UNOWAS and the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) was deployed to Cameroon and Chad from 11 to
19-09446

11/17

S/2019/549

24 February, and to the Niger from 11 to 17 March. From 14 to 16 March, my Special
Representative for West Africa and the Sahel and my Special Represent ative for
Central Africa and Head of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
undertook a high-level joint mission to Chad with the Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the European Union Special
Representative for the Sahel, Ángel Losada. The Special Representatives
subsequently visited Cameroon from 23 to 27 April and the Niger from 28 to 30 April.
In all three countries, they met government officials, the Commanders of the
Multinational Joint Task Force, relevant institutions, members of the diplomatic
corps, civil society representatives and the United Nations country team. Discussions
were focused on the security and humanitarian situation in those countries, as well as
the local, national and international responses to the daunting security and
humanitarian challenges in the Lake Chad basin as a whole.
66. The UNOCA-UNOWAS team visited Gomirom Doumou in Chad, the
northernmost region of Cameroon and the Diffa region of the Niger. It visited camps
of refugees and internally displaced persons and met former Boko Haram fighters
who had surrendered. It stressed the need for a comprehensive approach to addressing
the challenges posed by Boko Haram, including security, governance and
development aspects, and encouraged Cameroonian authorities to speed up the
preparation of a territorial action plan for the North and Far North regions within the
framework of implementing the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience
Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin Region. During
the reporting period, UNDP continued to strengthen the management and
coordination capacity of the Liptako-Gourma Integrated Development Authority.
Strategy for cross-border security in the Mano River Union
67. From 13 to 17 May, UNOWAS conducted a technical mission to the Mano River
Union secretariat in Freetown and to the ECOWAS Commission in Abuja. The
discussion between the mission and the ECOWAS Commission was focused on the
functioning of the joint border security and confidence-building units of the Union,
which play a significant role in social cohesion and conflict prevention in the
subregion. The mission discussed the need to update the 2003 strategy for cross border security in the Union and the revitalization of the Union secretariat. From 21 to
23 June, UNOWAS conducted an assessment mission to the Union secretariat on new
and emerging cross-border security threats in the subregion.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
68. During the reporting period, efforts against maritime crime continued to be
focused on bolstering the operational capacity of relevant agencies to patrol their
waters and on strengthening the capacity of the criminal justice chain to detect,
investigate and prosecute cases of piracy and maritime crime. Countries around the
Gulf of Guinea continued to build a collective maritime security response in the
various coordination zones through the Interregional Coordinating Centre, the
Regional Centre for Maritime Security in West Africa and the Regional Centre for
Maritime Security in Central Africa. The United States Navy, jointly with 33 other
countries, conducted a two-week maritime training course in the Gulf of Guinea to
improve monitoring and maritime safety on the West African coastli ne.
Drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
69. My Special Representative continued to advocate efforts against drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime in close cooperation with relevant
partners in the region.

12/17

19-09446

S/2019/549

D.

Implementation of the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel
70. During the period under review, UNOWAS continued to work closely with my
Special Adviser for the Sahel on the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel. My Special Adviser ended his tenure in March with an officer
in charge covering his functions and ensuring continuity in implementing the United
Nations Support Plan for the Sahel. I requested the United Nations system to
undertake an internal review to determine the functions and capacities further
required to advance the strategy efficiently, while addressing the humanitarian development nexus and its linkages to peace and security. My Special Representative
continued to advocate support for the implementation of t he recommendations of the
high-level meetings on the Sahel in the region, as well as those of his bilateral
engagements.
71. My Special Adviser and the officer in charge continued to implement the United
Nations Support Plan for the Sahel and advocate for further investment in the
countries of the region. A joint programme on climate -resilient and sustainable
agriculture has been developed for immediate implementation in conjunction with the
Liptako-Gourma Integrated Development Authority. The joint program me, which
principally targets women agricultural producers of the border regions of Mali,
Burkina Faso and the Niger, will be implemented jointly by the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), UNEP, UNDP
and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations with the support of
Sweden. The countries of the region have started the implementation of the priority
investment plan through their emergency development programme in Burkina Faso,
Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger, in partnership with the Alliance for the Sahel
and the United Nations.
72. My Special Representative attended the joint conference for the launch of the
regional refugee response plan for Nigeria for 2019 and 2020, organized on
29 January by UNDP and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in Abuja, for 200 participants from the federal and state Governments,
including officials of Chad, Cameroon and the Niger and representatives of the
diplomatic corps, NGOs and civil society organizations, entities of the United Nations
system and the private sector. The refugee response plane for Nigeria represents one
of the first examples of concrete implementation of the “New way of working” of the
triple nexus, linking humanitarian, development and peace issues in refugee
operations in Africa. In addition, UNDP had been leading the elaboration of the
United Nations joint regional project in support of efforts toward improving
livelihoods and the economic and human security of communities and vulnerable
groups throughout the border areas of Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger (member
States of the Liptako-Gourma Integrated Development Authority).
73. In January and May 2019, my Special Representative visited the Gambia and
met with the President to discuss political developments, the security sector,
sustainable development and economic reforms, as well as reconciliation efforts, for
which United Nations Peacebuilding Fund has thus far contributed $10.1 million. He
returned to Banjul from 7 to 9 May for further consultations with government
officials, the opposition, civil society and other stakeholders on these issues.
74. On 1 February, the Government of Mali, with the assistance of international
partners, launched a new five-year national action plan to combat trafficking in
persons and assimilated practices. UNODC conducted training for criminal justice
practitioners in Mali and the Niger on international judicial cooperation in combating
trafficking in persons and the smuggling of migrants. In March, UNODC also trained

19-09446

13/17

S/2019/549

100 officers of the police component of the Joint Force from Burkina Faso, with
financial support from the Government of Germany and in collaboration with the
Permanent Secretariat of the G5 Sahel and other partners, including the European
Union, the International Criminal Police Organization, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. UNODC, working in partnership with the
University of Ouagadougou II, established a master ’s programme in anti-corruption
at the University.
75. From 19 to 22 February, my Special Representative led an inter-agency mission
to Burkina Faso. In its meetings with national authorities, civil societ y
representatives, political parties and international partners, the mission recommended
an integrated, scaled-up approach in United Nations support to immediate
humanitarian and security-related priorities, as well as medium-term efforts to
strengthen peacebuilding efforts, conflict prevention mechanisms and sustainable
development. My Special Representative returned to Ouagadougou on 24 March to
accompany the Security Council on its visit, amid rising security challenges in some
parts of the country. Interlocutors expressed appreciation for the United Nations
efforts and leadership in the humanitarian response and appealed for more
international efforts towards addressing the security crisis and development
challenges in the country.
76. Meanwhile, at the request of the Government of Burkina Faso, the Office of
Counter-Terrorism and the Permanent Secretariat of the National Border Commission
launched a programme to help to improve the country’s border security and its
capacity to detect and interdict violent extremists and terrorists.
77. Burkina Faso assumed the presidency of the G5 Sahel during the ordinary
summit of Heads of State of the Group on 5 February in Nouakchott. Since then, there
has been continued mobilization of partners and resources. Following a meeting held
on the margins of the World Bank-International Monetary Fund meeting on 13 April
2019 in Washington, D.C., it was agreed that a more integrated approach would be
strengthened to enhance the impact of development aid. On 26 April, the G5 Sahel
and the Alliance for the Sahel met in Ouagadougou to review progress in the
emergency development programme. On 14 May, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
the G5 Sahel met with their European counterparts and European Union officials in
Brussels, to discuss ways to address the recent deterioration of the security situation
in the region, and reaffirmed the strategic importance of the Sahel for the European
Union. On 16 May, they discussed long-term investment through development aid.
78. On 1 May, the G5 Sahel held an extraordinary summit of Heads of State in
Ouagadougou. The Chancellor of Germany, Angela Merkel, attended the meeting
during her visit to the Sahel. Discussions were focused on the fight against terrorism
and organized crime and the overall security challenges in the region. The Chancellor
announced a pledge of $51 million to support efforts by Burkina Faso to combat
violent extremism. Participants called for further support for the operationalization
of the Joint Force and for additional assistance to implement the emergency
programme for development targeting vulnerable populations. They emphasized the
prevailing views in the region, namely that the intervention of Western countries in
Libya in 2011 at least partly engendered the current insecurity in the Sahel and that
such countries should therefore redouble efforts to stabilize the country.
79. On 3 May, my Special Representative and the Head of the African Union
Mission for Mali and the Sahel co-chaired the seventh meeting of the Ministerial
Coordination Platform for the Sahel, hosted by the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
African Integration, International Cooperation and Diaspora of Chad, in N ’Djamena.
At the meeting, the worsening security situation in the Sahel, the impact of milit ary
14/17

19-09446

S/2019/549

operations, and migration issues were discussed. Participants reiterated the
importance of the platform as a mechanism enabling information exchange and
coordination. They called for its strengthening and on donors to honour their pledges
for the Joint Force and the priority investment plan, as well as the stabilization
strategy developed by the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the African Union. The
Niger agreed to take over the presidency of the platform from Chad.

E.

Promotion of good governance, respect for the rule of law, human
rights and gender mainstreaming
80. Pursuant to its mandate to facilitate exchanges between stakeholders in the
region in the promotion of a culture of human rights, the rule of law and good
governance, UNOWAS organized a consultation on decentralization and its links to
conflict prevention. Practitioners, policymakers and representatives from civil society
and academia took part in the consultation to discuss linkages between conflict
prevention and decentralization efforts in West Africa and the Sahel, focusing on
Mali, Senegal and Sierra Leone.
81. UNOWAS, in collaboration with the OHCHR Regional Office for West Africa,
ECOWAS and the Network of National Human Rights Institutions in West Africa,
organized the annual regional consultations for national human rights institutions,
which were held in Accra from 29 May to 1 June. The meeting, which was attended
by representatives of those institutions, provided a platform for experience sharing
between the institutions and a forum to review the human rights situation in West
Africa and the Sahel, as well as to enhance the role of such institutions in addressing
challenges arising from electoral violence, violent extremism and irregular migration.
UNOWAS provided support to the NGO forum during the sixty-fourth ordinary
session of the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, held in Egypt from
24 April to 14 May.
82. During the reporting period, UNOWAS provided support to country
representatives of the Working Group on Women, Youth, Peace and Security in West
Africa and the Sahel for the training of more than 50 women and young people in
Benin, Mauritania, Nigeria, Senegal and Togo, who were subsequently deployed to
monitor the elections held in their respective countries.
83. On 3 April, my Special Representative chaired the first thematic session of the
Working Group in 2019, which was focused on UNOWAS support to countries that
organized elections in the first quarter of 2019, namely Guinea -Bissau, Nigeria and
Senegal. A second session, held on 24 April, was attended by 100 participants from
Benin, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea, Mali,
Mauritania and Senegal. Participants took stock of the achievements of the Working
Group, 10 years after its establishment by UNOWAS in partnership with ECOWAS,
UN-Women and other stakeholders in the region.
84. From 15 to 17 April, UNOWAS provided support for the strategic planning
workshop of the Network on Peace and Security for Women in the ECOWAS Region.

IV. Observations and recommendations
85. West Africa and the Sahel registered many positive developments during the
reporting period. The deteriorating security situation, at the same time, negatively
affected peace and stability in a number of countries, limiting the advancement of
opportunities in the subregion. It is therefore imperative that the international

19-09446

15/17

S/2019/549

community intensify efforts to help countries to mitigate governance deficits and
provide them with capacity-building support.
86. I am deeply troubled by the spiralling terrorist activi ties and violent extremism
in the Sahel and Lake Chad basin, disrupting livelihoods and leading to loss of life,
internal displacement and refugee flows; the serious humanitarian consequences,
including reduced access to basic services, especially health, education, food and
markets, are a matter of grave concern. I urge countries of the region and partners to
redouble their efforts to address the root causes of the phenomenon, through a more
integrated approach encompassing humanitarian assistance, develop ment aid,
security aspects and human rights dimensions.
87. I commend the countries participating in the Multinational Joint Task Force and
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel for their efforts to address the
multifaceted challenges in the subregion. I encourage partners to continue to support
such initiatives.
88. I also urge Member States to intensify efforts towards addressing the root causes
of insecurity and instability in the subregion, including poverty and inequalities,
exclusion and marginalization, the lack of access to social services and economic
opportunities, human rights violations and the impacts of climate change. I call upon
partners to fully support holistic and integrated approaches to addressing those
challenges, including through the implementation of the stabilization strategy for
countries affected by the Boko Haram crisis, the G5 priority investment plan for the
Sahel, the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel and the United Nations
Support Plan for the Sahel.
89. Climate change has continued to have an increasing impact on conflict dynamics
in the Lake Chad basin and parts of the Sahel. I encourage national, regional and
international partners to redouble efforts in response to prevent and respond to threats
related to climate change, in line with the resilience pillar of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel and the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel.
90. The continuous limitation of humanitarian access in the Lake Chad basin and in
the Liptako-Gourma region increasingly results in avoidable human suffering. I call
upon the parties concerned to respect the humanitarian principles of impartiality and
neutrality and allow the unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance to
populations in need, especially children, the elderly, women and other vulnerable
groups.
91. I appreciate the ongoing hospitality and support provided by the Governments
of the region to refugees and host communities in West Africa and the Sahel, and urge
partners to increase the humanitarian assistance.
92. I commend Benin, Guinea-Bissau, Nigeria and Senegal for holding generally
peaceful elections during the review period. While elections have, for the most part,
led to the peaceful exercise of and change in power in the subregion, significant gaps
remain with regard to good governance. Pre-electoral and post-electoral periods
continue to be characterized by tensions, antagonistic contests and disputes in some
cases, such as in Benin, Nigeria, Senegal and Sierra Leone. I encourage authorities
and national stakeholders to work together to ensure a level playing field for peaceful,
inclusive and credible elections in the region.
93. I welcome the progressive adoption and implementation of gender parity
legislation and the growing number of women in senior government positions in West
Africa and the Sahel. I urge countries in the subregion to take specific measures, in
accordance with their national and regional commitments, to enhance inclusive
processes and political, social and economic opportunities for women. I also welcome

16/17

19-09446

S/2019/549

the efforts made by some countries to enhance the participation of youth in national
peace, security and development strategies.
94. I urge continued support towards enhancing institutional and operational
frameworks for the promotion and protection of human rights. With key elections in
the region approaching, I urge Member States to continue to ensure that the freedoms
of assembly, expression and of the press, which are essential for a democratic process
and contribute to the credibility of electoral processes, are respected.
95. It is equally crucial to address the apparent instrumentalization of rule of law
institutions, in particular the judiciary and parliaments, for political ends because thi s
tends to erode confidence in State institutions and could threaten the maintenance of
law and order.
96. I welcome the renewed commitment of the Governments of Cameroon and
Nigeria to completing the demarcation of the land and maritime boundaries between
the two countries. I encourage them to renew efforts to resolve any residual
differences in accordance with the judgment of the International Court of Justice of
10 October 2002, with a view to accelerating the completion of the mandate of the
Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission.
97. I wish to express my appreciation to the Governments of West Africa and the
Sahel region, the African Union, ECOWAS, the G5 Sahel, the Mano River Union, the
Gulf of Guinea Commission and the Lake Chad Basin Commission for their continued
cooperation with UNOWAS. I also extend my appreciation to the United Nations
system entities in West Africa and the Sahel, civil society organizations and other
institutions for their close partnership with UNOWAS. I commend and further
encourage the close collaboration between the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa and UNOWAS on an increasing range of topical and transversal
challenges, which reflects and responds proactively to the enhanced cooperation
between the Economic Community of Central African States and ECOWAS. I wish to
express particular appreciation to my Special Representative, as well as the staff of
UNOWAS and the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission, for their continuing efforts
to advance peace and security in West Africa and the Sahel.

19-09446

17/17
