S/2001/1178

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 December 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 29 November 2001 from the Secretary-General
to the President of the Security Council
As you are aware, my Special Adviser for Special Assignments in Africa,
Ibrahim Gambari, has been actively engaged in efforts to promote peace in Angola.
Those efforts have had a positive impact on relations between the Government of
Angola and the United Nations system and have opened new channels of
cooperation.
There are still many issues which need to be addressed in Angola, such as
getting the parties to agree to negotiate under the Lusaka Protocol, supporting civil
society, assisting the Government in developing pilot projects for resettlement,
helping to create conditions for the holding of credible elections, and management
of the peace and reconciliation fund as requested by the Government of Angola.
Moreover, the war in Angola continues to have adverse regional repercussions,
despite the fact that Angola, Zambia and Namibia have established joint security
mechanisms to monitor the borders.
Mr. Gambari has also been providing advice to me on other African issues,
including the Great Lakes region, southern Africa and the work of the Open-ended
Ad Hoc Working Group of the General Assembly on the Causes of Conflict and the
Promotion of Durable Peace and Sustainable Development in Africa.
It would be desirable for Mr. Gambari to continue to monitor developments in
the subregion and remain engaged in efforts to promote the peace process, as well as
to perform coordinating functions regarding Secretariat support for the Open-ended
Working Group of the General Assembly.
For these reasons, I have decided to extend Mr. Gambari’s appointment as my
Special Adviser for Special Assignments in Africa until 28 February 2003.
I should be grateful if you would bring this matter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-69226 (E) 121201

*0169226*
