A/RES/55/86

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
21 February 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 113

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/55/601)]

55/86.

Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights
and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to selfdetermination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 54/151 of 17 December 1999, and taking note of
Commission on Human Rights resolution 2000/3 of 7 April 2000, 1
Recalling also all of its relevant resolutions, in which, inter alia, it condemned
any State that permitted or tolerated the recruitment, financing, training, assembly,
transit and use of mercenaries with the objective of overthrowing the Governments
of States Members of the United Nations, especially those of developing countries,
and recalling further the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the
Organization of African Unity,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations concerning the strict observance of the principles of sovereign equality,
political independence, the territorial integrity of States, the non-use of force or of
the threat of use of force in international relations and the self-determination of
peoples,
Reaffirming also that, by virtue of the principle of self-determination, as
developed in the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, 2 all peoples have the right freely to determine, without external
interference, their political status and to pursue their economic, social and cultural
development and every State has the duty to respect this right in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter,
Recognizing that mercenary activities continue to increase in many parts of the
world and take on new forms, permitting mercenaries to operate in a better
organized way, with increased pay, and that their numbers have grown and more
persons are prepared to become mercenaries,
1

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum
(E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
2
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

00 56455

A/RES/55/86

Alarmed and concerned about the danger that the activities of mercenaries
constitute to peace and security in developing countries, in particular in Africa and
in small States, and also elsewhere,
Deeply concerned about the loss of life, the substantial damage to property and
the negative effects on the policy and economies of affected countries resulting from
mercenary aggression and criminal activities,
Convinced that it is necessary for Member States to ratify the International
Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries
adopted by the General Assembly on 4 December 1989 3 and to develop and maintain
international cooperation among States for the prevention, prosecution and
punishment of mercenary activities,
Convinced also that, notwithstanding the way in which mercenaries or
mercenary-related activities are used or the form they take to acquire some
semblance of legitimacy, they are a threat to peace, security and the selfdetermination of peoples and an obstacle to the enjoyment of human rights by
peoples,
1.
Welcomes the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on
Human Rights on the use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and
impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination; 4
2.
Reaffirms that the recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries
are causes for grave concern to all States and violate the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations;
3.
Recognizes that armed conflict, terrorism, arms trafficking and covert
operations by third Powers, inter alia, encourage the demand for mercenaries on the
global market;
4.
Urges all States to take the necessary steps and to exercise the utmost
vigilance against the menace posed by the activities of mercenaries and to take the
necessary legislative measures to ensure that their territories and other territories
under their control, as well as their nationals, are not used for the recruitment,
assembly, financing, training and transit of mercenaries for the planning of activities
designed to destabilize or overthrow the Government of any State or threaten the
territorial integrity and political unity of sovereign States, or to promote secession or
to fight the national liberation movements struggling against colonial or other forms
of alien domination or occupation;
5.
Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to consider signing or
ratifying the International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and
Training of Mercenaries;3
6.
Welcomes the cooperation extended by those countries that have received
visits from the Special Rapporteur;
7.
Also welcomes the adoption by some States of national legislation that
restricts the recruitment, assembly, financing, training and transit of mercenaries;
8.
Invites States to investigate the possibility of mercenary involvement
whenever criminal acts of a terrorist nature occur;
3
4

2

Resolution 44/34, annex.
A/55/334.

A/RES/55/86

9.
Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Rapporteur with
all the necessary assistance, both professional and financial;
10. Recommends that the Commission on Human Rights renew the mandate
of the Special Rapporteur for a period of three years;
11. Urges all States to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur in the
fulfilment of his mandate;
12. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, as a matter of priority to be programmed in its immediate activities,
to publicize the adverse effects of the activities of mercenaries on the right to selfdetermination and, when requested and where necessary, to render advisory services
to States that are affected by the activities of mercenaries;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Governments to make proposals
towards a clearer legal definition of mercenaries, and in this regard strongly urges
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to convene a workshop
on the traditional and new forms of activities of mercenaries as a means of violating
human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination
before the fifty-seventh session of the Commission on Human Rights, so that a
report on the outcome of the workshop may be submitted to the Commission at its
fifty-seventh session;
14. Requests the Special Rapporteur to report his findings on the use of
mercenaries to undermine the right of peoples to self-determination, with specific
recommendations, to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session;
15. Decides to consider at its fifty-sixth session the question of the use of
mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the
right of peoples to self-determination under the item entitled “Right of peoples to
self-determination”.
81st plenary meeting
4 December 2000

3
