UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/684
4 September 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 4 SEPTEMBER 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached letter, dated 1 September 1997,
which I have received from the Chairman of the International Monitoring
Committee established pursuant to the mandate of the Inter-African Mission to
Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB).
Attached to the letter is the second periodic report of the Member States
participating in MISAB, as requested by the Security Council in its resolution
1125 (1997) of 6 August 1997.
I should be grateful if you would bring the letter and its enclosure to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

97-23049 (E)

040997

040997

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/684
English
Page 2

Annex
[Original:

French]

Letter dated 1 September 1997 from the Chairman of the
International Monitoring Committee addressed to the
Secretary-General

I have the honour to transmit the second report, covering the period from
20 August to 3 September 1997, requested by the Security Council in paragraph 6
of resolution 1125 (1997) concerning the situation in the Central African
Republic.

(Signed)

General Amadou Toumani TOURÉ
Chairman of the International
Monitoring Committee

/...

S/1997/684
English
Page 3

Enclosure
Second report to the Security Council pursuant to
resolution 1125 (1997) concerning the situation
in the Central African Republic
(1 September 1997)

INTRODUCTION
1.
On 6 August 1997, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
1125 (1997), in which it approved the continued conduct by Member States
participating in the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the
Bangui Agreements (MISAB) of the operation to achieve its objective to
facilitate the return to peace and security by monitoring the implementation of
the Bangui Agreements. Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Council authorized the Member States participating in MISAB and
those States providing logistical support to ensure the security and freedom of
movement of their personnel. It decided that that authorization would be
limited to an initial period of three months, after which the Council would
assess the situation on the basis of the reports submitted to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations at least every two weeks by the Member States
participating in MISAB.
2.
This is the second report which the Security Council requested the Member
States participating in MISAB to provide pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution
1125 (1997). It was prepared by the International Monitoring Committee to
supervise the implementation of the Bangui Agreements, which includes the
representatives of the States members of the International Mediation Committee
(Gabon, Burkina Faso, Chad and Mali), in collaboration with the MISAB Command,
which consists of high-ranking officers representing all of the Member States
participating in MISAB, including Senegal and Togo.
3.
This report describes developments in the situation in the Central African
Republic from 21 August to 3 September 1997.

POLITICAL LEADERSHIP
4.
Both the International Monitoring Committee to supervise the implementation
of the Bangui Agreements and the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements are under the political authority of
General Amadou Toumani Touré, former President of the Republic of Mali, Chairman
of the International Monitoring Committee and personal representative of the
heads of State concerned.
5.
The International Monitoring Committee to supervise the implementation of
the Bangui Agreements, chaired by General Touré, includes one representative of
each of the four heads of State of the members of the International Mediation
Committee, as well as a consultant from the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), who acts as a diplomatic adviser to the Committee.
/...

S/1997/684
English
Page 4

6.
Thus, the International Monitoring Committee to supervise the
implementation of the Bangui Agreements is the body which directs the actions of
MISAB, since it receives the necessary political guidance directly from the
heads of State concerned, and especially from the President of the Gabonese
Republic, who is Chairman of the International Mediation Committee. As such, it
is the negotiating body among the various parties to the Central African crisis
(President of the Republic, Government, presidential majority, group of 11
opposition political parties, moderate opposition parties or CODEPO, centrists,
former rebels, loyalist members of the armed forces, trade unions, civil
society). As its name indicates, the International Monitoring Committee is
primarily responsible for the political monitoring of the Bangui Agreements.
7.
The International Monitoring Committee has adopted a plan of action which
reflects the gist of the main provisions of the Bangui Agreements in the form of
a timetable, which can be outlined as follows:
-

Formation of a government of national union;

-

Adoption of an amnesty law covering those who committed offences in
the context of the third rebellion;

-

Disarmament (surrender of weapons by the former rebels in honour and
dignity, and recovery of weapons by MISAB from militias and civilian
populations);

-

Implementation of the recommendations of the General Meeting on
National Defence;

-

Situation of former heads of State;

-

Suspension of the parliamentary audit;

-

Final phase of national reconciliation through a number of actions
aimed at consolidating peace and security (organization of regional
and sectoral awareness-raising seminars, organization of a National
Reconciliation Conference, elaboration of an electoral code, access by
political parties to the State media and other measures).

8.
MISAB is under the patronage of President El Hadj Omar Bongo of Gabon,
senior head of State of the International Mediation Committee. It is under the
political authority of General Amadou Toumani Touré, Chairman of the
International Monitoring Committee. While it was initially under the command of
Brigadier General Edjo Edouard Nkili of Gabon, since 2 August 1997 it has been
headed by General Augustin Mombo Moukagni of Gabon, assisted by a Chief of Staff
(Colonel Talla Niang of Senegal), a Legal Counsel (Colonel Sizing Walla of Togo)
and the heads of each of the six contingents.
9.
Between 21 August and 3 September 1997 the International Monitoring
Committee to supervise the implementation of the Bangui Agreements conducted
intensive activities designed to secure progress in relation to each of the
elements in its timetable and reflecting the various political arrangements.

/...

S/1997/684
English
Page 5

Government of national union
10. After the decision of 7 August 1997 by the group of 11 opposition political
parties to end the suspension of the participation in the Government of the
ministers belonging to its ranks, President Ange-Félix Patassé presided over an
important meeting in the Palaise de la Renaissance on 12 August 1997 which
brought together the entire Central African political community, the Government,
the International Monitoring Committee to supervise the implementation of the
Bangui Agreements and the MISAB Command. Following that meeting, the first for
eight months, the Prime Minister and Head of Government, on the instructions of
the President of the Republic and head of State, made a statement on Monday,
1 September 1997 in which he announced the re-establishment of the Government of
Action in Defence of Democracy, that is to say the return to the Government of
the nine opposition ministers who had left it on 6 May 1997. A page has been
turned. There is guarded optimism here that the mediation machinery in the
Central African Republic will become a little more dynamic so that positive
steps can be taken towards peace and national reconciliation.
Implementation of the amnesty law covering offences relating to the third
rebellion and the misappropriation of public funds under investigation
11. This law, which was promulgated on 15 March 1997, is currently being
implemented with a great deal of pragmatism and understanding. It is not being
implemented blindly as regards the sanctions to be taken against citizens who
may be illegally in possession of weapons following the 15-day deadline
established by the law. The head of State and the relevant political
authorities have thus far shown a sense of responsibility and level headedness
and have taken into account the exceptional political situation in which this
law should be applied in all its aspects. This pragmatism has enabled the
International Monitoring Committee to negotiate with the former rebels and to
persuade them to hand over their weapons with honour and dignity. It is in that
same context that Lieutenant-Colonel Konzzale, Minister to the Office of the
Minister for Territorial Administration, who is responsible for public security
and disarmament, has, as head of a technical commission consisting of,
inter alia, 10 resource persons (deputies, area heads, former rebels) paid by
UNDP, with the participation of the International Monitoring Committee and
MISAB, been conducting an awareness-raising and weapons recovery campaign among
the civilian population since 12 August 1997.
Disarmament
12. This is, without a doubt, the most delicate phase of the national
reconciliation process. Two major phases are envisaged which will make it
possible to carry out this operation effectively:
(a)

The awareness-raising and voluntary participation phase;

(b)

The investigation, intervention and implementation-of-the-law phase.

The voluntary participation phase is the preliminary period which will last
between one and two months, depending on how things develop in the field. Its
purpose is to raise the awareness of the Central African people by a campaign
/...

S/1997/684
English
Page 6

conducted on the radio, television and in the written press and also by putting
up banners and posters bearing slogans supporting peace, national unity,
national reconciliation and disarmament on the main roads of Bangui. Any
patriotic citizens who turned in their weapons of their own accord would be
rewarded for doing so, in order to encourage all the other ones to return any
weapons they might have in their possession. It should be pointed out here that
this is in no way a weapons buy-back operation. The investigations,
intervention and implementation-of-the-law phase will begin immediately
following the first one. It will involve collaborating with informers
compensated according to the quality of their information. That will make it
possible to locate any weapons caches. During this second period anyone found
to be illegally in possession of a weapon will be handed over to the
authorities. In addition, MISAB will conduct searches, together with the
national defence and security forces.
13. The awareness-raising campaign of the Technical Commission on Disarmament,
presided over by Lieutenant-Colonel Evariste Martiale Konzzale, Minister to the
Office of the Minister for Territorial Administration, who is in charge of
public security and disarmament, was started on 12 August 1997 and is continuing
and intensifying in the various areas of the city of Bangui and at the level of
the various religious groups. It should be noted that the following important
meetings were held between 22 and 29 August:
Friday, 22 August 1997: first meeting with the area heads and members of
the disarmament committee of the eighth district;
Saturday, 23 August 1997: meeting with Muslim delegates at the Great
Central Mosque of Bangui in the third district, following the meeting of
18 August 1997 between Minister Konzzale and the International Monitoring
Committee and the Protestant clergy and other Protestant leaders;
Monday, 25 August 1997:
chiefs of police;

meeting between Minister Konzzale and the district

Tuesday, 26 August 1997: meeting with leading officials and area and group
heads of the fourth district;
Wednesday, 27 August 1997: awareness-raising meeting in the sixth
district, at which there was a public handing over of weapons and
munitions;
Friday, 29 August 1997: meeting with leading officials and area and group
heads of the fifth district.
14. To date the results obtained in the area of disarmament are as follows:
since the signing of the Truce Agreement of 28 June 1997 and of the Ceasefire
Agreement of 2 July 1997, the following weapons have been handed over to MISAB:

/...

S/1997/684
English
Page 7

Heavy weapons
120-mm mortars

surrendered:

2 out of a total of 4

81-mm mortars

surrendered:

7 out of a total of 15

60-mm mortars

surrendered:

9 out of a total of 19

14.5-mm machine-guns

surrendered:

5 out of a total of 6

12.7-mm machine-guns

surrendered:

1 out of a total of 3

75-mm recoilless guns

surrendered:

2 our of a total of 2

73-mm anti-tank rocket launchers

surrendered:

63 out of a total of 67

Rocket-propelled grenades

surrendered:

5 out of a total of 11

surrendered:

94 out of a total of 127

Total:

(weapons recovered:

74.01 per cent)*

It should be noted that since the first report was submitted the following
heavy weapons have been recovered:
81-mm mortars

surrendered:

3

60-mm mortars

surrendered:

2

73-mm anti-tank rocket launchers

surrendered:

1

Rocket-propelled grenades (RPG-7)

surrendered:

1

Hand-guns

surrendered:

7 out of a total of 111

Sub-machine-guns

surrendered:

209 out of a total of 459

Assault rifles

surrendered:

178 out of a total of 459

MAS 36-49/56-M14 rifles + muskets

surrendered:

420 out of a total of 1,181

Light machine-guns

surrendered:

45 out of a total of 80

.30-calibre machine-guns

surrendered:

13 out of a total of 17

surrendered:

872 out of a total of 2,384

Light weapons

Miscellaneous munitions
Total:

(weapons recovered:

36.50 per cent)**

* It should be pointed out that instead of a total of 107 heavy weapons
referred to in the first report, the total comes to 127 heavy weapons. This
explains why, although there has been a slight improvement in the operation
since the last report, the percentage of weapons recovered has dropped slightly.
** It should be noted that following a revised count of the light weapons
taken from Government stores by the former rebels, the total figures have been
adjusted. More than 100 light weapons have been recovered since the first
report.
/...

S/1997/684
English
Page 8

Recommendations from the General Meeting on National Defence
15. It appears that quite a few of the claims made by the former rebels could
be answered by responsible implementation of the 282 recommendations made at the
General Meeting on National Defence which was held in August 1996 at Bangui.
That is why the International Monitoring Committee, true to the spirit of the
Bangui Agreements, proceeded, in April 1997, to set up an ad hoc committee to
examine the said recommendations carefully and to set up a schedule for their
implementation, breaking them down into categories according to what could be
applicable in the short-, medium- and long-term based on the sensitivity of the
areas to which the recommendations relate and, above all, the financial
resources that would have to be mobilized. The results of the work of the
ad hoc committee, which was presided over by a leader of the opposition,
General Timothée Malendoma, a former prime minister, have already been
transmitted by the International Monitoring Committee to the Ministry of Defence
for implementation at the various relevant levels. Since the International
Monitoring Committee is merely a mediating body, it must leave the decisions on
these matters to the relevant Central African authorities, while remaining ready
to serve as arbitrator should the need arise. Subsequent reports will cover
what has already been done in this area.
Situation of former heads of State
16. A revised bill has just been prepared by the Government for presentation to
the National Assembly at its next session, which will be held in October. The
International Monitoring Committee continues to believe that resolution of this
problem will have a positive psychological influence on the beneficiaries and on
their supporters, as has been the case in a number of democratic African
countries.
Suspension of the parliamentary audit
17. The Bangui Agreements call for the "suspension of the judicial enforcement
of the parliamentary audit" opened in respect of persons presumed to have
misappropriated public funds under the previous regime, for it was understood
that the audit had been conducted in a very selective manner and was creating
more problems than it was resolving. The International Monitoring Committee,
respecting the spirit of the Bangui Agreements, proposed that in order to calm
everyone’s spirits, suspension of the parliamentary audit should be effected by
means of an official act. It was generally agreed that such an act would
undoubtedly be taken in the context of the next session of the National
Assembly.
National reconciliation
18. Each of the points mentioned above constitute as many phases on the road
leading towards national reconciliation. This point concerns the final phase of
that exciting process. The International Monitoring Committee, supported by
UNDP, is already engaged in making preparations for awareness-raising seminars,
symposia and meetings; the first phase will take place at the provincial level
and be targeted at specific groups (such as trade unions, women’s organizations
and youth movements), and the second phase will take place nationally, in the
/...

S/1997/684
English
Page 9

form of a national reconciliation conference, as recommended by the Bangui
Agreements. For this purpose, the International Monitoring Committee is working
in close cooperation with the Minister for Human Rights, National Reconciliation
and Promotion of a Democratic Culture, who chairs the technical commission on
awareness-raising under the patronage of the Prime Minister. At the most recent
weekly meeting, held on 27 August 1997, it was possible to assess the cost of
each of the activities in question and to target potential sources of funding.
19. In the context of the restructuring of the Central African Armed Forces,
the International Committee for Monitoring the Bangui Agreements had requested
UNDP to set up a fund to assist military personnel wishing to leave active
service in returning to civilian life, and UNDP had agreed to do so. UNDP
launched a project on demobilization, retraining and reintegration for the
Central African Armed Forces, which would make it possible to reduce the cost of
operating the armed forces and facilitate their restructuring. All Member
States and international organizations may make contributions to the fund in
question, which will initially be for an amount of approximately US$ 2 million.
The project will be operational in September 1997.

COOPERATION WITH THE CENTRAL AFRICAN AUTHORITIES
AND INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
20. Pursuant to its mandate, the International Monitoring Committee maintains
constant contact with the various Central African authorities to ensure the
implementation of the provisions of the Bangui Agreements. In this connection,
it is regularly consulted both by the President of the Republic and Head of
State and by the Prime Minister and Head of Government, as well as by the
National Assembly on a considerable number of issues concerning the life of the
Central African nation.
21. The International Monitoring Committee to supervise the implementation of
the Bangui Agreements, acting on behalf of MISAB and/or on its own behalf,
maintains regular contacts with international organizations, including UNDP and
foreign diplomatic missions based in Bangui, with a view to requesting their
diplomatic, financial and material support for mediation initiatives in the
Central African Republic.
22. In the period covered by this report, the International Monitoring
Committee was received three times by the President of the Republic to discuss,
in particular, issues relating to the reconstitution of the Government of Action
for the Defence of Democracy, the recovery of weapons in circulation among the
civilian population, and various measures to reduce tension and consolidate
peace.
23. The International Monitoring Committee met with a number of political
leaders from both the presidential majority and the opposition with a view to
dealing with the difficulties encountered in the endeavour to bring about
national reconciliation.

/...

S/1997/684
English
Page 10

DEPLOYMENT OF THE FORCE
24. It should be recalled that, at the request of the mediator,
General Amadou Toumani Touré, and with the agreement of the Conference on
Consensus-Building and Dialogue, held in Bangui from 11 to 16 January 1997, the
Heads of State of Gabon, Burkina Faso, Mali and Chad decided to send an
inter-African force with logistical support from France. This force, known as
the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui
Agreements, includes, in addition to troops from Gabon, Burkina Faso, Mali and
Chad (the countries members of the International Mediation Committee), troops
from Senegal and Togo, as a result of the decision of President Abdou Diouf and
President Gnassingbé Eyadema to contribute to this gesture of African
solidarity.
25. The activities of MISAB are governed by the mandate assigned to it by the
heads of State concerned (see document S/1997/561). These daily activities are
many and complex, and can be summed up as actions aimed at preventing
confrontation between the two main forces in question, the loyalists of the
Central African Armed Forces and the former rebels.
26. MISAB, which is deployed throughout the city of Bangui, is ensuring
security in all neighbourhoods of the central African capital by occupying 20
surveillance posts, and is carrying out patrols nightly in each of the city’s
eight districts.
27. The MISAB force currently consists of six contingents with a strength of
796 soldiers (officers, non-commissioned officers and other ranks), distributed
as follows:
Burkina Faso

114

Mali

113

Senegal

153

Togo

120

Gabon

149

Chad

147

A map showing MISAB deployment is annexed to this report. The force is provided
with a French logistical support command unit, with 88 men. A French liaison
and assistance detachment, with 39 men, has been made available to MISAB.
28. Owing to the development of organized crime, with the passive or active
complicity of the former rebels, the activities of MISAB have been extended,
with the agreement of the parties concerned, to operations to maintain security
in the various neighbourhoods. Since the signing of the Ceasefire Agreement on
2 July 1997, MISAB has participated, on the basis of a consensus, in joint
security patrols with approximately 120 men, consisting of MISAB personnel,
loyalists and rebels in all districts of Bangui.
/...

S/1997/684
English
Page 11

29. As the only force able to circulate everywhere since the withdrawal of the
French operational assistance units, MISAB frequently receives requests from all
neighbourhoods in the city to carry out medical evacuations to hospitals or to
respond to the many calls from individuals subjected to aggression of all types.
30. In the daytime, it is also MISAB that provides security and escorts for
convoys to supply fuel, a strategic product to be delivered to all the stations
of PETROCA, the national petroleum products distribution company, from the
Kolongo warehousing centre, which is in an area earlier controlled by the former
rebels.
31. Since its arrival in Bangui in February 1997, MISAB, which is a neutral and
impartial force, has been of considerable help in creating the climate of
security which has emerged over a period of days, weeks and months. After many
operations designed to deter and respond to flagrant provocations, it has
managed to contain the organized crime, hold-ups and other armed robberies which
had sown terror in Bangui and in the country’s interior.
32. MISAB was deployed to complement the actions of the various security
services, which had been weakened by the rebellion. In August 1997, MISAB
security activities yielded the following results:
Reports:
5 murders
16 hold-ups
Drug trafficking
Cash thefts
1 rape with hostage-taking
Thefts of various articles:

video recorders and other articles.

Patrols in August 1997:
2 murderers arrested
30 thieves arrested
2 drug traffickers arrested with 12 kilograms of cannabis
3 stolen vehicles recovered and returned to their owners.
Weapons recovered during patrols:
4 AKs
2 automatic pistols
1 MAT 49 sub-machine gun
1 Sten SAR
257 small-calibre cartridges.

/...

S/1997/684
English
Page 12

33.

MISAB receives logistical support from the following sources:

(a) Participating States: Each State with troops in Bangui provides its
personnel (officers, non-commissioned officers and other ranks) with their
regular pay and supplies them with weapons;
(b) France: France, which was an observer of the Bangui Agreements,
agreed to provide logistical support to the various contingents as follows:
-

Payment of the soldiers’ total food allowance and daily subsistence
allowance at the rates currently applicable to Central African
military personnel;

-

Payment of rents for the buildings used by military personnel and the
MISAB Command;

-

Provision of tactical and support vehicles for the force;

-

Supply of fuel and vehicle maintenance;

-

Supply of office equipment.

An overall evaluation of the cost of deploying MISAB in Bangui cannot be
conducted until the end of the mission. However, taking all expenses into
account, the cost of the logistical support provided to MISAB by France amounts
to some 350 million CFA francs per month, or about $600,000;
(c) Government of the Central African Republic:
command personnel;

Vehicles for use by

(d) Organization of African Unity (OAU): Special grant in the amount of
$40,000 in March 1997 to assist the various contingents. A second special grant
of $60,000 has been made jointly to the International Monitoring Committee and
MISAB.
34. In the course of the various operations conducted by MISAB, and
particularly during the confrontations of 22 and 23 March and 20 to 26 June, the
force suffered the following losses:
-

6 dead (3 Chadian soldiers, 2 Gabonese soldiers and 1 Senegalese
soldier)

-

20 wounded (13 Chadian soldiers, 5 Senegalese soldiers, 1 Malian
soldier and 1 Gabonese soldier).

Conclusions
35. The current experience with the Central African crisis is unique, and is
all the more stimulating in that it is unlike any previous experience. The
African mediation in Bangui, with its strengths and weaknesses, gives an idea of
what Africans can do to settle internal conflicts on their continent. However,
/...

S/1997/684
English
Page 13

it is important to point out that, owing to the insufficiency of the African
countries’ own resources, logistical support from the international community,
along the lines of the support which France has provided to MISAB and which
remains open to contributions from all other States, remains a necessity.
36. The adoption of resolution 1125 (1997), which was hailed by the entire
Central African political community, the whole of Africa and the international
community, is perceived as a recognition of the beneficial role being played by
MISAB in synergy with the International Monitoring Committee to supervise the
implementation of the Bangui Agreements.
37. For the people of the Central African Republic in general, and for the
entire spectrum of the political community in particular, Security Council
resolution 1125 (1997), appears to be a sort of catalyst accelerating the march
towards national reconciliation and lasting peace. The impression in Bangui is
that a new era has begun, an era of progressive restoration of confidence and
resumption of activities in various fields.

S/1997/684
English
Page 14

/...
