4. The Secretary-General is authorized:
( i) To administer as ·a unit the appropriations provided under section 3 (a) and section 20,
chapter III ;
(ii) To apply the reduction under section 28 to the various sections of the budget concerned ;
(iii) To apply the reduction under section 29 to the various sections of the budget concerned;
(iv) With the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, to transfer credits between sections of the budget.
·
5. In addition to the appropriations granted by paragraph 1, an amount of $US14,000 is hereby
appropriated for the purchase of books, periodicals, maps and library equipment from the income of
the Library Endowment Fund, in accordance with the objects and provisions of the endowment.
276th plenary meeting,
10 December 1949.

357 (IV). Unforeseen and extraordi•
nary expenses for the financial
year 1950
The General Assembly
Resolves that for the financial year 1950:
The Secretary-General, with the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions, and subject to the
financial regulations of the United Nations, is
authorized to enter into commitments to meet
unforeseen and extraordinary expenses; provided
that the concurrence of the Advisory Committee
shall not be necessary for :
(a) Such commitments not exceeding a total
of $2,000,000 if the Secretary-General certifies
that they relate to the maintenance of peace and
security or to urgent economic rehabilitati.on;
( b) Such commitments as may be necessary
to provide for reasonable expenses for the proposed Economic Commission for the Middle East
should the Economic and Social Council decide
that this Commission shall be created in 1950;
( c) Such commitments as may be necessary
to provide for expenses of meetings of the Economic and Social Council should the Council,
having reconsidered the question of its place of
meeting in the light of the debates in the General
Assembly, confirm its decision to hold its eleventh
session at Geneva;
(d) Such commitments, duly certified by the
President of the International Court of Justice,
relating to expenses occasioned :
(i) By the designation of ad hoe judges (Statute, Article 31),
(ii) By the appointment of assessors (Statute,
Article 30) or of witnesses and experts
( Statute, Article 50),
(iii) By the holding of sessions of the Court
away from The Hague ( Statute, Article
22),
and which do not exceed $24,000, $25,000 and
$75,000 respectively, under each of these three
headings;
The Secretary-General shall report to the Advisory Committee and to the next regular session
of the General Assemblv all commitments made
under the provisions of the present resolution,
together with the circumstances relating thereto,
and shall submit supplementary estimates to the
General Assembly in respect of such commitments.
276th plenary meeting,
10 December 1949.

358 (IV). Working Capital Fund
The General Assembly
Resolves that:
1. The Working Capital Fund shall be maintained to 31 December 1950 at the amount of
$US20,000,000;
2. Members shall make advances to the Working Capital Fund in accordance with the scale 20
adopted by the General Assembly for contributions
of Members to the fifth annual budget;
3. There shall be set off against this new allocation of advances the amounts paid by Members to the Working Capital Fund for the financial
year 1949; provided that, should the advance paid
by any Member to the Working Capital Fund
for the financial year 1949 exceed the amount
of that Member's advance under the provision
of paragraph 2 hereof, the excess shall be set
off against the amount of contributions ,iayable
by that Member in respect of the fifth annual
budget, or any previous budget;
4. The Secretary-General is authorized to advance from the Working Capital Fund:
(a) Such sums as may be necessary to finance
budgetary appropriations pending receipt of contributions; sums so advanced shall be reimbursed
as soon as receipts from contributions are available for the purpose;
( b) Such sums as may be necessary to finance
commitments which may be duly authorized under
the provisions of the resolution21 relating to unforeseen and extraordinary expenses. The Secretary-General shall make provision in the budget
estimates for reimbursing the \Vorking Capital
Fund;
( c) Such smns as, together with net sums
outstanding for the same purposes, do not exceed
$250,000 to continue the revolving fund to finance
miscellaneous self-liquidating purchases and activities. Advances in excess of the t()tal of $250,000
may be made with the prior concurrence of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions. The Secretary-General shall
submit, with the annual accounts, an explanation
of the outstanding balance of the revolving fund
at the end of each year;
( d) Loans to specialized agencies and preparatory commissions of agencies to be established
by inter-governmental agreement under the auspices of the United Nations to finance their work,
pending receipt by the agencies concerned of
sufficient contributions under their own budgets.
20 See resolution 343 (IV), page 46.
21 See resolution 357 ( IV) on this page.

56

I
In making such loans, which shall be repayable
within ~wo years, the Secretar)'.-General shall have
regard to the proposed financial resources of the
agency concerned, and shall obtain the prior
concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for any
cash issues which would increase the aggregate
balance outstanding ( including amounts previously advanced and outstanding) at any one
time to an amount in excess of $3,000,000, and
for any issue which would increase t~e balance
outstanding ( including amounts previously advanced and outstanding) in respect of any one
agency to an amount in excess of $1,000,000;
provided that an extension of one year shall be
granted to the Interim Commission of the International Trade Organization for the repayment
of the 1948 loans ;
(e) Such sums as, together with the sums previously advanced and outstanding for the same
purpose, do not exceed $500,000 to continue the
Staff Housing Fund in order to finance advance
rental payment, _guarantee deposits and working
capital requirements for housing the staff of the
Secretariat. Such advances shall be reimbursed
to the Working Capital Fund following the recovery of the rental advances, guarantee deposits
and working capital advances;
(f) Such sums, if any, as may be necessary
to reimburse staff members for national income
truces paid by them in respect of payments received from the United Nations during 1950, or
in respect of prior years for which reimbursement had not previously been made;
(g) In consultation with the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, such sums up to $5,000,000 for assistance
to Palestine refugees, in accordance with the
provisions of the resolution 22 adopted by the Generai Assembly at its 273rd plenary meeting on
8 December 1949.
276th plenary meetinr;.
10 December 10-19.

359 (IV). Tax equalization-Staff
Assessment Plan
The General Assemhly
Resolves that articles l to 7 of resolution 239
(III) A.23 be and hereby are cancelled and superseded by the following articles :
ARTICLE

l

That for each calendar year beginning after
31 December 1948. ali salaries, wages, overtime
and night differential payments, cost-of-living adjustments ( or differentials) and the allowance
for dependent children, to whomsoever paid by
the United Nations, shal: be subject to an assessment on the recipient at the rates and under
the terms specified in the following articles.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the Secretary-General may, where
in special circumstances he deems it necessary
and expedient, exempt from the assessment the
salaries and other emoluments of staff engaged
at locality rates, such as those serving missions
of the Un_ited Nations· or its smaller field offices.
22 See

ARTICLE l

That all amounts payable by the United Nations
in accordance with arrangements in force at 1
January 1949, other than those assessable under
article I, shall be exempt from this assessment.
ARTICLE 3

(a) That the assessment shall be calculated
according to the following rates :

On assessable payments not exceeding 4,000 dollars .
15 per cent
On the next 2,000 dollars of assessable payments . .
20 per cent
On the next 2,000 dollars of assessable payments .
25 per cent
On the next 2,000 dollars of assessable payments . .
30 per cent
On the next 2,000 dollars of assessable payments
35 per cent
On the next 3,000 dollars of assessable payments
40 per cent
On all remaining assessable income. 50 per cent

( b) In the case of a person who is not employed
by the United Nations for the whole of a calendar
year or in cases where there is a change in the
annual rate of payments made to a staff member,
the rate of assessment shall be governed hy the
annual rate of each such payment made to him.
ARTICLE 4

(a) That the following credits shall be deductible from the assessment computed under
article 3 if claimed in writing and supported by
evidence satisfactory to the Secretary-General :
( i) Two hundred dolbrs for a wife or a dependent husband, or 200 dollars for the
dependent children of a staff member who
is not entitled to credit for a wiie or a
dependent husband;
( ii I One hundred dollars for dependent relatives,
i.e. a dependent parent, or brother or sister,
or a mentally or physically incapacitated
child over 16 years of age.
( b) The maximum ,::-edit under paragraph (a)
( i) shall be 200 dollars, and the maximum credit
under paragraph (a) (ii) shall be 100 dollars. A
credit shall not be granted under both paragraph
( a) (i) and paragraph (a) (ii).
( c) A separate claim for the above-mentioned
credits shall lie made for each year. In the year
in which the circumstances giving rise to the
claim first occur, the credit shall be limited to
the appropriate portion of that year.
( d) Where both husband and wife are on the
staff of the U nitecl 1\: ations, a credit under paragraph (a) ( ii J shall not be granted to both o!
them.
( e) The Secretary-General may rerluce the
credits provided by this article in sue!; cases
where salaries are paid at loc:alitv rates which
diverge widely from the Headquarters salan
sc2 les.
ARTICLE 5

That notwithstanc\ing article 1, relief sliall bt
given in respect of dependent children by way
of exemption from assessable income. The amount
of exemption to be granted shall be the amnunl
of the children's allowance actually paid and mclndecl under artir:le 1 as assessable income.

resolution 302 (IV), page 23.

21 See Official Records of

the third session of the Gen"o/ Assembly. Part I, Resolutions. page 100.

57
