A /73/PV.101

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

101

st plenary meeting
Thursday, 25 July 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Beleffi (San
Marino), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Béji
Caïd Essebsi, President of the Republic of Tunisia
The Acting President: Before we proceed to the
items on our agenda, it is my sad duty to pay tribute
to the memory of the late President of the Republic of
Tunisia, His Excellency Mr. Béji Caïd Essebsi, who
passed away today, 25 July. On behalf of the General
Assembly, I request the representative of Tunisia
to convey our condolences to the Government and
the people of Tunisia and to the bereaved family of
President Essebsi.
May I now invite representatives to stand and
observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of
His Excellency Mr. Béji Caïd Essebsi.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The Acting President: A formal tribute in the
General Assembly will be conducted at a later date to
be announced.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major

United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/73/L.101)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.101.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): It is an honour for Argentina to introduce
draft resolution A/73/L.101, entitled “International
Year for the Elimination of Child Labour, 2021”.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
made the objectives of social justice and decent work
for all some of its top priorities at the heart of policies
in favour of sustainable and inclusive development and
growth, which will not be achieved so long as different
forms of exploitation, including child labour, continue to
exist. The statistics have been repeated many times, but
they are so alarming that they deserve to be recalled. At
present, 1 child in 10 is subjected to child labour, which
means that more than 150 million children are exploited
in this way. Although we committed in the 2030 Agenda
we to eliminating all forms of child labour, we will not,
at the current rate, reach that objective, which beyond
being a Sustainable Development Goal, is, above all, a
moral imperative.
Argentina has made decent work one of its
priorities, and is working hard at the national, regional
and multilateral levels to eliminate child labour.
Argentina holds the vice-presidency of Alliance 8.7,
and, in November 2017, we hosted the fourth Global

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-22951 (E)

*1922951*

A/73/PV.101

Conference on the Sustained Eradication of Child
Labour. In the Buenos Aires Declaration, we committed
to encouraging the General Assembly to adopt a
resolution declaring the International Year for the
Elimination of Child Labour, because we understand
that it is necessary to give greater visibility to the issue
and to further increase and deepen the commitment of
the international community to eliminating the scourge.
I would like to thank all the countries that
co-sponsored and supported the initiative. I would also
like to thank, in particular, the International Labour
Organization (ILO) for its commitment and capacity to
help us demand that States increase their ambition and
made progress on eliminating all forms of exploitation.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the ILO
members’ adoption of Convention 182 on the Worst
Forms of Child Labour, and since then work on the
subject has been ongoing.
Beyond the fact that there remains much to be
done, statistics show that when the awareness and
commitment of countries increase, the results speak for
themselves. According to global estimates presented by
Alliance 8.7, from 2000 to 2016, there was a 50 per cent
reduction in the number of children subjected to child
labour, and, between 2012 and 2016, there was a steady
decrease in the incidence of child labour.
We hope that this initiative will be one more step
to redoubling our efforts and that it will help us to
move day by day towards a world in which no child is
subjected to child labour or exploited in any way, and
where decent work for all has become a reality.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/73/L.101.
Before giving the floor for explanations of
position before adoption, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Mack (United States of America): The United
States joins the consensus on draft resolution A/73/L.101,
entitled “International Year for the Elimination of
Child Labour, 2021”. We envision a world in which all
children are free from deprivation, violence and danger,
regardless of religious affiliation, ethnicity, disability
or any other factor. However, the United States does not
share the view that the Convention on the Rights of the
Child constitutes the standard for child protection. We
join consensus on the draft resolution with the express
2/17

25/07/2019

understanding that it does not imply that States must
become parties to instruments to which they are not
a party or implement obligations under human rights
instruments to which they are not a party, including,
in the case of the United States, the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. Furthermore, to the extent that it is
implied in the draft resolution, the United States does
not recognize the creation of any new rights it has not
previously recognized, the expansion of the content
or coverage of existing rights or any other changes to
its or other States’ obligations under the current state
of treaty or customary international law or under the
current state of domestic law that implements such
treaty or customary international law.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position before adoption. The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/73/L.101, entitled “International Year for the
Elimination of Child Labour, 2021”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/73/L.101, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania, Antigua and
Barbuda, Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burundi,
Costa Rica, Cyprus, Denmark, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece, Honduras,
Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands, North
Macedonia, Pakistan, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic
of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Rwanda, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Tunisia, Ukraine and the
United Kingdom.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.101?
Draft resolution A/73/L.101
(resolution 73/327).

was

adopted

The President: We will now hear statements after
the adoption of the resolution.
Ms. Vieira (Cabo Verde): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of member States of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP),
namely, Angola, Brazil, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea19-22951

25/07/2019

Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe,
Timor-Leste and my own country, Cabo Verde.
We would like to express our gratitude to Argentina
for introducing resolution 73/327, entitled “International
Year for the Elimination of Child Labour, 2021”, and
to commend it for holding constructive, inclusive and
transparent negotiations. The CPLP is delighted that the
General Assembly adopted the resolution by consensus,
which highlights the importance of declaring the year
2021 the International Year for the Elimination of
Child Labour.
As mentioned in the resolution, the year 2016 was
the CPLP Year against Child Labour, and we very much
welcome this reference. Combating child labour is at
the heart of the policies of the CPLP, and its member
States hold improved promotion and protection of the
rights and well-being of all children, especially those
living in vulnerable situations, as an important policy
objective. The countries of the CPLP also believe that,
with the adoption of this resolution, the international
community will be able to increase awareness
surrounding the importance of eradicating child
labour, which is an important step towards achieving
Sustainable Development Goal target 8.7 and other
Sustainable Development Goals.
The CPLP reaffirms its strong commitment to
this cause, including the adoption of strategic plans
to eradicate child labour. Furthermore, CPLP member
States reiterate their commitment to eliminating all
forms of child labour and are therefore determined to
implement the resolution we have just adopted.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 14.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolutions (A/73/L.100 and A/73/L.102)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.102.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic):
It has become clear that, on the one hand, there is a
close relationship between peace and development
and that, on the other, peace cannot be sustained
without a culture of peace that is entrenched in our

A/73/PV.101

minds and our conscience. I therefore stand before the
General Assembly today to present the draft resolution
contained in document A/73/L.102, which is aimed at
taking further steps to promote the culture of peace, not
only because the absence of war does not equal peace,
but also because the human conscience remains fertile
ground in which the culture of peace can flourish.
The draft resolution, entitled “Promoting the
Culture of Peace with Love and Conscience”, refers in
its preambular paragraphs to a series of relevant General
Assembly resolutions. It recognizes the role of UNESCO
and the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, and
declares 5 April the International Day of Conscience.
The remainder of the draft underlines the role to be
played by Member States, United Nations entities and
civil society organizations in the promotion of the
culture of peace. Let me also note that the costs of all
activities arising from the implementation of the draft
resolution should be met from voluntary contributions.
Before I conclude, allow me to extend my deep
thanks to all delegations that sponsored draft resolution
A/73/L.102. We would be delighted to see any other
delegation join the list of sponsors.
In conclusion, allow me to stress that, as we were
drafting this text, we sought to ensure that it was
consistent with previous language to promote the
culture of peace. We hope that the General Assembly
adopts it by consensus. Allow me to also thank all
delegations that participated effectively in informal
negotiations on the matter.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.100.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): It is my
pleasure today to introduce, on behalf of my country,
the Kingdom of Morocco, draft resolution A/73/L.100,
entitled “Promoting interreligious and intercultural
dialogue and tolerance in countering hate speech”, for
consideration by the General Assembly.
At the outset, I wish to express the Kingdom of
Morocco’s sincere thanks and deepest gratitude to
all delegations that participated in a substantive and
constructive manner in the negotiations that led to
the text that we are considering this afternoon. My
thanks in particular go to the skill of the core group
that worked on the draft resolution for their tireless
support throughout the process. Finally, my delegation

19-229513/17

A/73/PV.101

would like to thank all delegations that co-sponsored
the draft resolution.
Our world today is in troubled times, characterized
by the exacerbation and proliferation of hate speech,
which goes against the values of peace, tolerance,
coexistence and cohabitation that the United Nations,
its Charter and the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights are constantly seeking to defend
and promote. Indeed, religious and political extremism
violate the rights of people to freedom of expression
and run counter to the values of coexistence, respect
for others and tolerance by indulging in discourse
that appeals to hatred in all of its forms. In this way,
some use religion to create divisions and satisfy their
reprehensible, obscurantist ideologies. Others use
political discourse based on racial, ethnic and religious
discrimination and xenophobia to foment exclusion,
stoke divisions in societies, fuel conflict and feed
terrorism and anarchy.
Those forms of speech inspire violence and
terrorism, costing the lives of thousands of innocent
people throughout the world. The recent attacks on
mosques, churches, synagogues and temples that have
been carried out have been strongly condemned. They
were only recently burned into our memory, having
challenged our universal conscience and demanding a
collective response in order to stamp out hate speech.
With that in mind, Morocco has the privilege to
present before the Assembly draft resolution A/73/L.100
this afternoon. Its main objective is to raise awareness
among the international community about the dangers
posed by discourse that incites hatred and to encourage
our community to take steps to promote dialogue of
tolerance, understanding and cooperation between
religions and cultures.
To that end, the Kingdom of Morocco carried out
a series of consultations both within the interregional
core group and with all Member States. Morocco aimed
to achieve a consensus-based text through an open,
transparent and inclusive process, while striving to
avoid issues on which opinions diverged. Three rounds
of negotiation were initially planned and then two
more were added to accommodate all delegations and
reach a consensus text, which is contained in document
A/73/L.100.
The draft resolution is made up 16 preambular
paragraphs and 11 operative paragraphs. The first four
paragraphs of the preamble reaffirm the commitment
4/17

25/07/2019

of States to the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and other relevant international instruments.
These paragraphs also aim to allay any concerns around
human rights and fundamental freedoms, including
freedom of expression and the right to practice one’s
faith or belief. This chapeau was strengthened by the
affirmation in the seventh preambular paragraph of
the right to freedom of opinion and expression and its
reference to article 19 of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights.
Furthermore, the text restates the obligation that
Member States have to ban discrimination and violence
based on religion or faith, in order to guarantee
protection for all. Given the cascade of initiatives,
documents and forums to promote dialogue between
different religions and cultures, and in order to avoid a
recitation of a long list of all of those documents, but with
a view to leaving no one behind, we decided to include
one generic paragraph based on agreed language. This
paragraph welcomes the initiatives that have been taken
at the international, regional and national levels as well
as actions carried out by religious leaders to promote
interreligious and cultural dialogue.
The important role to be played by religious leaders
in fostering understanding of common values in all of
humankind is set forth in the text. Violence targeting
people because of their religion, convictions or the
colour of their skin is denounced, and a reference to the
International Day Commemorating the Victims of Acts
of Violence Based on Religion or Belief was affirmed.
The profound concern about the increase in hate speech
threatening tolerance and respect for diversity is also
deeply conveyed in the draft resolution, in addition
to highlighting the importance of the role of Member
States, organizations, civil society, the Alliance of
Civilizations, UNESCO and the United Nations in
promoting tolerance and intercultural dialogue.
The draft resolution takes note of the Rabat Plan
of Action on the prohibition of advocacy of national,
racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement
to discrimination, hostility or violence; the Fez Plan
of Action for Religious Leaders and Actors to Prevent
Incitement to Violence that Could Lead to Atrocity
Crimes; the Secretary-General’s plan of action on hate
speech; and initiatives to develop a plan of action to
safeguard religious sites. With respect to arrangements,
while the importance of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue for promoting social cohesion was stressed,
19-22951

25/07/2019

A/73/PV.101

all calls for hatred that give rise to discrimination,
hostility or violence are condemned.

Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uzbekistan, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Yemen.

We therefore encourage Member States to promote
dialogue, tolerance, understanding and cooperation
between religions and cultures. Similarly, international
organizations are encouraged to raise awareness among
the public on the dangers of intolerance and sectarian
violence. Stemming from the draft resolution, we also
take note of the Fez Plan of Action and the plan of action
on hate speech, recently launched by the SecretaryGeneral, as well as the initiative for a plan of action to
protect religious sites.

The Acting President: May take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.100?

Lastly, Morocco hopes that the General Assembly
will adopt this draft resolution by consensus, and we
invite all delegations to co-sponsor it.
The Acting President: The Assembly will
take a decision on draft resolutions A/73/L.100 and
A/73/L.102, one by one.
We first turn to draft resolution A/73/L.100, entitled
“Promoting interreligious and intercultural dialogue
and tolerance in countering hate speech”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/73/L.100, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Afghanistan,
Albania, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cameroon, Canada, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Nigeria, North Macedonia,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Suriname, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of

Draft resolution
(resolution 73/328).

A/73/L.100

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
the speaker in explanation of position following the
adoption of resolution 73/328, may I remind delegations
that explanations of position are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Mack (United States of America): The United
States firmly supports efforts to promote interreligious
and intercultural dialogue and cooperation, and we
joined consensus on resolution 73/328.
The United States strongly supports the freedoms
of expression and religion or belief. We oppose
any attempts to unduly limit the exercise of these
fundamental freedoms. We strongly believe that these
rights are mutually reinforcing and that the protection
of freedom of expression is critical for protecting
freedom of religion or belief.
The freedom of religion or belief plays an important
societal role and is crucial to the creation of tolerant
and respectful societies in which negative stereotypes
will carry little meaning. To counter intolerance the
United States advocates robust protections for speech
as well as the enforcement of appropriate legal regimes
that deal with discriminatory acts and hate crimes.
On the invocation of the term “moderation” in
paragraph 5 of the resolution, we are concerned that the
implementation of moderation-focused programmes
and policies could undermine enjoyment of freedoms
of expression and thought, conscience and religion or
belief. Protecting the freedoms of religion or belief and
of expression includes protecting the rights of those
who hold minority viewpoints and the rights of those
with whom we disagree.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position following the
adoption of resolution 73/328.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/73/L.102 entitled “Promoting the Culture
of Peace with Love and Conscience”.

19-229515/17

A/73/PV.101

25/07/2019

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I should like to announce that
since the submission of draft resolution A/73/L.102, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of the
draft resolution: Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Benin, Burkina Faso, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea,
Guatemala, Guinea, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, the
Philippines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Tajikistan, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, the United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Yemen.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.102?
Draft resolution A/73/L.102
(resolution 73/329).

was

adopted

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 15.
Agenda item 128 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(i) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Economic Cooperation Organization
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tajikistan to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.74.
Mr. Mahmadaminov (Tajikistan): On behalf of the
members of the Economic Cooperation Organization
(ECO), I have the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.74, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Economic Cooperation Organization”.
Against the backdrop of a changing world
environment and complex socioeconomic challenges,
regional cooperation and economic integration
have become more arduous. Within the context of
institutional frameworks such as the ECO, cooperation
among neighbouring countries or countries within
the same region has shown its value for the economic
development and prosperity of peoples. Since its
establishment in 1964, the ECO has become a dynamic
example of outward-looking regional organizations.
6/17

It has successfully forged a variety of economic and
non-economic cooperation arrangements. Home to
more than 400 million people and spanning a territory
of 8 million square kilometres, the ECO regions cover
10 countries in West and East Asia, as well as Central
Asia and the Caucasus.
The ECO has been expanding partnerships and
cooperation arrangements with potential partners.
The United Nations system has always been the prime
target of ECO outreach policy to help to implement the
global agenda in our part of the world. To this end, we
believe that the United Nations-ECO relationship, as
consolidated by draft resolution before us, is mutually
beneficial for both sides: it helps the ECO to utilize the
capacities, resources and knowledge of United Nations
agencies in the interests of ECO member States and also
offers the United Nations system the regional capacities,
networks and platforms developed by the ECO.
As we all focus on the timely implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its
Sustainable Development Goals, it is worth mentioning
that, back in 2017, the ECO adopted its Vision 2025,
which is aligned with the 2030 Agenda. Vision 2025 is
guided by regional needs and requirements, as well by the
global development agenda. It focuses on cooperation in
areas such as economic growth and productivity, trade
expansion, enhanced connectivity, energy efficiency,
human development and social welfare.
The draft resolution before the Assembly, which is
based on resolution 71/16, consists of four preambular
and 37 operative paragraphs. It has been prepared
through continuous engagement with and input from
ECO member States. It focuses, among other things,
on core matters such as trade, transport, connectivity,
tourism, health, natural disasters, food security and
energy, in conformity with the needs and aspirations
of member States. Furthermore, the resolution
emphasizes the basic development needs of landlocked
countries and invites the United Nations system and
other international financial institutions to assist and
cooperate with ECO in order to help landlocked least
developed countries to overcome their challenges.
The draft resolution acknowledges the ongoing
efforts of the States members of the Economic
Cooperation Organization to strengthen regional
cooperation to combat illicit drug trafficking and
organized crime, including the establishment of
a police mechanism, a regional judicial and legal
19-22951

25/07/2019

cooperation mechanism and the Economic Cooperation
Organization regional centre for the cooperation of
anti-corruption agencies and ombudsmen.
In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity to
express, on behalf of the ECO member States, our
sincere thanks to all States Members of the United
Nations that participated actively and constructively
in the consultations on the draft resolution and showed
flexibility throughout the process.
It is regrettable that despite all our efforts to reach
a consensual resolution, a vote has been requested, for
the first time, on this text. We therefore kindly ask all
Member States to lend their continued support to the
draft resolution and vote in favour of it.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/73/L.74.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Mack (United States of America): The United
States has called for a vote on draft resolution A/73/L.74
because we have deep concerns about potential United
Nations collaboration with the Economic Cooperation
Organization. Iran, which chairs and hosts the Economic
Cooperation Organization, has a clear track record of
undermining regional security. Iran has destabilized its
neighbours, in particular through its support to terrorist
organizations like Hizbullah, the supply of advanced
weapons to the Houthis in Yemen and its extensive
military support for the Al-Assad regime’s attacks
against the Syrian people. Therefore, we do not believe
Iran is contributing to regional economic development.
Iran must be held accountable for its destabilizing
behaviour. That is why we are asking all members to
vote against draft resolution A/73/L.74.
Mr. Knyazyan (Armenia): I would like to present
Armenia’s position with regard to draft resolution
A/73/L.74.
We commend Tajikistan and appreciate its efforts to
promote cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO). Armenia
and Tajikistan enjoy excellent bilateral relations and
partnership within the framework of a number of
international and regional organizations. With regard to
paragraph 3 of the Baku Declaration, adopted in 2012,
we believe that the reference is not only redundant,

A/73/PV.101

as there are references to the latest meetings in the
framework of the ECO in the draft resolution, and but
that it also contains formulations that blatantly distort
the essence and principles of a resolution to the Nagorno
Karabakh conflict. The formulations in the Declaration
are in total contradiction with positions expressed by
the Minsk Group co-Chairs of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the only
internationally agreed mediation format mandated to
deal with the Nagorno Karabakh conflict.
The Declaration, as well as other documents
adopted by ECO and referred to in the draft resolution,
contain selective references to the principles of
international law in the context of conflict resolution,
omitting in particular reference to the principle of equal
rights and the self-determination of peoples. The OSCE
Minsk Group co-Chair countries have acknowledged,
among other principles, the principle of equal rights
and the self-determination of peoples as a basis for the
resolution of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict.
Armenia stresses the imperative of addressing
the resolution of conflicts within their respective
agreed formats. Attempts to misuse the ECO platform
to propagate one-sided conflict narratives are
counterproductive. Armenia calls upon ECO to refrain
from providing a platform to promote approaches that
may undermine the conflict resolution process.
Armenia therefore dissociates itself from paragraph
3 and other paragraphs containing references to
documents whose language on the Nagorno Karabakh
conflict runs counter to the documents and principles
of conflict resolution adopted in the framework of the
OSCE Minsk Group co-chairmanship.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.74, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Cooperation Organization”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/73/L.74: Afghanistan, Angola, Azerbaijan,
Benin, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, the Islamic

19-229517/17

A/73/PV.101

25/07/2019

Republic of Iran, Kazakhstan, Pakistan, Panama, Palau
and Turkey.

Draft resolution A/73/L.74 was adopted by 134
votes to 2, with 3 abstentions (resolution 73/330).

The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.

The Acting President: Before giving the floor
for explanations of vote on the resolution just adopted,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Armenia, Brazil, Papua New Guinea
8/17

Mr. Terva (Finland): I have the honour to deliver
this explanation of vote on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. The European
Union and its member States support resolution 73/330,
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Cooperation Organization, and encourage
further cooperation between the two organizations.
However, with reference to the language contained in
the resolution, notably regarding the Baku Declaration,
the EU stresses that such language is without any
endorsement of declarations, decisions and resolutions
adopted by the Economic Cooperation Organization
forums. The latter ought to be fully consistent with the
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
and in full respect of international law and the Charter
of the United Nations.
In that regard, we wish to put on record that the
provisions of the Baku Declaration related to Cyprus
are not consistent with existing Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions. We therefore urge the
Economic Cooperation Organization to refrain from
adopting positions that would undermine international
law and the United Nations Charter.
The EU trusts that its position will be taken into
account in the future so that it can continue to support
the resolution.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
We will now hear statements after the adoption of
the resolution.
Mrs. Crabtree (Turkey): Turkey, a founding
member of the Economic Cooperation Organization
(ECO), attaches great importance to the Organization
as a platform that contributes to the development of its
member States and the removal of trade barriers within
the ECO region, developing interregional trade and
promoting the ECO region’s integration with global
markets. We also see the ECO as an important tool for
strengthening cultural and historical ties among its
19-22951

25/07/2019

member States, bringing Turkey together with Central
Asia and South Asian countries.
Turkey strongly supports enhancing cooperation
between the United Nations and the ECO in order
to maximize synergies between the activities of the
two organizations. It was therefore regrettable that
resolution 73/330, as pointed out by the Permanent
Representative of Tajikistan, was voted on for the first
time in its history.
Turkey is expected to assume the chairmanship of
the ECO at the 24th Meeting of the Council of Ministers.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Tajikistan
for its excellent chairmanship and active leadership.
Turkey recognizes that a huge growth potential
exists in trade flows among the ECO countries in the
coming decades. We believe that enhanced economic
cooperation among the ECO countries is one of our
shared interests.
With that understanding, operationalizing the
ECO Trade Agreement will be among the top priorities
of our chairmanship. Other areas that we would like
to prioritize will be scaling up the activities of the
Economic Cooperation Organization Trade and
Development Bank, enhancing the transportation
network in the ECO region to develop connectivity
and linking the educational, cultural and scientific
institutions of the ECO. During our chairmanship
we look forward to working closely with the States
members of the ECO to help to achieve its founding
objectives of regional cooperation and development by
enhancing interregional trade and strengthening the
Organization’s institutional framework.
Turkey supports a settlement to the Cyprus issue, as
clearly demonstrated in the most recent round of talks,
which ended in failure in Crans-Montana in July 2017,
as well as in the previous attempt in 2004. As in other
disputes, in Cyprus only a negotiated settlement that is
based on dialogue and diplomacy can be sustainable.
Turkey will continue to engage with all the relevant
parties in that understanding. All the relevant parties
need to contribute to the efforts for the settlement of the
Cyprus issue without bias or prejudice.
The explanation of vote read out on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and the approach that it reflects
run contrary to that requirement. The EU has admitted
the Greek Cypriot Administration as a full member
despite the overwhelming Greek Cypriot vote against a
comprehensive settlement in 2004. That has nothing to

A/73/PV.101

do with the facts and continues to be in contravention
of the very treaties that founded the bicommunal
partnership State of Cyprus in 1960. Since that time,
the EU has been increasingly unable to adopt a balanced
position on the Cyprus issue. As long as the EU positions
exclusively reflect the interest of the Greek Cypriots
and do not even acknowledge the very existence of the
Turkish Cypriots, the EU will continue to disqualify
itself from the role of an objective contributor to the
efforts in search of a solution.
We wish to see the European Union play a positive
role in the efforts for the settlement of the Cyprus
dispute and, accordingly, keep its promises to the
Turkish Cypriots.
Mr. Mamdouhi (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
statement made by the representative of the United
States leaves my delegation with no choice but to briefly
touch on his nonsensical comment. We deeply regret
the fact that this forum has been used as an opportunity
to make reference to my country through fallacies that
come from the pathological tendency of the United
States to distort the realities when it comes to the States
that do not submit or follow its contradictory policies.
We reject such desperate efforts to take advantage of
this body and resort to any issue for political ends.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend the
efforts and competence of the delegation of Tajikistan
as the facilitator of negotiations on resolution 73/330,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Economic Cooperation Organization”. We
also welcome the tremendous and continued support
that the resolution has received in the form of such an
overwhelming number of votes.
The resolution was tabled after continuous
engagement and the receipt of input from States members
of the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) and
all interested parties. Despite the facilitator’s effort
to accommodate all stakeholders by addressing their
interests and concerns, regretfully, the United States,
in line with its pathological obsession against Iran,
opted to break the consensus for its narrow, bilateral,
nonsensical political ends.
Despite the fact that regional cooperation is now
a prevailing paradigm and a phenomenon of interest
in international relations, such actions have taken
place, while cooperation among neighbouring and
regional countries within the context of international
frameworks such as the ECO have proved its value to

19-229519/17

A/73/PV.101

the economic development and prosperity of the people
of the region and beyond.
The ECO has become a dynamic, outwardlooking regional organization and has been successful
in forging a range of economic and non-economic
cooperation arrangements. In that way, we hope that
the ECO continues its efforts on two tracks, namely,
as a regional cooperation framework to complement
the individual development efforts of its member
States and as a platform to translate the global agenda
into actions at the regional level. In accomplishing
those two functions, the ECO should further expand
its partnership and cooperation arrangements with
potential partners.
As has been the case, the United Nations system
should always be the prime objective of the ECO
outreach policy in order to help implement the global
agenda in all parts of the world. We are of the view that
the United Nations-ECO relationship not only helps the
ECO to utilize the capacities, resources and knowledge
of the relevant United Nations agencies in the interests
of ECO member States, but also offers the United
Nations system the regional capacities, networks and
platforms developed by the ECO over the course of the
past three decades.
In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity to
express our sincere gratitude to all States Members of
the United Nations that have participated actively and
constructively in realizing the ECO targets and played,
throughout the process, a productive and non-politicized
role, without which no steps could have been taken.
Ms. Ioannou (Cyprus): Before responding on the
points of substance raised by the representative of
Turkey here today, I would like to call once again on
the Turkish delegation to respect the names of its fellow
Member States.
First, I would like to welcome Turkey’s expression
of readiness to support finding a settlement to the
Cyprus problem, and we look forward to tangible proof
in this regard, particularly as to guarantees it has made
and the withdrawal of its troops from Cyprus.
Secondly, we have repeatedly heard the claim that
the European Union (EU) is biased against Turkey
because Cyprus became a Member State prior to the
island’s reunification. Let me be clear: the EU has
demonstrated that not only is it not biased — including
by being instrumental in the settlement of the Cyprus
10/17

25/07/2019

problem — but it has also provided financial support
to the Turkish Cypriot community, indeed more than
€500 million since 2006, which is possibly the highest
per capita amount of technical assistance and support
the EU has ever given. Let me also clarify that, at the
individual level, all Cypriot citizens enjoy the benefits
of Cyprus’s membership in the EU despite the persistent
division of the island and the fact that the EU acquis
remains suspended in part of our country because of
the occupation.
Thirdly, with respect to the problems with the
Baku Declaration, which is mentioned in paragraph
3 of resolution 73/330, just adopted, I wish simply
to recall that the Security Council spoke definitively
on the Cyprus question in its resolution 541 (1983),
affirming the sovereignty of Cyprus and the fact that
this sovereignty extends over the whole of Cyprus,
deploring the purported secession of part of the Republic
of Cyprus, pronouncing legally invalid the Declaration
that proposed to create an independent State in
northern Cyprus, calling upon all States to respect the
sovereignty, the independence and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Cyprus, and making an appeal to all
States not to recognize any separate State on the island
other than the Republic of Cyprus.
Lastly, I wish to stress that no one wants immediate
reunification as much as we do. However, the way to
achieve this end is not the subordination of Cyprus to
Turkey, which is something that the 2004 plan mentioned
here today would have amounted to. Cyprus should not
be victimized twice — once by being occupied and
then by being held hostage to this occupation. We look
forward to the earliest possible reunification of Cyprus
within the United European space of values, rights and
freedoms, working in peace with all our neighbours on
an equal footing, based on the established principles of
international law, including sovereign equality.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
Some delegations have asked to speak in exercise of
the right of reply. I would like to remind members that
statements in exercise of the right of reply are limited
to 10 minutes for the first statement and five minutes
for the second and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mrs. Baghirova (Azerbaijan): It was not the
intention of my delegation to take the floor on this
19-22951

25/07/2019

A/73/PV.101

agenda item, but the comments just made by the
representative of Armenia have compelled me to do so.

governing States, each exercising sovereignty within
and jurisdiction over their respective territories.

The Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO),
as was eloquently stated by our colleague from Turkey,
is an organization that seeks to increase and enhance
trade, economic cooperation and development in
the ECO region. Therefore, the organization does
not deal with the issue of the Nagorno-Karabakh
conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan nor with
the process of its resolution. Moreover, resolution
73/330 just adopted does not contain any reference
to Armenia’s aggression against Azerbaijan. That is
why the comments just made by the representative of
Armenia were completely irrelevant and redundant.
They are, indeed, nothing other than yet another sign
of Armenia’s narrow political agenda and an attempt
to deflect the international community’s attention and
spread false facts. Nevertheless, I would like to clarify
some of the issues raised in the Armenian statement
with respect to self-determination.

The Greek Cypriot Administration’s insistent
denial of the rights of Turkish Cypriots to their existence
in the northern part of the island only undermines the
prospects of finding a sustainable negotiated settlement
in Cypress. In 1974, Turkey intervened as a guarantor
Power following the infamous 15 July coup d’état
carried out by the joint Greek-Greek Cypriot front,
which aimed to annihilate the Turkish Cypriot people
and annex the island to Greece.

Armenian’s claims have nothing in common with
the principle of self-determination as it is understood
under the Charter of the United Nations, the Final
Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation
in Europe, also known as the Helsinki Final Act of
1975, and other international documents. The actions
that the Armenian representative describes as the
exercise of the right to self-determination have been
unequivocally characterized by the Security Council
and other authoritative international organizations as
the unlawful use of force tantamount to the commission
of other serious crimes.
In reality, it is the people of Azerbaijan’s right to
self-determination that is being grossly violated as a
result of Armenian policies of aggression, occupation
and ethnic cleansing. With respect to resolving the
conflict, the only factor undermining a settlement
is the presence of the Armenian armed forces on
Azerbaijani territory, which will never bring about the
result Armenia desires.
Mrs. Crabtree (Turkey): I also regret having to take
the floor again. The Turkish Cypriot-Greek Cypriot
partnership State, the 1960 Republic of Cyprus, was
converted into a purely Greek Cypriot Administration
by force of arms in 1963, and since then there has not
been a single Government representing both peoples
on the island. Rather, there exist two independent self-

The only occupation on the island is therefore the
56-year-long occupation of the seat of the Government
of Cyprus by the Greek Cypriot Administration. I
wish to remind the Greek Cypriot Administration that
its counterpart is not Turkey, but the Turkish Cypriot
side, which is unfairly absent from this Hall as a result
of the illegal occupation of their place at the table, as
just described.
Mr. Knyazyan (Armenia): We resolutely dismiss
the unfounded allegations made by the representative of
Azerbaijan by which she tries to disguise her country’s
destructive approach to the process of resolving the
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. The conflict is the result
of Azerbaijan’s failure to engage in dialogue with the
people of Nagorno-Karabakh as well as its policy of
forcefully resolving the issue by committing mass
atrocities and completely exterminating the population
of Nagorno-Karabakh. The denial of the human rights
of the people of Nagorno-Karabakh, the failure to reject
the use of force as a means of conflict resolution and
the State-led promotion of anti-Armenian hatred are
undermining the efforts of international mediators
to achieve a peaceful and long-lasting resolution to
the conflict.
With regard to the Baku Declaration referred to in
paragraph 3 of resolution 73/330 and the description of
the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict as the conflict between
Armenia and Azerbaijan in the fourth preambular
paragraph of the Declaration itself (A/67/581, annex),
I would like to recall that numerous documents of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the joint statements of the Heads
of Delegation of the OSCE Minsk Group Co-Chair
Countries, refer to it, as do Armenia and Azerbaijan, as
the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.
I would like to repeat once again that the OSCE
Minsk Group co-Chair countries have acknowledged,

19-2295111/17

A/73/PV.101

among other principles, the principle of equal rights
and the self-determination of peoples as a basis for the
resolution of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict.
Ms. Ioannou (Cyprus): I too regret having to take
the floor again and promise to be very brief. I would
just like to reject in toto the historical revisionism that
was attempted by my Turkish colleague. I would like
to reiterate that the international community has no
doubts about the fact that the Republic of Cyprus alone
is recognized as a subject of international law and its
Government is the sole legitimate Government that
represents Cyprus on the international stage.
Mrs. Baghirova (Azerbaijan): I apologize for
taking the floor again, but I would like to briefly
respond to the comments made by the representative
of Armenia.
Armenia’s policies and practices, which are based
on exclusion and discrimination on ethnic grounds, are
now aimed at consolidating the results of its unlawful
use of force and ethnic cleansing. The war that was
waged against my country claimed the lives of tens of
thousands of people, ruined cities, towns and villages,
and resulted in the forcible expulsion of more than
1 million Azerbaijanis from their homes and properties,
while thousands more went missing in connection with
the conflict. In that context, Armenian speculation about
human rights, democracy and so-called Armenophobia
or hate propaganda are responsible and beneath all
criticism, to say the least.
With regard to the language used by the co-Chairs
of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe Minsk Group, they should be more careful to
refer not only to one principle, but also to the principles
of sovereignty and territorial integrity, which Armenia
completely disregards.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (i) of agenda item 128?
It was so decided.
(t) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Kyrgyzstan to introduce draft
resolution A/73/L.103.
Mrs. Moldoisaeva (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
In its capacity as Chair of the Collective Security
12/17

25/07/2019

Treaty Organization (CSTO), I have the honour, on
behalf of its six members, to introduce, under sub-item
(t) of agenda item 128, the draft resolution contained
in document A/73/L.103, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization”.
When discussing issues related to cooperation
between the CSTO and the United Nations, it should be
borne in mind that one of the fundamental principles
of foreign policy common to all State members of the
organization is their recognition of the indispensable
central role played by the United Nations in the modern
system of international relations. In the process
related to the functioning of the United Nations,
the coordination of positions and unification of the
efforts of CSTO member States take place in mutual
support of foreign policy initiatives on international
and regional security issues. Approaches to issues are
also harmonized and submitted for discussion during
General Assembly sessions and joint statements are
adopted at the traditional meetings of the Foreign
Ministers of the CSTO member States during General
Assembly sessions. In other words, in essence, the
United Nations has become one of the main places
where CSTO partners make joint statements.
The United Nations and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization cooperate through regular
information exchange, the organization of visits and
participation in conferences and training events. In May
2017 and January 2018, the secretariat of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs held consultations
to discuss issues related to conflict prevention and
conflict resolution and opportunities for strengthening
cooperation. In June 2018, the CSTO Deputy SecretaryGeneral took part in a high-level interactive dialogue
with regional and other organizations, initiated by
Secretary-General Guterres.
We welcome the progress in strengthening
practical cooperation based on the memorandum of
understanding between the CSTO secretariat and
the United Nations Department of Peace Operations
of 20 September 2012 on peacekeeping operations,
including the contributions of CSTO member States
to United Nations peacekeeping, as well as the
participation of United Nations representatives in
CSTO peacekeeping training exercises. It should be
noted that the CSTO secretariat has developed and is
implementing the road map to create the conditions for
19-22951

25/07/2019

utilizing CSTO peacekeeping potential in the interest of
United Nations international peacekeeping activities.
An important practical step taken by the Collective
Security Treaty Organization in implementing the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy was
the signing, on 9 November 2018, of a memorandum of
understanding on cooperation and collaboration between
the CSTO secretariat and the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism. Also if importance is cooperation
between the CSTO and the United Nations in context
of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1526
(2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, which began in February 2016, allowing a
regular exchange of relevant information and opinions
on pressing security issues.
Moreover, the CSTO cooperates with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime within
the Networking the Networks initiative to promote
operational cooperation between regional and
international law enforcement organizations to
facilitate the exchange of criminal intelligence and
support multilateral operations targeting all forms
of organized crime including drug trafficking. We
welcome the Secretary-General’s report entitled,
“Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and other organizations” (A/73/328), which describes
the interaction of the United Nations and the CSTO in
the framework of regular information exchange, the
organization of visits and participation in conferences
and training events.
The agenda of CSTO cooperation with the United
Nations is diverse and relevant for conducting its duties,
and has achieved a level of mutual understanding that
ensures the effectiveness of interaction. That makes
it possible to consider it a benchmark for relations
between the CSTO and international organizations
in general.
The draft resolution, based on consensus resolution
71/12, adopted by the General Assembly on 21 November
2016, was discussed in informal consultations in an
open and transparent manner. It contains updates, as
well as new provisions reflecting the events that have
occurred since the adoption of the previous resolution.
It also notes the significant practical contribution and
efforts of the CSTO to strengthen its peacekeeping
potential and the system of regional security and

A/73/PV.101

stability. These include countering terrorism and
organized crime, fighting illegal trafficking in
drugs and weapons, irregular migration and human
trafficking, and the elimination of the consequences of
natural and humanmade disasters, which contribute to
the United Nations goals and principles. It welcomes the
efforts of the Secretariat and the CSTO to strengthen
coordination and cooperation between them.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to express my gratitude to all delegations of the States
members of the Collective Security Treaty Organization
for their support to the Kyrgyz chairmanship, and
to thank all other delegations for their active and
constructive participation in discussions on the draft
resolution, which we hope will be adopted by consensus,
as in previous years.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.103 entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Collective security Treaty Organization”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution,
and in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/73/L.103, China has also become a sponsor.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.103?
Draft resolution
(resolution 73/331).

A/73/L.103

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position on the resolution just adopted,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote or
position are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): As the General
Assembly has just adopted resolution 73/331 entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization”, I would like
to make the following statement.
Ukraine supports cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and other organizations, in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. Such cooperation is an important

19-2295113/17

A/73/PV.101

tool for the effective settlement of conflicts and the
promotion of peace and security. Unfortunately, we
must admit that, in today’s world, the roles of regional
organizations in maintaining peace and security are
rather different. Some of them are committed to their
charters and work to prevent, manage and resolve
conflicts and crises. In that regard, we welcome positive
examples of such cooperation between the United
Nations and the European Union, the African Union,
the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and many others. These organizations have
proven to be capable of taking the lead in promoting
peace, security and stability.
Others, on the contrary, tend to abstain from
such actions and politicize their activities due to the
destructive actions of their members. In our opinion,
the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO)
is one such organization. To our disappointment, the
CSTO has demonstrated its complete failure not only
to take appropriate measures to respond to the Russian
aggression in Ukraine, but even to make a relevant
assessment of the actions of its founding member.
Furthermore, the majority of CSTO members, being
under the influence of the Russian Federation, keep
voting against any General Assembly resolution or
decision aimed at countering Russian aggression.
Nowadays, the CSTO has become one of the Russian
Federation’s visible forays down the path of regional
hegemony and a vehicle for gaining influence among
its neighbours. The CSTO is merely one of the Russian
policy tools employed in the post-Soviet space.
Unfortunately, due to the position of the CSTO and
its biased approach to the issues related to the RussianUkrainian conflict, Ukraine cannot support the
provisions of the resolution related to the peacekeeping
capabilities of the CSTO, as well as its role in providing
“an adequate response to a wide range of threats and
challenges” (resolution 73/331, seventh preambular
para.). We therefore dissociate ourselves from the
consensus on these paragraphs.
I take this opportunity to encourage CSTO
members, specifically the Russian Federation, to
implement the eighth preambular paragraph of the
resolution and “to attain objectives consistent with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations”.
Mrs. Baghirova (Azerbaijan): At the outset,
we would like to thank the delegation of Kyrgyzstan
for its skilful efforts and leadership in facilitating
14/17

25/07/2019

the negotiations on resolution 73/331, which we have
just adopted. The delegation of Azerbaijan actively
participated in the negotiation process. We note with
satisfaction that some of the proposals we put forward
in the course of informal consultations have been
accommodated in the text of the resolution.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is essential to the promotion of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations. Regional
organizations cannot be misused by those who gravely
violate international law and advocate the culture
of impunity. The charter of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO) commits its members to
act in strict accordance with their obligations under the
Charter of the United Nations and the decisions of the
Security Council and to be guided by the universally
recognized principles of international law. According
to the charter of the CSTO, the purposes of the
organization are to strengthen peace and international
and regional security and stability and to promote a just
and democratic world order, based on the universally
recognized principles of international law. We recall
those obligations with a particular purpose.
As is well known, the Republic of Armenia, one
of the members of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization, in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, used military force
to seize a part of the territory of the Republic of
Azerbaijan, namely, the Nagorno Karabakh region,
the seven adjacent districts and some exclaves in
order to ethnically cleanse the captured areas of all
non-Armenians and set up a subordinate racist minority
regime there.
In its resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993)
and 884 (1993), the Security Council condemned the
use of force against Azerbaijan and the occupation of
its territories, reaffirmed respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Azerbaijan, the inviolability
of national borders and the inadmissibility of the use
of force for the acquisition of territory, and demanded
the immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal
of the occupying forces from all occupied territories.
None of the Security Council resolutions has been
implemented by Armenia, which continues to take
purposeful measures to consolidate the gains of the use
of force and ethnic cleansing and to challenge ongoing
political efforts towards a resolution of the conflict.
19-22951

25/07/2019

It is important to emphasize, in that connection,
that the fulfilment in good faith of the obligations
based on full respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States and the inviolability of international
borders is a necessary prerequisite for the maintenance
of international and regional peace and security and
at the core of economic cooperation and sustainable
development. There is no alternative for common
language rules and their universal application, including
in particular with regard to the resolution of conflicts,
whatever their distinct root causes and characteristics.
Consistency should be maintained in identifying
ways and means of providing international responses
to various crises and conflicts. The implementation of
resolutions adopted by the principal organs of the United
Nations and accountability must be part and parcel of
collective efforts to that end. In that regard, we note
that resolution 73/331, which the General Assembly just
adopted, refers, inter alia, to the articles of the Charter
of the United Nations relating to regional cooperation
and encouraged the efforts of States members of the
Collective Security Treaty Organization to attain
objectives consistent with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations. We look forward to such efforts and
their reflection in the future reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and other organizations.
Mr. Sánchez Kiesslich (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico is taking the floor to explain its
position on resolution 73/331 following its adoption.
We value the cooperation between the United
Nations and the various regional organizations. We
are convinced that such cooperation is most effective
when there is full alignment with the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. In order to
be consistent with the resolutions presented at this
General Assembly, it is important to make sure that
the language referring to international crimes is
perfectly aligned with the legal instruments that codify
them. In this regard, Mexico wishes to highlight the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and two of its three complementary
Protocols — the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, and the Protocol against the Smuggling of
Migrants by Land, Sea and Air. Conferring the same
treatment — the use of the verb “combat” — on both
irregular migration and the illegal trafficking of drugs,
arms and human trafficking, is not consistent with

A/73/PV.101

either the additional Protocols or the recently agreed
international commitments on the matter.
In this regard, it is important to emphasize that the
smuggling of migrants is not the same as trafficking
in persons. They are two distinct crimes, and therefore
have their own protocols. Let me repeat this: it is
important to emphasize that migrant smuggling is not
the same as human trafficking. They are distinct crimes,
and therefore have their own protocols that require
differentiated responses. Furthermore, not all irregular
migration derives from the smuggling of migrants,
which is why Mexico expresses its disagreement with
the formulation in paragraph 2 of resolution 73/331 in
which irregular migration is misrepresented as illicit
trafficking in migrants, and puts the phenomenon
of irregular migration on the same list of threats to
international peace and security as terrorism and illicit
trafficking in weapons. On the other hand, with regard
to the references to the world drug problem contained
in the text, we underline that the agreements emanating
from the 2016 special session of the Assembly include
examining the problem from the perspective of
health and the full respect for human rights. Mexico
will continue to support international cooperation
efforts with regional organizations and advocate strict
adherence to international law.
Ms. Agladze (Georgia): Georgia fully supports
United Nations cooperation with regional organizations
that aim to contribute to international peace and
security and the fulfilment of the purposes and
principles of the United Nations. We believe the efforts
of the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO)
do not serve this goal. To the contrary, in August 2008,
the CSTO failed to take adequate steps to respond to
Russia’s full-scale aggression against Georgia and the
subsequent and ongoing occupation, militarization
and factual annexation of Georgia’s Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali/South Ossetia regions. Further, the CSTO
contributes to Russia’s aggressive policy towards
its neighbours. Accordingly, my delegation cannot
support a resolution recognizing CSTO’s peacekeeping
capabilities, its adequate response to threats and
challenges, and its contributions to the fulfilment of
the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
We therefore wish to disassociate ourselves from the
consensus on resolution 73/331.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.

19-2295115/17

A/73/PV.101

Several delegations have asked to exercise the right
of reply. May I remind members that statements in the
exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes
for the first intervention and to five minutes for the
second intervention and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): As a State member of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO), the Russian Federation
notes with satisfaction that, as in previous years, the
resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and the CSTO was adopted by the General Assembly
without a vote (resolution 73/331). We thank the
Permanent Representative of Kyrgyzstan, as the Chair
of the organization, and his team for their capable
leadership of the negotiation process and the result that
was achieved.
We express genuine thanks to those delegations that
have provided support for their active and constructive
participation in the discussions on the draft resolution.
At the same time, we are disappointed that, in today’s
meeting of the General Assembly, some delegations
have unfortunately sought to make use of agenda item
128, on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations, in this forum to air
disagreements that arise in bilateral relations or to push
their views of certain events, which are different from
what actually took place in reality. We are against this
kind of politicized approach.
Mr. Knyazyan (Armenia): My delegation has
requested the floor to remind the delegation of
Azerbaijan that the topic of the agenda item under
consideration is cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and other organizations. We
resolutely reject Azerbaijan’s unfounded and baseless
allegations and condemn its attempt to misuse this
body to promote its narrow perception of conflict. On
many occasions, we have presented our position with
respect to the relevant Security Council resolutions
on the matter (resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874
(1993) and 884 (1993)). I will therefore confine myself
to only certain points.
The Security Council has not considered the issue
of political settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict
nor has it set limitations on the exercise of the right of
the people of Nagorno Karabakh to self-determination.
All four resolutions of the Security Council were
adopted during the period of active hostilities, in
16/17

25/07/2019

1993. Their main objective was to bring about an
immediate cessation of all military actions and hostile
acts. Unfortunately, despite significant reductions
in tensions, a complete cessation of hostilities and a
consolidated ceasefire continue to be a challenge today
owing to Azerbaijan’s destabilizing military build-up
and acquisition of offensive weaponry, in violation
of legally binding obligations on conventional arms
control, and other hostile acts.
Furthermore, by referring to elected authorities
of Nagorno Karabakh as a racist regime, Azerbaijan
is trying to conceal its official policy of promoting
anti-Armenian hatred and official glorification of
perpetrators of hate crimes and mass atrocities against
Armenians. Such Azerbaijani policies are further
deepening the gap between conflict-affected societies
and counters the efforts being made to establish an
environment conducive to peace.
Mrs. Baghirova (Azerbaijan): I take the floor to
respond to the comments made by the delegation of
Armenia. I can only describe them as hypocritical,
because the comments that were made on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Economic
Cooperation Organization contradict what that
representative has said previously.
As for the contents of the comments made by that
representative, I would like to state once again that the
resolutions adopted by the Security Council in 1993 are
still relevant and that the situation on the ground has
not changed. What has been referred to as the elected
regime is illegal, as it has not been recognized by anyone
in this Hall. The Nagorno Karabakh region has always
been and will remain an integral part of Azerbaijan.
Armenia has resorted to force, violence and
terrorist activities in an attempt to realize its groundless
and unlawful territorial claims. Since the very first day
of the conflict, combat operations have been conducted
exclusively inside the territory of Azerbaijan, almost in
the middle of my country, affecting its civilian population
and infrastructure. Armenia continues to occupy the
Nagorno Karabakh region and the surrounding seven
districts of Azerbaijan, in gross violation of the Charter
of the United Nations, international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Regardless of what Armenia is trying to represent,
this does not reflect the situation on the ground, the
numerous violations of the ceasefire or the people
who are dying there. It just means that what Armenia
19-22951

25/07/2019

is trying to do is misuse this platform to spread false
information and present its position.
As for the communities in question, the Armenian
representative refers to the Armenian community but
completely forgets about the Azerbaijani community,
which was been forcibly displaced from those
territories. Those people cannot exercise their right of
return or their right to their property. I advise Armenia
not to dismiss those people, because their rights have
been grossly violated by that country. Armenia has
consistently obstructed the conflict-settlement process
while refusing to engage reasonably and constructively
in results-oriented negotiations, regularly resorting to
various provocations and escalating the situation on
the ground.

A/73/PV.101

The achievement of peace, security and stability will
be possible first and foremost only if the consequences
of the Armenian occupation are eliminated, thereby
ensuring that its armed forces are immediately,
unconditionally and completely withdrawn from the
territories of Azerbaijan, the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of my country are restored and the right of
internally displaced Azerbaijanis to return to their
homes and properties in dignity and safety is guaranteed
and implemented.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (t) of agenda item 128?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

19-2295117/17
