United Nations

A/RES/64/300

General Assembly

Distr.: General
15 October 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 53 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 13 September 2010
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/64/L.68)]

64/300. Draft outcome document of the High-level Review
Meeting on the Implementation of the Mauritius Strategy
for the Further Implementation of the Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 63/213 of 19 December 2008 and 64/199 of
21 December 2009,
Recalling also its decision 64/555 of 15 April 2010,
Decides to refer the annexed draft outcome document to the High-level
Review Meeting on the Implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, to be held on 24 and 25 September 2010, for its
consideration.
121st plenary meeting
13 September 2010

Annex
Draft outcome document of the High-level Review Meeting on the
Implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States
We, Heads of State and Government, Ministers and representatives of Member
States, gathered at a high-level meeting at United Nations Headquarters in
New York on 24 and 25 September 2010 to undertake a five-year review of the
Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for

09-47983

*0947983*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/300

the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States 1 to assess the
progress made in addressing the vulnerabilities of small island developing States
through the implementation of the Mauritius Strategy,
0F

1.
Recall that the unique and particular vulnerabilities of small island
developing States have been acknowledged by the international community since
the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, held in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil, in 1992, the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, held in Barbados in 1994, the World Summit on
Sustainable Development, held in Johannesburg, South Africa, in 2002, and the
International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, held in
Mauritius in 2005;
2.
Reaffirm our commitment to support the efforts of small island
developing States, in view of their unique and particular vulnerabilities, towards
their sustainable development through the further full and effective implementation
of the Barbados Programme of Action 2 and the Mauritius Strategy,1 including
through the achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including
those contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration; 3
1F

2F

3.
Acknowledge that small island developing States have demonstrated
their commitment to promoting sustainable development, and will continue to do so,
in mainstreaming sustainable development principles into national development
strategies, in enhancing political commitments and public awareness of the
importance of sustainable development issues, in establishing protected areas,
including marine, coastal and terrestrial, through the demonstration of strong
leadership in protecting biodiversity, in adopting strategies for promoting renewable
energy and in mitigating the negative effects of the global financial and economic
crisis on their economies. To this effect, small island developing States have
mobilized resources at the national and regional levels despite their limited resource
base, and in this regard additional resources should be mobilized to support their
efforts;
4.
Note with concern that notwithstanding these efforts, small island
developing States continue to face sustainable development challenges. The longstanding cooperation and support provided by the international community has
played an important role and should play an even more critical role in helping small
island developing States to make progress in addressing their vulnerabilities and in
supporting their sustainable development efforts;
5.
Also note with concern that, while small island developing States have
progressed in the areas of gender, health, education and the environment, their
overall progress towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals has been
uneven. Small island developing States have made less progress than most other
groupings, or even regressed, in economic terms, especially in terms of poverty
_______________
1
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
2
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States (Report of the
Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown,
Barbados, 25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda), chap. I,
resolution 1, annex II).
3
See resolution 55/2.

2

A/RES/64/300

reduction and debt sustainability. Small island developing States have not achieved
sustained high levels of economic growth owing in part to the ongoing negative
impacts of the financial and economic crisis. The small size, remoteness, narrow
resource and export base, and exposure to global environmental challenges of most
small island developing States have worked against efforts towards sustainable
development;
6.
Acknowledge that climate change and sea-level rise continue to pose a
significant risk to small island developing States and their efforts to achieve
sustainable development and, for some, represent the gravest of threats to their
survival and viability;
7.
Recall resolution 63/281 of 3 June 2009, and in this context emphasize
the need to consider and address the issue of climate change, including its possible
security implications for small island developing States;
8.
Maintain that the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change 4 is the primary international, intergovernmental forum for negotiating the
global response to climate change. We also call upon States to take urgent global
action to address climate change in accordance with the principles identified in the
Convention, including the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities
and respective capabilities;
3F

9.
Call upon the international community to continue to enhance its support
for the development and implementation of small island developing States national
climate change mitigation and adaptation strategies and programmes, as well as to
facilitate regional and interregional cooperation, in view of the urgent need to build
the resilience of small island developing States to the adverse impacts of climate
change;
10. Also call upon the international community to enhance support for the
efforts of small island developing States to adapt to the adverse impacts of climate
change, including through the provision of dedicated sources of financing, capacitybuilding and the transfer of appropriate technologies to address climate change;
11. Recognize that small island developing States continue to grapple with
the effects of natural disasters, some with increased intensity, including those due to
climate change, which impede progress towards sustainable development;
12. Also recognize the need to enhance and establish, if necessary, means
and tools at the international level aimed at implementing a preventive approach for
natural disasters in small island developing States, reducing risks and properly
integrating risk management into development policies and programmes, including
through the further implementation of the internationally agreed framework for
disaster risk reduction, the Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015. 5 We call upon
the international community to continue to support small island developing States in
enhancing their efforts to strengthen regional and national efforts in disaster risk
reduction, management and coordination, including creating or strengthening
insurance mechanisms, where appropriate, for natural and environmental disasters
in small island developing States;
4F

_______________
4

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to
Disasters (A/CONF.206/6 and Corr.1, chap. I, resolution 2).
5

3

A/RES/64/300

13. Reiterate that energy dependence is a major source of economic
vulnerability for many small island developing States. While those States are
particularly suited to renewable energy options and in spite of the fact that many are
endowed with extensive renewable energy resources, these remain underdeveloped.
We also reiterate the need to support small island developing States in their efforts
to develop and utilize new and renewable energy as well as foster energy efficiency
and conservation, inter alia, through financing from all sources, technical assistance
and capacity-building aimed at developing a sustainable energy sector, to be the
foundation of the development sector of small island developing States. We
underscore the importance of facilitating access by small island developing States to
finance, including access to investment funds for renewable energy, and are ready to
assist them to this effect. In this regard, we welcome regional mechanisms and
initiatives for energy cooperation and integration to build and develop energy
infrastructure, direct supplies and social projects in order to achieve their energy
sustainability;
14. Recognize the importance of North-South cooperation, complemented by
South-South cooperation, cooperation among small island developing States and
triangular cooperation, in order to promote programmes for those States for the
effective implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius
Strategy;
15. Also recognize that small island developing States continue to be heavily
dependent on their coastal and marine resources, and that their development
challenges include limited access to financing, technologies and equipment, global
overfishing and destructive fishing practices, and barriers to increased participation
in fisheries and related activities;
16. Reiterate the need for improved conservation of coastal and marine
resources and integrated coastal management. We urge the international community
to continue and enhance its support for small island developing States to strengthen
their implementation of integrated coastal zone management strategies and their
scientific research capacity;
17. Emphasize that small island developing States and the relevant regional
and international development partners should work together to develop and
implement regional initiatives to promote conservation and the sustainable
management of coastal and marine resources;
18. Reiterate the need for the adoption and implementation of effective
measures at the international, regional and national levels that provide for the longterm sustainable use of fisheries resources, given their vital importance to the
sustainable development of small island developing States. In this regard, we agree:
(a) To reaffirm the commitment to urgently reduce the capacity of the
world’s fishing fleets to levels commensurate with the sustainability of fish stocks;
(b) To promote the full participation of small island developing States in
regional fisheries management organizations;
(c) To assist small island developing States in developing their fisheries
sector, including through building the capacity of those States, so as to facilitate a
greater level of participation in high seas fisheries, including for straddling fish
stocks and highly migratory fish stocks, to enable them to receive greater benefits
from sustainable fisheries for such stocks, to develop their own fisheries, and to
improve their market access;

4

A/RES/64/300

(d) To further strengthen, through international support, the capacities of
small island developing States to carry out monitoring and implement enforcement
measures to combat illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, and overfishing;
(e) To urge the mainstreaming of efforts to assist small island developing
States with other relevant international development strategies, with a view to
enhancing international coordination so as to enable them to develop their national
capacity to exploit fishery resources, consistent with the duty to ensure the
conservation and management of those fisheries resources;
19. Call upon the international community to continue enhancing the efforts
of small island developing States to foster agricultural production, productivity and
sustainability and to prioritize food security. This should be achieved through
diversification and value-added activities, research and development, improved land
use, sustainable forest management, access to and the appropriate use of modern
technology and access to markets, as well as the empowerment of small-scale
farmers, including women, indigenous peoples and rural communities;
20. Recall that for most small island developing States, tourism is an
important contributor to employment, foreign exchange and economic growth, and
that the Mauritius Strategy recognizes the need for sustainable tourism. Climate
change, along with other sources of environmental degradation, can have an adverse
impact on the sustainability of the tourism industry in small island developing
States. We therefore call upon the World Tourism Organization, the relevant United
Nations agencies and other relevant stakeholders to support the development and
implementation by small island developing States of measures to promote
sustainable tourism in such States;
21. Call upon the international community to further assist small island
developing States in the development of appropriate systems for recycling, waste
minimization and treatment, reuse and management, and mechanisms to protect the
oceans and coastal areas from waste and toxic materials, including through the
creation and strengthening of systems and networks for the dissemination of
information on appropriate environmentally sound technologies, recycling and
disposal technologies;
22. Note with concern that water quality and availability constitute serious
constraints in small island developing States, and, although some small island
developing States are implementing measures such as demand-side management,
wastewater treatment, enhancing water-use efficiency and increasing public
awareness, such efforts are hampered by financial and capacity constraints, and
request the international community to provide assistance to small island developing
States for capacity-building for the development and further implementation of
freshwater and sanitation programmes;
23. Call upon the international community to assist the efforts of small island
developing States to strengthen national disaggregated data and information systems
as well as analytical capabilities for decision-making, tracking progress and
development of vulnerability-resilience country profiles; the efforts of small island
developing States in developing databases and in institutionalizing national
indicators for monitoring and evaluating sustainable development should also be
supported and utilized by United Nations agencies where available;
24. Reiterate the importance of facilitating the exchange of knowledge,
success stories, experiences and information among small island developing States;

5

A/RES/64/300

25. Recognize that the objectives of the Convention on Biological Diversity 6
are vital and indispensable elements to achieving the sustainable development of
small island developing States, and encourage small island developing States, with
the necessary support of the international community, to make further efforts to
incorporate biodiversity protection into their national development strategies; we
call upon the international community to increase assistance to small island
developing States to strengthen biodiversity protection and address the current and
emerging threats posed by invasive alien species. We look forward to a successful
outcome of the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention, to
be held in Nagoya, Japan;
5F

26. Also recognize the need to address the specific trade- and developmentrelated needs and concerns of small island developing States so as to enable them to
fully integrate into the multilateral trading system in accordance with the Doha
mandate on small economies, 7 and agree to facilitate the accession of small island
developing States to the World Trade Organization, where appropriate, through
enhanced technical assistance;
6F

27. Urge development partners, in view of the current global economic
situation, to further pay due attention to the unique and particular vulnerabilities of
small island developing States in the context of their trade and partnership
agreements and trade preference programmes, in accordance with World Trade
Organization rules and provisions, to help economic recovery in those States;
28. Reiterate the importance of aid for trade as a means of delivering
coordinated, effective and targeted trade-related technical assistance and capacitybuilding programmes, as established in the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration of
2005, 8 and in this context call for assistance to be provided, where appropriate, to
address the special constraints of small island developing States with respect to
building their supply-side capacities and their competitiveness, as part of their
national development strategies;
7F

29. Acknowledge that the specific circumstances of each small island
developing State should be taken into account in addressing long-term debt
sustainability and that better access to international capital markets needs to be
ensured for small island developing States;
30. Urge the international financial institutions to continue to take into
account the specific circumstances, situations and vulnerabilities of each small
island developing State to enable them to have adequate access to financial
resources, including concessionary financing for investment in sustainable
development;
31. Reiterate the importance for development partners of implementing
concrete measures in support of the transition strategy for small island developing
States that have recently graduated or are about to graduate from least developed
country status so as to ensure the sustainability of the progress made, and recognize
the importance of the review of the criteria used in determining graduation from
least developed country status within the relevant United Nations mandates;

_______________
6

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
World Trade Organization, document WT/MIN(01)/DEC/1, para. 35. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
8
World Trade Organization, document WT/MIN(05)/DEC. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
7

6

A/RES/64/300

32. Request the Secretary-General to include a chapter in his report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session on the follow-up to and implementation
of the Mauritius Strategy on the collection, analysis and dissemination of data on
the sustainable development of those States, and to make recommendations on how
to address the challenges relating to these issues;
33. Also request the Secretary-General, since the present review has
highlighted some shortcomings in the institutional support for small island
developing States as well as other constraints to the full and effective
implementation of the Mauritius Strategy and the Barbados Programme of Action, to
submit a report that puts forward concrete recommendations to enhance the
implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius Strategy
and refocus efforts towards a results-oriented approach and to consider what
improved and additional measures might be needed to more effectively address the
unique and particular vulnerabilities and development needs of small island
developing States. The report should be prepared in consultation with Member
States as well as the relevant specialized agencies, funds, programmes and regional
commissions, taking into account the work done by the United Nations system and
submitted to the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session. Within the scope of
that report, we further request the Secretary-General to conduct a comprehensive
review and examine ways to enhance the coherence and coordination of the United
Nations system’s support for small island developing States and to put forward
concrete recommendations to Member States in this regard. This should include
reviewing the work and respective mandates of all relevant United Nations entities
within their areas of expertise as they relate to the Barbados Programme of Action
and the Mauritius Strategy, including with regard to paragraphs 101 and 102 of the
Strategy;
34. Renew our resolve to fulfil our commitments to further implement the
Mauritius Strategy, and underscore the urgency of finding additional solutions to the
major challenges facing small island developing States in a concerted manner. We
recognize that the way forward for sustainable development requires that
coordinated, balanced and integrated actions be taken at all levels, including
through the strengthening of collaborative partnerships between small island
developing States and the international community, with the aim of building the
resilience of small island developing States in overcoming their unique and
particular vulnerabilities and in reflecting their respective national priorities and
needs.

7
