A /72/PV.65

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

65th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 6 December 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Saikal
(Afghanistan), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 130
Investigation into the conditions and circumstances
resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld
and of the members of the party accompanying him
Draft resolution (A/72/L.19)
The Acting President: I should like to inform
members that action on draft resolution A/72/L.19 will
be postponed to a later date to allow time for a review
of its programme budget implications by the Fifth
Committee. The Assembly will take action on the draft
resolution as soon as the report of the Fifth Committee
on its programme budget implications is available.
I now give the floor to the representative of Sweden
to introduce draft resolution A/72/L.19.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I am proud to
introduce today, on behalf of all the sponsors, the draft
resolution contained in document A/72/L.19, concerning
the investigation into the conditions and circumstances
resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld and
the members of the party accompanying him. We are
grateful to all the delegations that have joined us in that
endeavour, and I would like to thank all the sponsors
for their support.
Let me start by expressing my gratitude to Judge
Othman and his team for their work on the matter and

to all Member States that have collaborated with and
contributed to the investigation. Since 2015, first as
Head of the Independent Panel of Experts established
pursuant to resolution 69/246 and most recently as the
Secretary-General’s Eminent Person, Judge Othman
has overseen major progress in the investigation. We
now have a unique opportunity to shed light on what
happened in Ndola on the 17 September 1961. Judge
Othman concludes in his latest report (see A/71/1042)
that it is plausible that an external attack or threat
was a cause of the crash. That conclusion alters the
balance of probabilities, and thus additional follow-up
is warranted.
In light of that, and in firm support of the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations on the way forward,
Sweden, together with partners, is introducing the
draft resolution before the Assembly today. The draft
resolution has eight operational elements, the most
important of which are contained in paragraphs 1, 4
and 5.
Paragraph 1 requests the Secretary-General to
reappoint Judge Othman to continue his work. This
extensive investigation benefits immensely from
continuity, and we firmly believe that no one is better
placed than Judge Othman to take this issue forward.
Paragraph 4 requests the Secretary-General to
ensure that the United Nations reviews its own specific
records and archives for possible declassification of
information relevant to the case. We understand that
work is already well under way regarding that matter,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-42157 (E)

*1742157*

A/72/PV.65

and we thank the Secretary-General for his timely
efforts in that regard.
Judge Othman also notes that it is likely that
important additional information that has not yet been
made available does exist. Judge Othman has thus
concluded that the burden of proof has shifted to Member
States to show that they have conducted a full review
of records and archives in their custody or possession,
including those that remain classified. Therefore,
paragraph 5 encourages all Member States that may
hold relevant information to appoint, without delay,
an independent and high-ranking official to conduct a
dedicated internal review of their intelligence, security
and defence archives to determine whether relevant
information exists. We count upon the full cooperation
of all Member States in that regard. It is our shared
responsibility to pursue the full truth in this matter.
As the draft resolution contains a small programme
budget implication, adoption will take place once the
Fifth Committee has considered the matter later this
month. In the meantime, the list of sponsors will remain
open, and we encourage all Member States to join us
and our partners in this endeavour.
The United Nations and all its Member States must
now do everything possible to ascertain what happened
with flight SE-BDY. We owe it to the families of those
who perished 56 years ago, many of whom are watching
this meeting from various parts of the world. We owe
it to the United Nations as an Organization and to all
in the Assembly who strive to continue to work in the
spirit of Mr. Hammarskjöld. As Secretary-General
Guterres put it, Dag Hammarskjöld not only believed
in the United Nations, he inspired so many others to
believe in it too.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 130.
Agenda item 176
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations: cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation
Draft resolution (A/72/L.10)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Côte d’Ivoire to introduce draft
resolution A/72/L.10.
2/9

06/12/2017

Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): In my capacity as representative of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire and
Chair of the Council of Foreign Ministers of the States
members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), and as Chair of the group of States members of
the OIC in New York, I have the pleasure to introduce
draft resolution A/72/L.10, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation”.
The draft resolution is in keeping with the spirit and
the objectives of resolution 3369 (XXX), of 10 October
1975, and with the purpose set out in the text, whereby
the Assembly decided to invite the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation to participate in the sessions and
the work of the General Assembly and of its subsidiary
bodies in the capacity of observer.
In its preambular paragraphs, the draft resolution
reaffirms the common objectives of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and the United Nations with
regard to conflict prevention, confidence-building,
peacekeeping,
conflict
resolution,
postconflict rehabilitation, mediation and preventive
diplomacy, including conflict situations involving
Muslim communities.
The draft resolution emphasizes that the two
organizations wish to strengthen their cooperation
in the political, economic, social, humanitarian,
cultural and scientific fields, as well as in the joint
search for solutions to global problems, such as
questions related to international peace and security,
disarmament, self-determination, the promotion of
a culture of peace through dialogue and cooperation,
decolonization, fundamental human rights, social
and economic development and the fight against
international terrorism. The draft resolution welcomes
the initiatives for interfaith dialogue undertaken by
the two organizations and the existing cooperation
between the OIC and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.
In its operative part, the draft resolution welcomes
the strong commitment of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation to the fight against violent extremism
and terrorism. It also welcomes the fact that the two
organizations share the common goal of promoting
and facilitating the Middle East peace process and of
cooperation between the two organizations to combat
17-42157

06/12/2017

A/72/PV.65

intolerance and stigmatization against certain people
because of their religion or beliefs.

hatred and extremism. Indeed, our aim is to bring about
peace, security and stability throughout the world.

Today, we note the increasing importance and
usefulness of the dynamic cooperation between the
United Nations and the OIC. It is clear that, in the face
of old and new conflicts, cooperation between the two
organizations is of strategic importance.

The fact that our world today is witnessing many
crimes and security challenges represents a real
danger and threat to international peace and security.
We therefore need to have greater cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and various
regional and international organizations and groupings.

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to express my
deep gratitude to the delegations that have diligently
worked to develop the draft resolution. I now request
all States members of the General Assembly to adopt
by consensus the draft resolution issued as A/72/L.10.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Chatzisavas (European Union): I have
the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and its member States.
The European Union and its member States support
the draft resolution on cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(A/72/L.10), and we encourage further cooperation
between the two organizations.
With reference to the language contained in the
draft resolution, which notes the adoption of the 2025
Programme of Action of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), the EU stresses that such language
is without any endorsement of declarations, decisions
or resolutions adopted by OIC forums, which should be
fully consistent with General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions and in full respect of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations, including,
notably, the principle contained in Article 2, paragraph
7, of the Charter. In that regard, we wish to put on
record that the provisions of the OIC 2025 Programme
of Action related to Cyprus are not consistent with the
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
We urge the OIC to refrain from adopting positions
that would undermine international law and the Charter
of the United Nations.
Mr. Alhakbani (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia continues to make
great efforts aimed at achieving the goals of peace and
security to which we all aspire. We want to promote
understanding among religions and cultures, advance
the culture of peace and confront ideologies embodying

After the United Nations, the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC) is the second largest
intergovernmental organization, with 57 member States
from four continents, and represents nearly 1.5 billion
people. It speaks as one voice for the Muslim world in its
work to protect members’ rights, ensuring cooperation
among all countries of the world with regard to settling
conflicts, as well as regional and international disputes.
It plays a vital role in settling and preventing conflicts,
as well as providing humanitarian assistance in various
parts of the world, for example, in support of efforts
related to the primary issue for which it was established,
namely, the Palestinian question and defending the
Palestinian people so that they can regain enjoyment of
their legitimate rights and establish a State within the
pre-June 1967 borders.
In addition, members of the OIC have recently
cooperated with States Members of the United Nations
to introduce a draft resolution in the Third Committee,
entitled “Situation of human rights in Myanmar”
(A/C.3/72/L.48), in order to stop human rights violations
directed against the Rohingya minority in that country
and ensure a dignified and secure livelihood and a safe
and decent life for them. We also provide humanitarian
assistance to refugees in every corner of the globe.
The OIC plays a vital role in addressing many
international issues and supporting work in various
areas, including peace and security, the Palestinian
question and East Jerusalem, alleviating poverty,
combating terrorism, investing in and financing
projects, food security, science and technology,
climate change, sustainable development, moderation,
promoting harmony among religions, empowering
women, underwriting international joint Muslim
initiatives in the humanitarian sphere, and good
governance, inter alia. Various specialized institutions
are working under the auspices of the OIC, as are a
number of ad hoc committees dedicated to technology,
investment, trade and economic development and
other fields, while other OIC-affiliated entities play

17-421573/9

A/72/PV.65

complementary critical roles in addressing various
other issues.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
the OIC in a variety of fields, including peace and
security, humanitarian assistance, refugees and the
dialogue among civilizations and religions, plays
a very important role in promoting tolerance and
defending and upholding the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. We encourage
cooperation among all specialized agencies within
the two organizations, which can potentially play a
vital role in building upon the values of peace and the
prevention of conflicts, by supporting greater efforts
aimed at combating intolerance, terrorism and hateful
narratives, thereby raising awareness through dialogue
of the range of values shared by humankind as a whole.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that the security,
cultural, environmental, health and other challenges
that we are facing throughout the world today make
it incumbent upon us to encourage cooperation with
various regional and international organizations so as
to address them.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): As a founding State Member of the United
Nations, Syria would like to express its views on this
agenda item, as well as on draft resolution A/72/L.10,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation”.
First of all, we recall that the Syrian Arab Republic
is also a founding member of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC), which was established in
1969 in response to an extremist terrorist arson attack
carried out against the Al-Aqsa mosque. Accordingly,
since its establishment, the OIC has been committed to
defending Jerusalem and Palestine, while assuming the
role of speaking for the Muslim world as a whole.
The Syrian Arab Republic has always maintained
friendly and brotherly relations with the majority of
States members of the OIC. We therefore appreciate
the support provided by many of those States’ peoples
and Governments to Syria in the context of the
struggle against terrorism that has been forced upon
us. Nonetheless, it seems as though there are strange
practices afoot that run counter to the Charters of both
the OIC and the United Nations. It is therefore necessary
to reconsider the role and activities of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.
4/9

06/12/2017

It is no secret that many States members of the OIC
have been voicing their profound disagreement with
and discontent at because of undemocratic practices
within the organization that do not respect the principle
of joint working methods, owing to the fact that the host
State continues to impose its point of view and will upon
the other members of the organization. Against that
backdrop, an illegal resolution was adopted with a view
to suspending the Syrian Arab Republic’s membership
in the OIC, which occurred during an extraordinary
plenary meeting held in Saudi Arabia.
At that time, the host State exerted pressure on
other members of the OIC — by which I mean political
and financial pressure — so as to force the adoption
of the illegal resolution without the least amount of
consideration for the organization’s normal procedures.
I wish to recall that the presidency of the organization
issued a communiqué in April in which it welcomed
American military aggression against Syria.
We were informed by 15 States members of the
Organization for Islamic Cooperation that the OIC
presidency issued that communiqué in April 2017
without prior consultation with OIC member States and
despite the fact that many member States had already
expressed their disagreement with the declaration and
its content. The communiqué shows a lack of respect
for proper ethical behaviour. Exercising such pressure
and bringing about such outcomes is unacceptable for
the presidency of an organization such as the OIC.
How, in a political declaration, is it possible to welcome
military aggression against a founding member of
the organization?
For several years, my country has suffered and
continues to suffer the fallout of a terrorist war. For
seven years now we have been waging this fight against
terrorism, and certain OIC member States have been
directly involved and implicated in this war against
terrorism. They have financed and armed terrorist
groups fighting on Syrian territory. They have also
facilitated tens of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters
joining the terrorist war in Syria and Iraq.
The host State of the OIC is one of the leading
financing parties of terrorism in Syria. Certain other
Governments, but also the Saudi State, bear the chief
responsibility today for extremist and terrorist violent
activities around the world, not just in Syria. It is the
Saudi State that fuels the extremist Wahhabi line of
thought. It is that State which has created and is financing
17-42157

06/12/2017

religious centres around the world to disseminate the
extremist Wahhabi theology among young people. This
is a direct threat to international peace and security and
undermines the image of Muslims around the world. It
also runs directly contradicts the OIC’s stated mandate
of promoting peace, dialogue and tolerance among
religions and civilizations.
The Government of the host State is also directly
responsible today, through what is called the Arab
Coalition, for an unparalleled humanitarian tragedy
that has led to hundreds of thousands of innocent
people in Yemen facing massacres and famine. The
war in Yemen, which has often been overlooked, has
led to an outbreak of cholera and other scourges in the
country, which is now teetering on the edge.
Moreover, the host State of the OIC is also
responsible for several wars and conflicts in the world
today being waged on a religious basis, which threaten
to rend asunder the very unity of Muslims. We know
that they are prosecuting these wars for selfish and
destructive political purposes, transforming the Middle
East region into a theatre of conflict and conflagration.
Saudi Arabia is not innocent. Quite the contrary,
Saudi Arabia has chosen to overlook the objectives and
principles of the OIC to push and cajole many Islamic
and Arab States to set aside the cause of Jerusalem and
Palestine and thereby ignore the needs of millions of
displaced Palestinians and Syrians suffering under
Israeli occupation.
We are at a critical and historical turning point.
The United States Administration seems to have the
intention of moving its embassy from Tel Aviv to
Jerusalem, which is a unilateral and illegal decision that
we denounce and reject. This intended move is illegal
because we know that the Palestinian people have a
historic right to make Jerusalem their capital and to live
in Jerusalem as the capital of the Palestinian State.
What is the OIC doing today on behalf of Jerusalem?
What is the OIC doing today in response to the serious
threats to the holy city of Jerusalem and its status? The
United States President’s decision on Jerusalem reflects
the belief that it is possible to ignore the collective
voice and conscience of Muslims and Arabs. He has
shown himself capable of engaging in questionable
transactions that show at a minimum a lack of respect
for the rights of Palestinians and for Arabs in the
broadest sense. We are talking here about inalienable
rights that cannot be bartered away. As an Islamic State

A/72/PV.65

and a State at the heart of the Organization for Islamic
Cooperation, we bear a historic responsibility today to
withstand and push back against this stated intention.
Finally, the position of the Syrian Arab Republic
as pertains to the draft resolution entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation” is also based on the notion that
the rights of Christian and Muslim Palestinians must be
upheld and defended. We promote their rights alongside
the rights and status of the city of Jerusalem. We want to
preserve and uphold the rights of all of the Palestinian
people without distinction.
We want to make sure that the Islamic religion
continues to be seen as blameless. It cannot be
stereotyped as being linked to terrorism. We need to
preserve and uphold democratic standards, as well as
transparency and equality among member States in
terms of the rule of law, and ensure that we uphold
the principle that all members of the OIC stand on the
same footing. That is why the delegation of the Syrian
Arab Republic calls for draft resolution A/72/L.10,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation”, to be put to
a vote.
Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): Azerbaijan aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Côte d’Ivoire on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC).
We have the pleasure to co-sponsor draft resolution
A/72/L.10, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation”.
As one of the largest intergovernmental organizations
with 57 member States from four continents, the
OIC plays an important role in promoting peace and
security and fostering a culture of peace at the regional
and global levels. More significantly, the objectives of
international peace and security and understanding and
dialogue among civilizations, cultures and religions are
enshrined in the OIC Charter.
Because of the vast geographical expanse of the
OIC, which spans many regions and subregions, it
is clear that the OIC and the United Nations should
strive to collaborate closely to realize the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations.
Both organizations are working closely to advance a
shared agenda on conflict prevention and resolution,
counter-terrorism,
human
rights,
humanitarian
cooperation and sustainable development. The OIC has

17-421575/9

A/72/PV.65

proved to be an important partner of the United Nations.
It works closely with the League of Arab States, the
Gulf Cooperation Council, the Economic Cooperation
Organization and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, all of which are partners of the United Nations.
It networks successfully with the African Union and the
European Union on various issues of common interest
and concern.
Some OIC countries continue to live in conflict
and post-conflict situations, under foreign military
occupation and alien domination and are exposed to
complex security challenges. These conflicts remain
serious threats to international peace and security
and impede socioeconomic development in affected
countries and regions. Through various political,
diplomatic, humanitarian and peacebuilding efforts,
the OIC has greatly contributed to the promotion of
international peace and security in many OIC countries.
Azerbaijan greatly appreciates the long-standing
commitment of the OIC to conflict resolution and
welcomes the fact that the United Nations and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation share a common
goal of promoting and facilitating the Middle East peace
process so that it can reach its objective of establishing
a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
They also share a common objective of fostering
peaceful and political solutions to other conflicts, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, as set out in
resolution 69/317 and the draft before us. It is important
that the two organizations continue to work together
towards the realization of this common objective.
The rise of anti-Muslim rhetoric is a matter of
serious concern. The OIC and the United Nations should
continue to work to fight Islamophobia and foster
understanding, dialogue and tolerance. Azerbaijan
rejects any attempt to equate Islam with violence and
terrorism. As stated by the President of Azerbaijan, His
Excellency Mr. Ilham Aliyev,
“We are one of the countries most active in fighting
against Islamophobia and attempts to connect Islam
with terror”.
Against this background, Azerbaijan perceives
intercultural and interreligious dialogue as a very
powerful tool to combat intolerance and promote
cultural diversity and explores all possible avenues to
foster peace and tolerance among nations and cultures.
6/9

06/12/2017

We will continue to make our modest contribution to
the benefit of the OIC and the international community.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this agenda item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/72/L.10, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation”. I wish to inform the Assembly that the
draft resolution has been closed for e-sponsorship.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to those delegations listed on the document,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Pakistan have also become
sponsors of A/72/L.10.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Albania,
Algeria,
Argentina,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Cyprus, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia, France,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Hungary,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, Sudan, Sweden,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen
Against:
None
17-42157

06/12/2017

Abstaining:
Armenia, India, Israel, Syrian Arab Republic
Draft resolution A/72/L.10 was adopted by 92 votes
to 0, with 4 abstentions (resolution 72/74).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Bulgaria,
Malta, Switzerland and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour;
the delegation of Nepal had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: I shall now give the floor to
those delegations that wish to speak in explanation of
vote after the voting.
Ms. Meitzad (Israel): Resolution 72/74, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation”, refers to the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation 2025 Programme
of Action adopted in 2016. We would expect this
Programme of Action to focus on cooperation and
mutual understanding, and we are astonished to see that
in fact it presented another attack on Israel. It seems that
no matter what we discuss — be it cooperation, conflict
prevention, development or mediation — some member
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation insists on
injecting poisonous and false language about Israel
into every forum and resolution. This does nothing to
encourage dialogue and does even less for peace.
Owing to our strong bilateral relations with some
OIC members, Israel did not vote against resolution
72/74. I therefore put it on official record that Israel
disassociates itself from the fourth preambular
paragraph of the resolution,
“Noting the adoption by the Islamic Summit
Conference at its thirteenth session, held in
Istanbul, Turkey, on 14 and 15 April 2016, of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation 2025
Programme of Action and the adoption on 14 March
2008 by the Islamic Summit Conference at its
eleventh session, held in Dakar on 13 and 14 March
2008, of the amended Charter of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference”.
That is why Israel could not, unfortunately, vote
in favour of the draft resolution and abstained in
the voting.
Mr. Kendrick (United States of America): Although
the United States voted in favour of resolution 72/74,
in the spirit of maintaining consensus on this item,

A/72/PV.65

we are forced to dissociate ourselves from the fourth
preambular paragraph, just cited by the representative
of Israel, which reads:
“Noting the adoption by the Islamic Summit
Conference at its thirteenth session, held in
Istanbul, Turkey, on 14 and 15 April 2016, of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation 2025
Programme of Action and the adoption on 14 March
2008 by the Islamic Summit Conference at its
eleventh session, held in Dakar on 13 and 14 March
2008, of the amended Charter of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference”.
The United States disassociates itself from this
paragraph owing to unacceptable statements about
Israel in some of the referenced products, specifically
the 2025 Programme of Action.
Ms. Green (Canada): Canada strongly supports
resolution 72/74 and its objective of strengthening
the cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. However,
we dissociate ourselves from the fourth preambular
paragraph, as Canada opposes initiatives at the United
Nations and in other multilateral forums that unfairly
single out Israel for criticism. Canada rejects one-sided
resolutions and any politicization of the issues.
Mr. Yardley (Australia): We have voted in favour
today of resolution 72/74, a useful and important
resolution. However, Australia dissociates itself from
the fourth preambular paragraph, which notes the
adoption of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
2025 Programme of Action. Australia does not
accept the Programme of Action’s characterization of
Israeli actions.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): Armenia proudly
shares a long history of friendship, cooperation, deep
mutual respect and civilizational interaction with
the overwhelming majority of States members of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). With some
of them our common history stretches back many
centuries. Armenia enjoys and will spare no effort to
further deepen its most cordial bilateral relations with
those States.
With respect to resolution 72/74 on the cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, Armenia regrets and considers
unacceptable the negotiating method chosen by the OIC
and its representation in New York. In fact, there were

17-421577/9

A/72/PV.65

no negotiations as such on the draft of the resolution.
This is most disrespectful to the larger membership
of the United Nations. Therefore, the resolution lacks
credibility and genuine support.
Since there have been no opportunities to engage
in negotiations on the resolution, Armenia reiterates
that the OIC has no mandate to foster the resolution of
disputes outside its mandated area. Such claims can only
undermine efforts for peaceful resolution of conflicts
within internationally agreed negotiating formats.
Furthermore, Armenia notes with regret reference
to the OIC 2025 Programme of Action in the preambular
part of the resolution. The OIC 2025 Programme of
Action contains formulations that blatantly contravene
the basic agreed principles of the settlement of the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict. In the light of the foregoing,
Armenia abstained in the voting on the resolution.
Armenia calls on the member States of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation to reject the abuse
of their very respectful organization by Azerbaijan as it
pursues its efforts to undermine the peaceful settlement
of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict, which is taking
place within the internationally mandated format of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Minsk Group co-Chairmanship.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
Several delegations have asked to speak in
exercise of the right of reply. May I remind members
that statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to
five minutes for the second intervention, and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Radwan (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Our country would like to exercise the right of reply
to respond to the statement made by the representative
of the Syrian regime. We regret the illegitimate,
unsubstantiated accusations that have been made
against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. We recall that all
of the attempts against us by the Syrian regime, which
fails even to acknowledge its aggression against its own
people, leading to the suspension of its membership
in the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, have
made it impossible for us to support resolution 72/74.
Nonetheless, I would like to thank all Member States
that voted in favour of it.
8/9

06/12/2017

Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): My delegation is
taking the floor to exercise its right of reply to respond
to the comment made by the representative of Armenia.
First of all, we would like to thank the delegation
of Côte d’Ivoire for having skilfully facilitated the
negotiations on resolution 72/74, in which all Member
States had the opportunity to contribute to the
negotiation process and to the harmonization of the text.
Paragraph 4 of the resolution states that
“the United Nations and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation share a common goal of
promoting and facilitating the Middle East peace
process so that the process can reach its objective
of establishing a just and comprehensive peace in
the Middle East and also share a common objective
of fostering peaceful and political solutions to
other conflicts in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations and the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council”.
There is nothing surprising in the unsuccessful and
senseless attempts of Armenia to challenge this
language or the other provisions of the resolution
that make reference to the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC) framework document.
We thank the OIC for its principled position on the
conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan. Since the
eruption of the conflict, the OIC has, on the basis of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, explicitly
characterized the actions of Armenia on the territory
of Azerbaijan as aggression and condemned in the
strongest possible terms both the use of force against
Azerbaijan and the occupation of its territories.
In 2016, the OIC established a contact group on
the aggression of the Republic of Armenia against
the Republic of Azerbaijan. The establishment of the
OIC Contact Group and its effective functioning are of
great importance, considering the urgent need for more
concerted efforts to force Armenia to comply with its
international obligations and the persistent calls of
the OIC on its member States and the international
community to use effective political and economic
measures so as to put an end to Armenian aggression
and occupation of Azerbaijani territories. We believe
the deliberations within the Contact Group and the OIC
will complement and contribute to the implementation
of the relevant OIC resolutions and help harmonize
17-42157

06/12/2017

individual and joint efforts of OIC member States to
this end.
As has been expressed on previous occasions,
Azerbaijan looks forward to working closely with the
United Nations, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and other partners in achieving the earliest possible
resolution of the Armenian-Azerbaijani conflict based
on the aforementioned position and to bringing peace
and stability to the region.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): I have requested the
floor to reply to the statement made by the representative
of Azerbaijan.
The Azerbaijani statement is a testament to its
policy of abusing various formats, in this case, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation-United Nations
cooperation framework, in relation to the Nagorno
Karabakh conflict. Azerbaijan should rather reconfirm
its adherence to basic principles of the resolution of
the conflict provided by the co-Chairs of the Minsk
Group on multiple occasions, including the principles
of the self-determination of peoples, the non-use of
force or threat of force and territorial integrity. Instead,
Azerbaijan continues to deviate from previously reached
agreements on the strengthening of the ceasefire regime
by obstructing the increase in the number of monitors
to observe the ceasefire violations on the border with
Nagorno Karabakh.
We hope that Azerbaijan will show the political will
needed to achieve a peaceful settlement of the conflict,
thereby contributing to durable solutions and bringing
peace to the region.
Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): The remarks we
just heard from the representative of Armenia are full
of falsifications, distortions and misinterpretations
and demonstrate how far Armenia has gone from
engaging in a constructive quest for peace in our
region. In reality, by disregarding the resolutions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly, by
continuing to unlawfully occupy Azerbaijan’s territory,
by deliberately denying the right of more than a million
Azerbaijani refugees and internally displaced persons
to return to their homes, by pursuing racist ideologies
and misinterpreting fundamental norms and principles
of international law, Armenia clearly demonstrates
yet again who is actually responsible for undermining
peace, security and stability.

A/72/PV.65

Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): I regret taking the
floor in exercise of our second right of reply, in response
to the remarks by the delegation of Azerbaijan.
The Azerbaijani delegation, in its typical manner,
is portraying reality upside down and trying to
deceive the international community in relation to the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict. Azerbaijan consistently
misrepresents the essence of the Nagorno Karabakh
conflict, trying to conceal its policy of ethnic cleansing
and violence conducted against the people of Nagorno
Karabakh from 1988 to 1991, as well as against
Armenians in the cities of Baku, Sumgait, Kirovabad
and elsewhere. These actions subsequently developed
into open aggression and large-scale hostilities
against the population of Nagorno Karabakh, which
also involved mercenaries closely linked to terrorist
organizations and ultimately claimed the lives of
thousands of civilians.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe Minsk Group co-Chairmanship, the
internationally mandated format to negotiate the
resolution of the conflict, has called numerous times
for the establishment of mechanisms to investigate
ceasefire violations. It has been reiterated by the
co-Chairs that, without such mechanisms, the sides
will continue to blame each other for initiating deadly
attacks on the line of contact on the Armenian and
Azerbaijani border.
Armenia and Nagorno Karabakh have agreed to
such a mechanism, but Azerbaijan has continuously
refused to implement confidence-building measures
of any kind. The systematic use of heavy weaponry
and artillery and missiles make it unambiguously clear
to the international community why the Azerbaijani
leadership has been rejecting the creation of such
a mechanism.
Against a backdrop of hostilities on the border
of Nagorno Karabakh, it is unacceptable to allow
Azerbaijan to continue its current practice of regularly
violating the ceasefire. We call on Azerbaijan to
renounce violence and commit to implementing
proposals aimed at a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 176?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

17-421579/9
