UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1995/164
28 February 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

REPORT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL MISSION TO RWANDA
ON 12 AND 13 FEBRUARY 1995
Letter of transmittal
Letter dated 28 February 1995 from the members of the
Security Council mission to Rwanda addressed to the
President of the Security Council

We have the honour to transmit herewith the report of the Security
Council’s mission to Rwanda, which took place on 12 and 13 February 1995. The
report is submitted to the Council in accordance with the terms of reference for
the mission agreed upon by the Council during informal consultations on
6 February 1995.

95-05888

(E)

020395

(Signed)

Ibrahim A. GAMBARI (Nigeria)
Chairman of the Mission

(Signed)

LI Zhaoxing (China)

(Signed)

Karel KOVANDA (Czech Republic)

(Signed)

Gerhard HENZE (Germany)

(Signed)

Julio RENDON BARNICA (Honduras)

(Signed)

Nugroho WISNUMURTI (Indonesia)

(Signed)

Karl F. INDERFURTH (United States of America)

/...

S/1995/164
English
Page 2

Annex
Report of the Security Council mission to Rwanda
on 12 and 13 February 1995

I.

INTRODUCTION AND ACTIVITIES OF THE MISSION

1.
On 6 February 1995, the Security Council decided that its mission to
Burundi would make a stopover in Rwanda on 12 and 13 February 1995 before its
return to New York. According to the terms of reference (S/1995/112) for the
visit, the mission would hold consultations with the Rwandese Government
regarding its efforts towards national reconciliation and reconstruction and the
problem of the return of refugees. It would also hold consultations with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, United Nations agencies, United
Nations Assistance Mission in Rwanda (UNAMIR) personnel, members of the
diplomatic corps and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in Kigali and, upon
its conclusion, submit a report to the Security Council.
2.
The mission arrived at Kigali on 12 February, from Bujumbura. It was led
by H.E. Mr. Ibrahim A. Gambari, Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the
United Nations, and comprised H.E. Mr. Li Zhaoxing (China),
H.E. Mr. Karel Kovanda (Czech Republic), H.E. Mr. Gerhard Henze (Germany),
H.E. Mr. Julio Rendon Barnica (Honduras), H.E. Mr. Nugroho Wisnumurti
(Indonesia) and Mr. Karl F. Inderfurth (United States of America).
3.
It emerged from recent reports by the Secretary-General (S/1995/65 and
S/1995/107) that, while significant progress has been made towards restoring
normality and stability to Rwanda, more needed to be done. In the letter of
10 February from its President addressed to the Secretary-General (S/1995/130)
and its presidential statement of 10 February (S/PRST/1995/7), the Security
Council demonstrated its continued concern and, above all, its readiness to
support additional practical measures and efforts that would lead to a more
peaceful and stable Rwanda. While acknowledging the achievements of the
Government of Rwanda, despite the difficulty of the task and the limited
resources available to it, the Security Council expects the Government to
intensify its efforts to repatriate refugees, to promote national reconciliation
and to reinvigorate the political process, including the creation of an
appropriate mechanism for sustaining dialogue between the Government, the
refugee community and the United Nations.
4.
During its stay in Rwanda, the mission held meetings with
Mr. Pasteur Bizimungu, President of the Republic of Rwanda (with
Mr. Anastase Gasana, Minister for Foreign Affairs, and Mr. Jacques Bihozagara,
Minister for Rehabilitation and Social Reintegration, in attendance),
Major General Paul Kagame, Vice-President and Minister of Defence of Rwanda, and
Mr. Faustin Twagiramungu, Prime Minister of Rwanda. In addition, the mission
held consultations with Mr. Shaharyar M. Khan, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Rwanda, Brigadier General Henry Anyidoho, Deputy Force
Commander of UNAMIR, representatives of United Nations agencies and offices in
Rwanda, members of the diplomatic corps and representatives of NGOs. The
mission visited a camp for internally displaced persons in Kibeho, in
/...

S/1995/164
English
Page 3

south-western Rwanda. The mission’s program of work in Rwanda, and a list of
participants in its various meetings, are attached to the present report (see
annexes I and II).

II.

OBSERVATIONS

5.
Several perspectives were heard on how best to move forward to stabilize
the situation in Rwanda. While it was generally agreed that the most important
goal was to prevent the recurrence of the tragedy that had recently befallen
Rwanda, the specific issues of repatriation, reconciliation, reconstruction and
the need for justice were seen as interrelated, although differences were
evident as to the priorities in addressing those concerns.
6.
The return and resettlement of internally displaced persons and refugees
was seen as a prerequisite for long-term stability and progress. The Prime
Minister emphasized that, without reconciliation, peace would not be possible.
Bringing to justice those responsible for genocide and other serious violations
of international humanitarian law in Rwanda constituted another priority.
7.
The mission was informed of progress in facilitating the return and
resettlement of internally displaced persons, especially through "Opération
Retour". This programme, coordinated jointly by UNAMIR and United Nations
agencies, in cooperation with the Government and supported also by NGOs, was
launched on 29 December 1994.
8.
Fear remains the single most important factor impeding the return of
internally displaced persons and refugees. Government officials informed the
mission of progress made in safeguarding the rights of innocent citizens and
stressed the urgent need for assistance in order to restore an effective
judiciary and a trained police force. Government officials explained their
concerns with regard to the International Tribunal for Rwanda, but reaffirmed
Rwanda’s readiness to cooperate with the Tribunal and expressed the hope that it
would begin its work as soon as possible.
9.
Regarding reconciliation, progress has been marginal so far. While
recognizing that national reconciliation was a continuous process, the view was
stressed that a number of immediate steps and measures were called for, such as
active repatriation, the creation of a political and psychological climate
conducive to reconciliation and the restoration of an effective and functioning
judiciary. Concern was expressed, on the other hand, that many of those accused
or suspected of carrying out atrocities had so far shown no remorse or
contrition, a situation that was seen as discouraging efforts towards
reconciliation, by making forgiveness difficult.
10. Government officials also emphasized that they respected, and indeed
accepted the spirit of an inclusive and broad-based Government, as provided for
under the Arusha peace agreement, to which their Government remained fully
committed. It was pointed out that the Arusha accords were part of Rwanda’s
fundamental or basic law ("loi fondamentale"). They further pointed out,
however, that returning to the country was the precondition for participating in
the political process. Officials also indicated that the Government had
/...

S/1995/164
English
Page 4

recently commenced dialogue with representatives of Rwandese refugee communities
in Burundi. They explained that dialogue with the refugee community in Zaire
was not yet feasible in view of the insecurity and intimidation to which those
refugees were subjected by armed elements in their midst.
11. The role of civic education and sensitization programmes emphasizing the
respect for human rights, the rule of law and tolerance, was underlined. In
this connection, Radio UNAMIR will make a positive contribution by providing
Rwandese, both inside the country and in refugee camps, with factual and
objective information.
12. Concerning rehabilitation and reconstruction, the mission was informed that
the emergency phase was largely over and that emphasis was increasingly being
placed on longer-term measures to rebuild the country. In this connection, the
response of the international community to the January 1995 round-table meeting
in Geneva and to the consolidated inter-agency appeal was encouraging. The
importance of setting up an effective mine-clearance programme in Rwanda was
also emphasized. Such a programme was considered particularly urgent in view of
the need to ensure the proper resettlement of large numbers of internally
displaced persons and refugees and to revive agricultural and reconstruction
activities.
13. The Government expressed appreciation for the support provided by the
international community for its programme of development and recovery. It also
welcomed the role of United Nations agencies and operations, in particular
UNAMIR, whose presence in the country was viewed as a most valuable factor for
confidence-building and security in Rwanda.
14. The mission was encouraged by the progress made towards returning to
normalcy in Rwanda; yet the country’s problems are far from over. In fact, the
critical challenges of social and political accommodation, on which genuine
stability and long-term healing depend, are still to be addressed. During its
visit to the Kibeho camp for internally displaced persons, the mission noted
that the population in the camp was increasing rather than decreasing even as
other camps in the area were apparently "melting away". The mission also heard
from its residents that, despite the availability of basic relief supplies and
other services provided by the United Nations and the humanitarian agencies,
most internally displaced persons would rather return to their homes and farms
but were held back by fear.
15. The gravity of the horrendous crimes committed recently in Rwanda is
recognized by the international community which, through the Security Council,
has established an International Tribunal to bring to justice those responsible.
At the same time, it is imperative to move forward to re-establish order and,
above all, to prevent a new cycle of injustices or atrocities. In other words,
while trying to cope with the tragic consequences of its recent problems,
Rwandese society must be enabled to rebuild and to continue to function.
Clearly, the primary responsibility in this regard rests with the Rwandese
themselves, who must determine how to come to terms with each other. For
healing to succeed and to endure, it should, above all, be indigenous and
deliberate. It cannot be imposed.

/...

S/1995/164
English
Page 5

16. The role of the international community has, to date, been to assist
Rwanda’s own efforts towards peace and progress. During its stay in Rwanda,
therefore, the mission made it clear, especially in its discussions with
government officials, that its purpose was to learn and to exchange ideas in
order to enhance cooperation between Rwanda and the Security Council with a view
to finding solutions to the problems at hand. The visit and the discussions
held convinced the mission of the continuing validity of the Security Council’s
approach to date, based essentially on the sharing of responsibilities between
the Government and the international community, especially in the areas of
repatriation, reconstruction and reconciliation.
17. On repatriation, the mission believes that as long as 2 million Rwandese
remain in camps in and outside their country, the situation in Rwanda will
remain inherently unstable. It therefore considers their return home as a
matter of highest priority in the interest of lasting and sustainable peace and
progress. The mission agrees that ensuring security in the refugee camps is
vital for the success of efforts to accelerate repatriation. In this regard, it
reaffirms the Security Council’s endorsement of recent arrangements made by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) with the
Governments of Zaire and the United Republic of Tanzania to enhance security in
the Rwandese refugee camps in these countries and supports the Council’s request
to the Secretary-General to continue to explore all options and to make any
further recommendations necessary to realize effective security in the camps.

III.

RECOMMENDATIONS

18. The mission believes that the Government of Rwanda should intensify its
efforts to create favourable conditions and an auspicious climate inside the
country to encourage and facilitate repatriation. In this connection, it is
considered that the Government’s action in the following areas could be
particularly helpful: (a) reinvigorating the political process, including the
creation of a framework for dialogue between the Government, refugee
representatives and the United Nations; (b) launching, in cooperation with civic
associations, religious leaders, the United Nations and NGOs, a civic education
programme within the country, including in internally displaced persons camps,
and directed also at refugee camps through radio, to promote harmony among all
Rwandese; (c) moving expeditiously to put in place an effective mechanism to
protect property rights; (d) establishing a transparent and effective judiciary;
(e) setting up and deploying nationwide a trained police force; (f) establishing
an effective civil administration throughout the country; and (g) continuing to
allow unimpeded access throughout the country to UNAMIR, humanitarian personnel
and human rights monitors. The mission recommends furthermore that the
international community support the Government’s efforts.
19. The mission reaffirms the call by the Security Council contained in its
presidential statement of 10 February 1995 for the full implementation of the
agreement reached between the Governments of Zaire and Rwanda on the return of
refugees and property.
20. The mission believes that the generous response of the international
community to the recent round-table meeting in Geneva and the consolidated
/...

S/1995/164
English
Page 6

inter-agency appeal will make a major contribution towards the rehabilitation
and reconstruction of Rwanda.
21. The mission recommends the setting up as soon as possible in Kigali of a
United Nations inter-agency mine-clearance programme and expresses the hope that
the international community will contribute generously to the programme.
22. The mission is of the view that national reconciliation is a continuous
process. It could be facilitated by efforts to promote repatriation and
rehabilitation, including the measures outlined above. It could also be aided
by concrete movement in the area of justice. The mission therefore recommends
that the International Tribunal become operational as soon as possible in close
cooperation with the Government of Rwanda. In the meantime, and in view of the
fact that both the Prosecutor and Deputy Prosecutor have been appointed and are
supported by several staff members, the mission recommends that the Prosecutor’s
office also commence its work in Rwanda. In this connection, it hopes that a
list of persons sought for questioning in connection with the violations of
international humanitarian law concerning recent events in Rwanda, will soon be
established and made public.
23. The mission considers that national reconciliation is principally a task
for the Rwandese themselves. The Government should continue to play a leading
role, including finding effective ways of broadening the political process to
cover all sectors of the Rwandese society. In this connection, the mission
welcomes the reaffirmation by the Rwandese Government of its commitment to the
Arusha Peace Agreement.
24. The mission welcomes the commencement, as approved by the Government of
Rwanda, of Radio UNAMIR and shares the view that it will make an important
contribution towards repatriation and reconciliation efforts.
25. The mission notes the Security Council’s recent agreement with the
Secretary-General’s recommendation to increase the strength of UNAMIR’s civilian
police component from 90 to 120 police observers. It stresses the importance of
having a qualified team of civilian police observers and their deployment at the
earliest possible time in order to enable UNAMIR to fulfil its mandated task to
assist in the training of a new, integrated national police force for Rwanda.
26. The mission commends UNAMIR and other United Nations staff as well as NGO
personnel in Rwanda for their dedication and commitment in the service of peace
and supports their activities in Rwanda.
27. The members of the mission would like to express their gratitude and
appreciation to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and his
staff for the valuable support and assistance rendered to them during the
mission.

/...

S/1995/164
English
Page 7

Annex I
Programme of work

Sunday, 12 February 1995
0845 hours

Arrival at Kigali

1000 hours

Meeting with United Nations agencies

1130 hours

Meeting with NGOs

1300 hours

Briefing by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the Deputy Force Commander of UNAMIR

1600 hours

Meeting with the diplomatic corps

1700 hours

Meeting of H.E. Mr. Gambari (Chairman) with the Nigerian
contingent serving with UNAMIR

1930 hours

Buffet dinner offered by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General

Monday, 13 February 1995
0800 hours

Visit to Kibeho camp for internally displaced persons and
Rukondo

1200 hours

Meeting with the Prime Minister

1500 hours

Meeting with the Vice-President and Minister of Defence

1700 hours

Meeting with the President

1900 hours

Press conference at Kigali airport

2010 hours

Departure from Kigali

/...

S/1995/164
English
Page 8

Annex II
Participants in meetings with the Security Council mission

1.

Meetings with officials of the Government of Rwanda
Mr. Pasteur Bizimungu, President
Maj. Gen. Paul Kagame, Vice-President and Minister of Defence
Mr. Faustin Twagiramungu, Prime Minister
Mr. Anastase Gasana, Minister for Foreign Affairs
Mr. Jacques Bihozagara, Minister of Rehabilitation and Social Integration

2.

Meetings with representatives of United Nations agencies and offices in
Rwanda
Mr. Shaharyar M. Khan, Special Representative of the Secretary General for
Rwanda
Brig. Gen. Henry Anyidoho, Deputy Force Commander, UNAMIR
Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, Resident Representative, United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP)
Mr. Babacar Cisse, Deputy Resident Representative, UNDP
Mr. Roman Urasa, representative, UNHCR
Mr. Julio Gamba, Resident Representative, World Bank
Mr. Daniel Toole, representative, United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
Mr. Carol Jaenson, Chief, Children in Difficult Circumstances Section,
UNICEF
Mr. Randolph Kent, Humanitarian Coordinator in Rwanda, UNREO
Ms. Patricia Banks, Deputy Humanitarian Coordinator in Rwanda, UNREO
Mr. Techeste Zergaber, Country Director, World Food Programme (WFP)
Mr. Zlatan Milisic, Reports Officer, WFP
Mr. William Clarance, Head, United Nations Human Rights Field Operation in
Rwanda
Mr. Paul Howard, Chief of Mission, Intergovernmental Organization for
Migration
Mr. Mahamane Maiga, Acting Coordinator, World Health Organization
Mr. Ibrahima Kaba, Officer-in-Charge, Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations
Ms. Alana Armitage, Programme Officer, United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA)
Mr. Abdoulaye Mar Dieye, Interregional Adviser, Department for Development
Support and Management Services, United Nations
Mr. Sidique Dao, Officer-in-Charge, Humanitarian Affairs, Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, UNAMIR

3.

Meeting with members of the diplomatic corps
Ms. Lucy Edwards, Ambassador, Canada
Mr. Huang Shejiao, Ambassador, China
Mr. Jacques Courbin, Ambassador, France
Mr. August Hummel, Ambassador, Germany
Mr. David Rawson, Ambassador, United States of America
/...

S/1995/164
English
Page 9

Mr. Sylvain Ndayikengurukiye, Charge d’affaires a.i., Embassy of Burundi
Père Nguyen Van Tot, Chargé d’affaires, Holy See
Mr. Siguar Schelstraete, Belgium
Mr. Claude Latulippe, Canada
Père Henri Hoser, Holy See
Ms. Lilian Wong, Foreign and Commonwealth Office, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland
4.

Meeting with the Steering Group of the NGO community in Rwanda
Mr. Teferra Shiawl, Africa Humanitarian Action
Mr. Askale Binga, Africa Humanitarian Action
Mr. Steven Rifkin, Save the Children
Mr. Tom Walker, Médecins sans Frontières
Ms. Barbara Kerstiens, Médecins sans Frontières
Mr. Yvan M’Bomo, Équilibre
Mr. Mungwakuzwe Canisius, Forum des ONG rwandaises (Forum of Rwandese NGOs)

-----
