A/58/PV.72

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-eighth session

72nd plenary meeting
Tuesday, 9 December 2003, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

The Hon. Julian R. Hunte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Saint Lucia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Reports of the Sixth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will
consider the reports of the Sixth Committee on agenda
items 148 to 159, 162 to 164 and 128.
I request the Rapporteur of the Sixth Committee,
Mr. Metod Spacek of Slovakia, to introduce the reports
of the Sixth Committee in one intervention.
Mr. Spacek (Slovakia), Rapporteur of the Sixth
Committee: Today I have the honour to present to the
General Assembly the reports of the Sixth Committee
on 15 of the agenda items allocated to it, namely, items
128, 148 to 159 and 162 to 164.
I would like to draw the Assembly’s attention to
agenda item 128, “Administration of justice at the
United Nations”. The relevant report of the Committee
is contained in document A/58/521. The draft
resolution recommended for adoption by the General
Assembly appears in paragraph 6 of that report.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would decide to amend article 3,
paragraph 1, of the Statute of the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal to provide that
“Members shall possess judicial or other relevant
legal experience in the field of administrative law
or its equivalent within the member’s national
jurisdiction.”

The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote and we hope that the General Assembly
will do the same.
I now turn to the report of the Sixth Committee
on agenda item 148, “Progressive development of the
principles and norms of international law relating to the
new international economic order”, contained in
document A/58/510.
Under the terms of the draft decision
recommended by the Sixth Committee in paragraph 6
of the report, the General Assembly would decide to
take note of the consideration of agenda item 148. The
Assembly would further note that the item could be
considered in the future.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote and we hope that the General Assembly
will do the same.
I now turn to report of the Sixth Committee on
agenda item 149, “United Nations Programme of
Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and
Wider Appreciation of International Law”, contained in
document A/58/511. The draft resolution recommended
for adoption by the General Assembly is found in
paragraph 6 of that report.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would approve the guidelines and
recommendations regarding the execution of the
Programme for the biennium 2004-2005, and carry out
in the biennium the activities specified in section III of
the report of the Secretary-General on the Programme.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

03-64445 (E)
*0364445*

A/58/PV.72

It would also request the Secretary-General to continue
to provide the necessary resources to the budget for the
Programme for future bienniums.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote and we hope that the General Assembly
will do the same.
I now call the Assembly’s attention to agenda
item 150, “Convention on jurisdictional immunities of
States and their property”. The relevant report of the
Committee is contained in document A/58/512. The
draft resolution recommended for adoption by the
General Assembly is reproduced in paragraph 9 of that
report.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would decide that the Ad Hoc
Committee on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and
Their Property, established by resolution 55/150 of 12
December 2000, will reconvene from 1 to 5 March
2004, with a view to completing a convention on
jurisdictional immunities of States and their property.
To that end, the Ad Hoc Committee would be requested
to formulate a preamble and final clauses, based on
previously agreed results, and to report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-ninth session on the outcome of
its work.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote and we hope that the General Assembly
will do the same.

also appeal to Governments, the relevant bodies of the
United Nations system, organizations, institutions and
individuals to support the training and legislative
technical assistance programme of the Commission, in
particular in developing countries, and to make
voluntary contributions to the relevant trust funds.
Under the operative paragraphs of the second
draft resolution, entitled “Model Legislative Provisions
on Privately Financed Infrastructure Projects of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law”, the General Assembly would express its
appreciation to the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law for its adoption of the Model
Legislative Provisions, would request the SecretaryGeneral to publish them and would recommend that all
States give due consideration to the Model Legislative
Provisions and the Legislative Guide on the same
subject, adopted by the Commission in 2000, when
revising or adopting their relevant legislation.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote and we hope that the General Assembly
will do the same.
I would now like to draw the Assembly’s
attention to the Sixth Committee’s report on agenda
item 152, “Report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its fifty-fifth session”,
contained in document A/58/514. The draft resolution
recommended for adoption by the General Assembly
appears in paragraph 8 of that report.

I now turn to agenda item 151, “Report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its thirty-sixth session”. The report
of the Sixth Committee on this agenda item is
contained in document A/58/513. The Sixth Committee
recommends that the General Assembly adopt the two
draft resolutions contained in paragraph 9 of that
document.

By the terms of the draft resolution, the General
Assembly would, among other things, take note with
appreciation of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its fifty-fifth session and
recommend that the Commission continue its work on
the topics in its current programme, taking into account
comments and observations of Governments.

Under the terms of the first draft resolution
entitled “Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law on the work of its thirty-sixth
session”, the General Assembly would, among others
things, request the Commission and its secretariat to
take the lead in assuring cooperation and coordination
with other relevant international organizations in work
on international legal texts. In addition, it would
request the Secretary-General to keep under review the
level of resources available to the Commission in order
to ensure its ability to carry out its mandate. It would

The General Assembly would reiterate the
invitation to Governments to provide information
regarding State practice on the topic “Unilateral acts of
States” and would invite Governments to submit
information regarding national legislation, bilateral and
other agreements and arrangements with regard to the
use and management of transboundary groundwaters,
in particular those governing quality and quantity of
such waters, relevant to the topic currently entitled
“Shared natural resources”. The Assembly would also
request the Secretary-General to invite States and
international organizations to submit information

2

A/58/PV.72

concerning their practice relevant to the topic
“Responsibility
of
international
organizations”,
including cases in which States members of an
international organization may be regarded as
responsible for acts of the Organization.
The General Assembly would also invite the
Commission to continue taking measures to enhance its
efficiency and productivity and would encourage the
Commission to continue taking cost-saving measures at
it future sessions. Furthermore, it would approve the
conclusions
of
the
Commission
regarding
documentation of the Commission.
In addition, the General Assembly would decide
that the next session of the Commission would be held
at the United Nations Office at Geneva from 3 May to
4 June and from 5 July to 6 August 2004.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote and we hope that the General Assembly
will do the same.
Let me now turn to the Sixth Committee’s report
on agenda item 153, “Report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country”, contained in
document A/58/515. The draft resolution recommended
to the Assembly for adoption is set out in paragraph 8
of that report.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly
would,
inter
alia,
endorse
the
recommendations and conclusions of the Host Country
Committee, express the view that the maintenance of
appropriate conditions for the normal work of
delegations and the missions accredited to the United
Nations and the observance of their privileges and
immunities is an issue of great importance, and request
the host country to continue to resolve, through
negotiations, problems that might arise and to take all
measures necessary to prevent any interference with
the functioning of missions.
Furthermore, the Assembly would welcome the
decision of the Committee to conduct a detailed review
of the implementation of the Parking Programme for
Diplomatic Vehicles, as recommended by the Legal
Counsel in his legal opinion on 24 September 2002,
with a view to addressing the problems experienced by
some Missions during the first year of the Parking
Programme, and ensuring its proper implementation in
a manner that is fair, non-discriminatory, effective and
consistent with international law. It would express its

appreciation for the efforts made by the host country
and its hope that the issues raised at the meetings of the
Host Country Committee would continue to be
resolved in a spirit of cooperation and in accordance
with international law. Moreover, it would note that
during the reporting period the travel controls
previously imposed by the host country on staff of
certain missions, and staff members of the Secretariat
of certain nationalities, remained in effect and would
request the host country to consider removing such
travel controls.
The Assembly would also note that the
Committee anticipates that the host country will
continue to ensure the timely issuance of entry visas to
representatives of Member States for the purpose of
their attending official United Nations meetings, in
accordance with applicable agreements.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote and we hope that the General Assembly
will do the same.
I now turn to the Sixth Committee’s report on
agenda item 154, entitled “International Criminal
Court”, contained in document A/58/516. The draft
resolution recommended for adoption by the General
Assembly is found in paragraph 8 of that report.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would, inter alia, call upon all States
that have signed the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court to ratify or accede to that agreement
without delay and would encourage efforts aimed at
promoting the results of the Rome Conference and the
provisions of the Rome Statute.
The Assembly would also welcome the
establishment of the Permanent Secretariat for the
Assembly of States Parties and, in that context, would
recognize the need for an orderly and smooth transition
of that function from the United Nations Secretariat to
the new body. In addition, the Assembly would express
its appreciation to the Secretary-General for providing
effective and efficient assistance in the establishment
of the Court and would also invite him to take
measures to conclude a relationship agreement between
the United Nations and the Court.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote and we hope that the Assembly will do
the same.

3

A/58/PV.72

I now draw the Assembly’s attention to the Sixth
Committee’s report on agenda item 155, “Report of the
Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the
Organization”, contained in document A/58/517. The
Sixth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly adopt two draft resolutions contained in
paragraph 12 of that report.
By the terms of draft resolution I, entitled
“Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the
United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of
the Organization”, the General Assembly would, inter
alia, request the Special Committee, at its next session,
from 29 March to 8 April 2004, to continue its
consideration of all proposals concerning the question
of the maintenance of international peace and security
in all its aspects in order to strengthen the role of the
United Nations. The Special Committee would also be
requested to continue to consider, on a priority basis,
the question of the implementation of the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations related to assistance
to third States affected by the application of sanctions
under Chapter VII of the Charter, by commencing a
substantive debate on all of the related reports of the
Secretary-General and the proposals submitted on the
question.
Furthermore, the Assembly would encourage the
Secretary-General in his efforts to eliminate the
backlog in the Repertory of Practice of United Nations
Organs and in the Repertoire of the Practice of the
Security Council and request that he submit a report on
both publications to the General Assembly at its fiftyninth session.
By the provisions of draft resolution II, entitled
“Implementation of the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations related to assistance to third States
affected by the application of sanctions”, the General
Assembly would, inter alia, decide to consider at its
fifty-ninth session — either within the Sixth
Committee or a working group of that Committee —
further progress in the elaboration of effective
measures to implement the provisions of the Charter
related to assistance to third States affected by
sanctions.
The Sixth Committee adopted the two draft
resolutions without a vote and we hope that the
Assembly will wish to do the same.

4

I now turn to the report of the Sixth Committee
on agenda item 156, “Measures to eliminate
international terrorism”, contained in document
A/58/518. The draft resolution recommended for
adoption by the General Assembly is set out in
paragraph 10 of that report.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would, inter alia, strongly condemn all acts,
methods and practices of terrorism as criminal and
unjustifiable, wherever and by whomsoever committed.
In addition, the Assembly would urge States that have
not yet done so to consider, as a matter of priority and
in accordance with Security Council resolution 1373
(2001), becoming parties to the relevant conventions
and protocols in that area. The draft resolution would
urge States to work in cooperation with the SecretaryGeneral and with one another, as well as with
interested intergovernmental organizations, to ensure,
where appropriate within existing mandates, that
technical and other expert advice is provided to States
requiring and requesting assistance to enable them to
become parties to the conventions and protocols in
question.
Furthermore, the Assembly would decide that the
Ad Hoc Committee, established pursuant to resolution
51/210 of 17 December 1996, would continue to
elaborate a draft comprehensive convention on
international terrorism, as a matter of urgency, and
would continue its efforts to resolve the outstanding
issues relating to the elaboration of a draft international
convention for the suppression of acts of nuclear
terrorism. The Ad Hoc Committee would also keep on
its agenda the question of convening a high-level
conference, under the auspices of the United Nations,
to formulate a joint organized response of the
international community to terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations.
The Assembly would further decide that the Ad
Hoc Committee will meet from 28 June to 2 July 2004
and would continue their work, if necessary, during the
fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly, within the
framework of a working group of the Sixth Committee.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote and we hope that the Assembly will do
the same.
I would now like to turn to the report of the Sixth
Committee on agenda item 157, “Scope of legal
protection under the Convention on the Safety of

A/58/PV.72

United Nations and Associated Personnel”, contained
in document A/58/519. The draft resolution
recommended by the Sixth Committee for adoption by
the General Assembly is set out in paragraph 10 of that
report.

The Sixth Committee recommends that the item
entitled “International convention against the
reproductive cloning of human beings” be included in
the provisional agenda of the sixtieth session of the
General Assembly.

Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would, among other things, urge
States to take all necessary measures, in accordance
with their international obligations, to prevent the
commission of crimes against United Nations and
associated personnel, and to ensure that those crimes
do not go unpunished and that the perpetrators of such
crimes are brought to justice.

I now turn to agenda item 159, “Observer status
for the International Institute for Democracy and
Electoral Assistance in the General Assembly”. The
relevant report of the Sixth Committee is contained in
document A/58/522 and the draft resolution
recommended for adoption by the General Assembly is
found in paragraph 8 of that report.

According to operative paragraph 11, the next
meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee established by
General Assembly resolution 56/89 would be held from
12 to 16 April 2004. The Ad Hoc Committee’s
mandate, as set out in that paragraph, would be to
expand the scope of legal protection under the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel, including, inter alia, by means of
a legal instrument, and that the work shall continue
during the fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly
within the working group of the Sixth Committee. By
operative paragraph 12, the Ad Hoc Committee would
be requested to submit a report on its work to the
General Assembly at the fifty-ninth session. Finally, in
operative paragraph 13, the General Assembly would
request the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-ninth session on the measures
taken to implement the resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote and we hope that the Assembly will do
the same.
I now draw the Assembly’s attention to the Sixth
Committee’s report on agenda item 158, entitled
“International convention against the reproductive
cloning of human beings”, contained in document
A/58/520. The Sixth Committee’s recommendation to
the General Assembly can be found in paragraph 14 of
that report. As described in paragraph 10, the Sixth
Committee adopted a motion, under rule 116 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly, to adjourn
the debate on the agenda item until the sixtieth session
of the General Assembly. Therefore, as noted in
paragraph 13, the Committee did not take action on any
other proposals.

Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would decide to invite the
International Institute for Democracy and Electoral
Assistance to participate in the sessions and the work
of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer. It
would also request the Secretary-General to take the
necessary action to implement the resolution.
The draft resolution was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote and we hope that the
Assembly will do the same.
I now draw the Assembly’s attention to the Sixth
Committee’s report on agenda item 162, “Observer
status for the Eurasian Economic Community in the
General Assembly”, contained in document A/58/523.
The draft resolution recommended for adoption by the
General Assembly is reproduced in paragraph 8 of that
report.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would decide to invite the Eurasian
Economic Community to participate in the sessions and
the work of the General Assembly in the capacity of
observer. It would also request the Secretary-General to
take the necessary action to implement the resolution.
The draft resolution was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote and we hope that the
Assembly will do the same.
I now turn to agenda item 163, “Observer status
for the GUUAM in the General Assembly”. The
relevant report of the Committee is contained in
document A/58/524 and the draft resolution for
adoption by the General Assembly is set out in
paragraph of that report.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would decide to invite GUUAM to

5

A/58/PV.72

participate in the sessions and the work of the General
Assembly in the capacity of observer. It would also
request the Secretary-General to take the necessary
action to implement the resolution.
The draft resolution was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote and we hope that the
General Assembly will do the same.
I now turn to the Sixth Committee’s report on
agenda item 164, “Observer status for the East African
Community in the General Assembly”, contained in
document A/58/525. The draft resolution recommended
for adoption by the General Assembly is reproduced in
paragraph 7 of that report.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would decide to invite the East
African Community to participate in the sessions and
the work of the General Assembly in the capacity of
observer. It would also request the Secretary-General to
take the necessary action to implement the resolution.
The draft resolution was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote and we hope that the
Assembly will do the same.
This concludes my presentation of the reports of
the Sixth Committee. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Chairman of the Sixth
Committee, Ambassador Lauro Baja, and the other
members of the Bureau, Mr. Tal Becker, Ambassador
Allieu Ibrahim Kanu, and Ms. Gaile Ann Ramoutar, for
their hard work and leadership. I would also like to
thank all the delegates for their contributions to the
success of the session.
Furthermore, I would like to place on record our
appreciation for the able and efficient cooperation
provided by Mr. Václav Mikulka, the Secretary of the
Committee, and his very competent team. It is owing to
their efforts that the work of the Committee always
proceeded smoothly, efficiently and in an atmosphere
of genuine cordiality. We are grateful to them for
ensuring that we completed our work successfully.
The President: I thank the Rapporteur of the
Sixth Committee.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Sixth
Committee that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.

6

Statements will
explanations of vote.

therefore

be

limited

to

The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Sixth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
May I remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Sixth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Sixth Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance.
I should therefore hope that we may proceed to
adopt without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the Sixth Committee.
Agenda item 148
Progressive development of the principles and norms
of international law relating to the new international
economic order
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/58/510)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The draft decision was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote. May I consider that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 58/522).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 148?

A/58/PV.72

It was so decided.
Agenda item 149
United Nations Programme of Assistance in the
Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/58/511)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/73).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 149?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 150
Convention on jurisdictional immunities of States
and their property
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/58/512)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 9 of its report.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/74).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 150?

Agenda item 151
Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law on the work of its thirtysixth session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/58/513)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by
the Sixth Committee in paragraph 9 of its report.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its thirty-sixth session”.
The Sixth Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): Sierra Leone was a
sponsor of the draft resolutions but that is not indicated
in the report. We wish that to be indicated in the record
of the meeting.
The President: It has been duly noted.
The Sixth Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 58/75).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Model Legislative Provisions on Privately Financed
Infrastructure Projects of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law”.
The Sixth Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
58/76).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 151?
It was so decided.

It was so decided.

7

A/58/PV.72

Agenda item 152
Report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its fifty-fifth session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/58/514)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/77).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 152?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 153
Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/58/515)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/78).
The President: I have one request for
explanation of position after the adoption of the draft
resolution. I now give the floor to the representative of
Cuba.
Ms. Ramos Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation felt it appropriate to maintain
consensus on the adoption of the draft resolution
contained in document A/C.6/58/L.23, under agenda
item 153, “Report of the Committee on Relations with
the Host Country”, and with regard to the report of the
Sixth Committee contained in document A/58/515.

8

However, we do wish to indicate that the host
country continues to repeatedly fail to comply with its
obligations under the Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the United Nations, the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961 and the
agreement concluded between the United Nations and
the United States of America concerning the
Headquarters of the United Nations.
My delegation states this on the basis of concrete
examples which occurred recently, such as the arbitrary
failure to grant travel permits requested for His
Excellency Mr. Dagoberto Rodriguez Barrera, head of
the Cuban Interests Section in Washington, to attend
the fifty-eighth regular session of the General
Assembly of the United Nations as a member of the
Cuban delegation.
More recently, in November, there was the late
issuance of travel permits to two officials of our
Mission who were to travel to Washington to
participate in the meeting of the Council of the Global
Environment Facility, scheduled for 19 to 21
November 2003. Although the travel permit in question
was requested within the time limits established, as
stipulated by the discriminatory practices imposed by
the host country against the Cuban Mission to the
United Nations, this delay meant that the Cuban
delegation was unable to be present at that meeting
during the first day of the session. To date, we have not
been informed of the reasons.
That unjustified delay comes in addition to the
fact that entry visas to the United States were not
issued to the remainder of the Cuban delegation, which
was to travel from Havana to participate in that event.
Despite the fact that Cuba currently occupies the
position of member of the Council of the Global
Environment Facility for the Caribbean area and
presides over the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification,
which agreed at its sixth meeting in Havana, from 25
August to 5 September 2003, to accept the Global
Environment Facility as the financial mechanism of the
Convention.
We wish to reiterate that in our capacity as a
member of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country, we will continue to contribute to refining the
work of that Committee through broad-based processes
of debate, consultation and negotiation among its
members and the active participation of other States.

A/58/PV.72

However, we cannot fail to denounce the selective,
unjust, discriminatory and politically motivated
practices by the host country, which constitute flagrant
violations of the Headquarters Agreement and the
customary rules of diplomatic law.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 153?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 154
International Criminal Court
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/58/516)
The President: The chair has before it a request
for explanation of vote before the vote. I now give the
floor to the representative of the United States of
America.
Ms. Willson (United States of America): For
reasons set forth in our 23 October statement in the
Sixth Committee on this agenda item, the United States
cannot and does not join consensus on this resolution
embracing the International Criminal Court.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/79).
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
154.
Agenda item 155

I should like to inform members that action on
draft resolution I is postponed to a later date to allow
time for the review of its programme budget
implications by the Fifth Committee. The Assembly
will take action on draft resolution I as soon as the
report of the Fifth Committee on its programme budget
implications is available.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution II, entitled “Implementation of the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations related
to assistance to third States affected by the application
of sanctions”.
The Sixth Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
58/80).
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
155.
Agenda item 156
Measures to eliminate international terrorism
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/58/518)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 10 of its report.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/81).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
156.

Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the
Role of the Organization
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/58/517)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Sixth Committee
in paragraph 12 of its report.

9

A/58/PV.72

Agenda item 157
Scope of legal protection under the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/58/519)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 10 of its report.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/82).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 157?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 158
International convention against the reproductive
cloning of human beings
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/58/520)
Draft resolution (A/58/L.37)
The President: After consultations with
concerned delegations, it is my understanding that
there is an agreement whereby no action will be taken
on the recommendation by the Sixth Committee
contained in paragraph 14 of its report (A/58/520) or
on draft resolution A/58/L.37. It is also my
understanding that there is agreement to adopt the
following decision: “The General Assembly decides
that the item entitled ‘International convention against
the reproductive cloning of human beings’ will be
included in the provisional agenda of its fifty-ninth
session.”
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to proceed along those lines?
It was so decided.
The President: I now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the decision just adopted. May I remind

10

delegations that explanations of position are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom is profoundly disappointed by the
actions of those who sought, until very recently, to
overturn the decision of the Sixth Committee.
During the deliberations of the Sixth Committee,
we made clear the views of the United Kingdom. The
United Kingdom is totally opposed to reproductive
cloning, and we were one of the first countries in the
world to introduce specific legislation to ban that
possibility.
However, in our view, therapeutic cloning is a
different matter. The United Kingdom believes that all
types of stem cell research, including therapeutic
cloning, should be encouraged. Indeed, we believe that
it would be indefensible to stop such research and deny
millions of people — and their families — the chance
of new treatments that could save their lives. The
international scientific community supports that view.
More than 60 of the world’s leading scientific
academies, including the United States National
Academy of Sciences, published a joint statement in
September 2003 calling on the United Nations to ban
reproductive cloning — but to permit therapeutic
cloning research.
The United Kingdom respects the cultural,
religious and social differences that may lead other
countries to reach different conclusions on what type of
research may be appropriate in their own national
settings. We have no wish to impose our view on other
countries or to interfere in decisions that have been
legitimately taken by other national Governments. We
believe that it would be totally unjustifiable to attempt
to impose a ban on therapeutic cloning in those
countries that have reached a national consensus in
favour of such research, that have nationally agreed
regulatory systems for embryo research, and that are
working to deliver new treatments for serious and lifethreatening diseases.
I have already expressed our disappointment at
the present situation. We believe that the United
Nations should proceed through consensus. It is clear
that there is no consensus with respect to therapeutic
cloning research. But, by ignoring that fact and
pressing for action to ban all cloning, supporters of the
Costa Rican draft resolution have effectively destroyed

A/58/PV.72

the possibility of action on the important area on which
we are all agreed — a ban on reproductive cloning.
I wish to make clear that the United Kingdom
would never be party to any convention that aimed to
introduce a global ban on therapeutic cloning; neither
will the United Kingdom participate in the drafting of
such a convention or apply it in its national law.
Therapeutic cloning research will continue to be
permitted in the United Kingdom.
Mr. Samy (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of Egypt joined the consensus of the
General Assembly in its consideration of agenda item
158. Nevertheless, we should like to place on record
the following two points.
First, the Egyptian delegation expresses its
dissatisfaction at the precedent of the Assembly
reconsidering in plenary meeting issues already
discussed by the Sixth Committee and altering — even
dropping — recommendations made in the
Committee’s report. We are fully aware that the plenary
has the right to take any action it deems appropriate
with regard to any recommendation made by any of the
Main Committees. At the same time, however, I should
like to express our concern at the possible
repercussions of that precedent on the Committees’
future actions and on the Assembly’s relationship with
its Committees.
Secondly, because the General Committee
recommended referral of item 158 to the Sixth
Committee, instead of recommending referral to the
Assembly in plenary meeting, it is not procedurally
permissible to submit any documents under the item to
the plenary for consideration. Here, we should like to
recall the consideration of agenda item 108, which was
referred to both the Third Committee and the plenary.
If the General Assembly had wished to grant
jurisdiction to both plenary meetings and the Sixth
Committee to consider item 158, then it would have
done so, as was the case with item 108. Therefore, we
have procedural doubts about the soundness of
presenting document A/58/L.37.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 158?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 159
Observer status for the International Institute for
Democracy and Electoral Assistance in the
General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/58/522)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/83).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 159?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 162
Observer status for the Eurasian Economic
Community in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/58/523)
The President: We now turn to the draft
resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report. The representative of Sierra
Leone has asked to speak in explanation of position
before action is taken on the draft resolution, and I give
him the floor.
Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): When this draft
resolution came before the Sixth Committee for
consideration, my delegation did not join the consensus
because, as we indicated then, we did not have
sufficient information on the Eurasian Economic
Community. In the intervening period, we have been
honoured and privileged to be furnished with sufficient
information that has helped my delegation to
understand what this community is seeking to achieve.
On the basis of what we have been furnished, we are
now satisfied on the bona fides of this Community,
and, therefore, we are now prepared to join the
consensus on this agenda item.

11

A/58/PV.72

We wish also to express our profound thanks to
the delegation of Azerbaijan which has endeavoured to
furnish us with the requisite information on the basis of
which we are now prepared to join the consensus.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report
(A/58/523).
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/84).
Mr. Kazykhanov (Kazakhstan) (spoke in
Russian): On behalf of the Member States of the
Eurasian Economic Community (EAEC) — the
Republic of Belarus, the Republic of Kazakhstan, the
Kyrgyz Republic, the Russian Federation and the
Republic of Tajikistan — I would like to express our
deep gratitude to the General Assembly for supporting
the recommendation of the Sixth Committee on
granting observer status to the EAEC in the General
Assembly.
The Member States of the EAEC are grateful to
those countries that have joined in sponsoring the
resolution and in particular, Cambodia and Ukraine.
One of them, Ukraine, has the status of observer in the
EAEC. We see this decision by the General Assembly
as proof that the international community has high
regard for the work that is being conducted by our
States in meeting the objectives and the challenges
entailed in enhancing integration processes on Eurasian
territory.
We also believe that this type of mechanism for
cooperation, one such as the EAEC, is crucial in order
for our common interests in the Eurasian region to be
correctly presented at the international level. The major
purposes of the Community are clearly articulated in
the founding treaty of our organization and are in every
way consonant with the purposes of the United
Nations. The work of this regional intergovernmental
organization includes a wide range of issues and
encompasses economics, finance, trade, transport,
energy, the environment and cooperation for
development.
We are convinced that the work of the EAEC, as
an organization that brings together States with

12

enormous trade and transport potential, could become a
significant factor in the ongoing post-Doha and postMonterrey transformation of international trade and
development policy. This experience and innovations
which our countries are requiring as they transform
their area into a free-trade zone through EAEC could,
in our view, be appropriately implemented in the
resumed post-Cancún negotiating process. The
participation of the EAEC in the work of the General
Assembly as an observer will help us establish closer
cooperation between the EAEC and the United Nations
so that we can achieve our common purposes in the
area of socio-economic development. It will also help
us establish new and more appropriate opportunities for
expanding the field of cooperation between our two
organizations.
The universal and comprehensive nature of the
work of the United Nations, its tremendous intellectual
and technological potential, puts it in a position to
provide policy and technical support to the efforts of
economic organizations such as the EAEC. This
support from the United Nations would be an effective
contributor to the successful development of the
economies of our States in a time of rapidly changing
global economic and trade processes.
The EAEC’s involvement, as well as the
involvement of other major inter-State economic
associations in crafting high-level socio-economic
policy decisions at the United Nations, is a positive
step in light of the Secretary-General’s report to the
Millennium Summit with its recommendations to
ensure closer coordination of macroeconomic and trade
policy so as to help us achieve our common purpose,
namely to increase the advantages of globalization.
In conclusion, I would once again like to thank
the delegations for adopting this decision, and note the
desire of our States to give solid substance to the
EAEC’s involvement as an observer in the General
Assembly.
Mr.
Rapota
(Secretary-General,
Eurasian
Economic Community) (spoke in Russian): First of all,
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me
an opportunity to speak before the members of the
General Assembly.
The Eurasian Economic Community (EAEC) is a
regional organization, and its emergence logically
stems from the high rate at which economic
transformation is taking place in member States. The

A/58/PV.72

Community fulfils our need for regional and
subregional organizations in today’s world as a strong
voice in helping to resolve political and socioeconomic problems. One of the major purposes of our
organization is set forward in its unified economic
space.
We are moving forward towards that goal.
Recently, we have been able to achieve genuine results
in integrating our work, for example, by creating a
free-trade zone on the territory of the Community. We
have also adopted a number of legal measures aimed at
harmonizing foreign trade, including fiscal, customs
and currency legislation among our States. Legislation
has also been enacted on cross-border issues, energy,
transportation and social questions. The problem of
migration is now very urgent for all our States. Within
our organization we have a draft agreement on
principles for regulating labour migration, and, if
adopted, it will eliminate many problems that have to
do with illegal migration.
We are also paying a great deal of attention to
resolving ecological problems. A major priority of our
work is the area of social issues, which is particularly
important for the Central Asian States, where providing
employment, medical services and education, in
addition to overcoming poverty, are pressing problems.
Generally, in spite of its relative youth, our
organization is already playing a significant role in
encouraging and expanding the integration of Member
States into the global economy and the international
division of labour.
As Secretary General of the EAEC, I wish to
thank members for adopting this resolution today on
granting observer status for the Community in the
General Assembly. For us it is not just a formal act, it
represents the conclusion of a process of international
and legal recognition of our organization as a fullfledged participant in international economic
integration. This new status, no doubt, will allow the
EAEC to strengthen and improve its potential and will
help us broaden the frameworks of our international
cooperation. We are prepared to work very closely with
the United Nations, as well as with all other
international partners who are interested in working
with us.
In conclusion, I would like to pledge to members
that the EAEC will do its utmost to cooperate with the
United Nations so that we can meet all our challenges

and strengthen and support international peace and
security by ensuring sustainable social economic
developments in the Eurasian region.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 162?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 163
Observer status for the GUUAM in the
General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/58/524)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/85).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 163?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 164
Observer status for the East African Community in
the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/58/525)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/86).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 164?

13

A/58/PV.72

It was so decided.
Agenda item 128
Administration of justice at the United Nations
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/58/521)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/87).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 128?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 19
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples (A/58/23 (Parts I, II and III))
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/58/66 and
A/58/171)
Draft resolutions (A/58/23 (Part III), chapter
XII, section G, para. 7), (A/58/L.21)
The President: I will suspend the meeting for
five minutes to allow delegations to change personnel
for the next series of agenda items.
The meeting was suspended at noon and resumed
at 12.05 p.m.
The President: I call on the Rapporteur of the
Special Committee, Mr. Fayssal Mekdad of the Syrian
Arab Republic, to introduce the Committee’s report and
the draft resolution contained in part III, chapter XII,

14

section G, paragraph 7 of the report of the Special
Committee. I hope that he will be heard in silence.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic), Rapporteur
of the Special Committee: It is a great honour for me to
inform the General Assembly of our pride, Sir, in
having you personally as President of the Assembly. I
know how dear to you and close to your heart this item
is. It is no secret that the issue of decolonization
enjoyed broader support and assistance during your
chairmanship of the Committee of 24 some years ago. I
thank you for that commitment, which is ongoing
through all of us.
The General Assembly is beginning its
consideration of agenda item 19 on the question of the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. As
the Rapporteur of the Special Committee on
decolonization, I have the honour to present the report
of the Committee on its activities during the year 2003.
The report is contained in document A/58/23 and
consists of three parts.
Part I of the report provides information on the
history and organization of the Committee and gives a
general description of the matters on its agenda and its
interaction with other United Nations bodies and
intergovernmental, non-governmental and regional
organizations. A review of the work of the Committee
during the year 2003 can also be found in Part I of the
report.
Projections for the future work of the Committee
in the year 2004, subject to the approval of the General
Assembly, are contained in section J of part I. I would
like to draw the Assembly’s particular attention to that
section of the report.
Part II of the report contains information on the
activities of the Committee according to the items on
its agenda. It gives an account of the Special
Committee’s deliberations on such issues as the
dissemination of information on decolonization; the
question of sending visiting missions to the Territories;
economic and other activities that affect the interests of
the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories; the
implementation of the Declaration by the specialized
agencies and international institutions; and information
transmitted under Article 73 e of the United Nations
Charter. That part of the report also presents a brief
summary of the Special Committee’s deliberations

A/58/PV.72

related to the 16 remaining Non-Self-Governing
Territories.
Part
III
of
the
report
contains
the
recommendations of the Committee in the form of draft
resolutions.
The year under review was a productive year for
the Special Committee on decolonization. For the first
time in history, the Committee held its seminar in a
Non-Self-Governing Territory, Anguilla, for which we
are thankful both to the Government of the United
Kingdom and to the Government of the Territory of
Anguilla.
In 2003, the Special Committee continued to be
guided by the goals set up for the Second International
Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism and its plan
of action. The Committee concentrated its efforts on
those actions that need to be taken by the administering
Powers, by the Territories and by the Committee itself
in order to implement the objectives of the Decade and
to move forward towards a complete eradication of
colonialism.
The report states that the Committee has focused
its attention on political, economic and social
developments in the Non-Self-Governing Territories. In
that respect, the Committee attaches great importance
to the participation of representatives from the
Territories, as well as non-governmental organizations
and experts, in its annual session in June 2003.
The report underlines that the Special Committee
continues to pay special attention to developing
productive relationships with the administering
Powers. To that end, the Committee has undertaken
further efforts to intensify dialogue and improve
interaction with them. The report notes the
continuation of fruitful meetings of the representatives
of New Zealand and Tokelau and confirms the
readiness of the United Nations Development
Programme to finance a study on the self-determination
options for that Territory.
The report also notes that the United Kingdom
and the United States have continued their informal
contacts with the Special Committee and that both
administering Powers have expressed their intention to
maintain those contacts in the future. The participation
of the representatives of the United Kingdom in the
seminar in Anguilla considerably enriched that forum.
In 2004, the Special Committee intends to continue to

seek closer cooperation with all administering Powers
and hopes to enjoy their formal participation in its
work.
The annex to chapter II of part I of the report
contains information on the Caribbean Regional
Seminar, which was held in the Non-Self-Governing
Territory of Anguilla in May 2003. In addition to the
novelty of being held in a Non-Self-Governing
Territory, this year’s Seminar had a more focused
agenda devoted to advancing the decolonization
process in the Caribbean and Bermuda. The Seminar
was attended by a number of chief ministers from the
Non-Self-Governing Territories. It provided a mutually
beneficial opportunity for a direct interaction and
exchange of views between the members of the
Committee and the representatives of the administering
Power and the Territories.
Part II of the report of the Special Committee
presents an account of its deliberations of the issues on
its agenda related to the individual Territories. During
the period under review, the Committee continued to
pay special attention to political, economic and social
developments in the small island Territories and
followed the situations in American Samoa, Anguilla,
Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman
Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the
Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin
Islands, as well as Tokelau and New Caledonia.
The report also reflects the consideration by the
Special Committee of the question of the Falkland
Islands (Malvinas), Gibraltar, the question of Western
Sahara and the decision concerning Puerto Rico.
The consideration of the developments in the
Non-Self-Governing Territories by the Special
Committee has been greatly facilitated by the working
papers on each Territory prepared by the Secretariat.
In concluding my presentation of the report, I
should like to express the gratitude of the Special
Committee to the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Kofi Annan, for his continuing unqualified support of
the efforts of the Special Committee towards the
eradication of colonialism. I should also like to
highlight with appreciation the substantive political
support and advice provided by the Department of
Political Affairs, whose input has been invaluable in
the work of the Committee and in the implementation
of its mandate. I should equally like to refer to the
excellent technical Secretariat services provided by the

15

A/58/PV.72

Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management and to wish Mr. Mohammad Sattar, the
outgoing Secretary of the Special Committee, who is
retiring, best wishes for the future.
The President: I call on the Vice-Chairman of
the Special Committee, Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla
of Cuba, to introduce draft resolution A/58/L.21.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): As the General Assembly begins its
consideration
of
the
item
concerning
the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, I
have the honour to address the Assembly as ViceChairman of the Special Committee on Decolonization,
on behalf of the Acting Chairman of the Committee,
Mr. Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoué, who was unable to be
present.
The Rapporteur of the Special Committee has
already introduced the report of the Committee for the
past year, contained in document A/58/23. I wish
briefly to review the activities of the Special
Committee and introduce the draft resolution that we
will consider. At the same time, I will stress the most
important areas of work of the Special Committee for
the next year. Much remains to be done to conclude the
decolonization process. This is the third year of the
Second International Decade for the Elimination of
Colonialism, and 16 Non-Self-Governing Territories
remain on our programme of work.
This year, in keeping with the mandate of the
Special Committee, we have examined developments
in each one of the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
based on the information provided by the
Administering Powers pursuant to Article 73 e of the
Charter, the working papers on each Territory, prepared
by the Secretariat, and the statements made by
representatives of the Territories, petitioners, nongovernmental organizations and experts.
In June, the Committee adopted by consensus
nine resolutions and one decision. We have continued
to bring to the attention of the international community
the importance of the joint activities of the Economic
and Social Council and the Special Committee aimed at
giving development assistance to the Territories. In
July, the Economic and Social Council adopted a
resolution on the implementation of the Declaration on
decolonization by specialized agencies.

16

The regional seminars, held annually by the
Special Committee in the Caribbean or the Pacific,
have always been a valuable opportunity for
representatives of the Territories, the Special
Committee and other members of the United Nations,
non-governmental organizations and various experts to
exchange views and opinions and to examine various
matters pertaining to the situation in the Territories.
In May, a seminar was held for the first time in
one of the Non-Self-Governing Territories — Anguilla.
The seminar programme is aimed at promoting the
decolonization process in the Caribbean Territories and
Bermuda. Direct interaction and deliberations among
the participants enabled everyone — members of the
Committee, representatives of the Administering
Powers, Member States and of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories — to understand clearly the need for all
parties concerned to support, with practical and
concrete measures, the common desire to achieve
decolonization.
As the Assembly will recall, the Special
Committee attributes great importance to the function
of Administering Powers in the effective fulfilment of
decolonization goals and, in that regard, has
endeavoured to work in close cooperation with them.
In recent years, the Special Committee has welcomed
the cooperation that has characterized its relations with
New Zealand. This year, the working relationship of
the Special Committee with the United Kingdom and
the United States, although informal, has also
improved.
The Special Committee hopes to continue
working with all the Administering Powers to give
effect to the proposal that it formulated some time ago
to prepare decolonization plans for the various
Territories. In that regard, I also wish to reiterate the
obligation of Member States, pursuant to the Charter,
to ensure that the interests of the peoples of the
Territories are borne in mind.
I wish to say a few words on the draft resolution
concerning the implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, contained in document A/58/L.21. That
draft resolution is along the same lines as resolution
57/140, adopted by the General Assembly at the
previous session. In the preambular part, the draft
resolution refers to the Second International Decade for
the Elimination of Colonialism and reaffirms that the

A/58/PV.72

existence of colonialism is incompatible with the
Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the 1960 Declaration on decolonization. It
reaffirms the Special Committee’s resolve to achieve
the complete and rapid elimination of colonialism. The
draft resolution reaffirms also the General Assembly’s
support for the aspirations of peoples under colonial
domination to exercise their right to self-determination,
including independence, in keeping with United
Nations resolutions on decolonization.
It urges the Administering Powers to conclude,
before the end of 2004, a constructive programme of
work, case by case, for the Non-Self-Governing
Territories, with the aim of facilitating fulfilment of the
mandate of the Special Committee and resolutions on
decolonization, including those relating to specific
territories. In that context, in operative paragraph 7, the
Assembly welcomes the consultations taking place
between the Special Committee and the representatives
of the Government of New Zealand and the people of
Tokelau, with the view to carrying forward the
programme of work on the question of Tokelau.
Paragraph 8 contains provisions on the Special
Committee’s programme of work for the coming year.
The Assembly asks the Committee to formulate
specific proposals to put an end to colonialism, to
review the implementation of relevant resolutions by
Member States, to follow the political, economic and
social situations of Non-Self-Governing Territories, to
conclude by the end of 2004 a constructive programme
of work on a case-by-case basis for the Non-SelfGoverning Territories, to continue sending visiting
missions, to carry out seminars in order to garner
support worldwide for the decolonization process and,
finally, to mark annually the Week of Solidarity with
the Peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories.
Some paragraphs of the draft resolution refer
expressly to the economic activities and the
exploitation of natural resources of the Territories.
They call on Member States and specialized agencies
to give moral and material support to the peoples of the
Territories, and request Administering Powers to use
bilateral and multilateral assistance to strengthen the
economy of those Territories.
The draft resolution reiterates that visiting United
Nations missions are an effective instrument for
learning about the situation in the Territories, urges the
Administering Powers to facilitate those missions and

urges those Administering Powers that have not
participated officially in the work of the Special
Committee to do so at its 2004 session.
Finally, the draft resolution asks the SecretaryGeneral, specialized agencies and other agencies of the
United Nations system to lend economic and social
assistance to the Territories and to continue doing so
once those Territories have exercised their right to selfdetermination, including independence.
The text of the draft resolution before the
Assembly has been prepared with the participation of
interested delegations in a spirit of cooperation. I
appeal to all delegations to favourably consider the
recommendations contained in the draft resolution, so
that the Special Committee on decolonization can
maintain and enhance the momentum it gained at the
last session to put an end to colonialism in the world.
In fulfilment of the mandate conferred on it by
the General Assembly, the Special Committee proposes
in the coming year to intensify its activities to conclude
the decolonization process in the remaining Non-SelfGoverning Territories. Furthermore, it proposes to
expand its cooperation with the administering Powers
and provide assistance to the peoples of the Territories
with a view to finding lasting and mutually acceptable
solutions to the remaining problems.
Before concluding, I would like, on behalf of all
the members of the Special Committee, to thank the
Secretary-General for the valuable substantive and
technical support given to us by the Secretariat over the
year.
The President: I should like to inform members
that the General Assembly will take action on draft
resolutions under agenda item 19 after all the reports of
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) have been considered.
Reports of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee)
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) on
agenda items 81 to 90, 12 and 19.
I request the Rapporteur of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee, Mr. Damien Cole of
Ireland, to introduce in one intervention the reports of
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee.

17

A/58/PV.72

Mr. Cole (Ireland), Rapporteur of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee): It is a great privilege and honour for me to
introduce to the General Assembly the reports of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) submitted under agenda items 81
to 90, as well as items 12 and 19. These reports,
contained in documents A/58/470 to A/58/480, include
the texts of draft resolutions and decisions
recommended to the General Assembly for adoption.
For the convenience of delegations, a checklist
prepared by the Secretariat of voting in the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) is contained in A/C.4/58/INF/3.
During this first part of the fifty-eighth session of
the General Assembly, the Fourth Committee held a
total of 24 formal meetings. The Committee continued
its practice of having an informal interactive meeting
under agenda item 85, “Comprehensive review of the
whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their
aspects”. An open-ended working group established by
the Committee under item 82, “International
cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space”, also
held a number of informal meetings.
During that stage of its work, the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee adopted 23 draft
resolutions and two draft decisions, of which 10 draft
resolutions and both draft decisions were adopted
without a vote.
The first report, submitted under agenda item 81,
“Effects of atomic radiation”, is contained in document
A/58/470. The Fourth Committee considered the report
of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the
Effects of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR), as contained
in document A/58/46. The draft resolution submitted
under that agenda item is contained in paragraph 7 of
the report of the Fourth Committee.
In the draft resolution, the General Assembly
would, among other things, request UNSCEAR to
continue its work and to report to the General
Assembly on its review of the important problems in
the field of ionizing radiation. The United Nations
Environment Programme is urged to review and
strengthen the present funding of UNSCEAR, so that it
can discharge the responsibility and mandate entrusted
to it. On behalf of the Fourth Committee, I recommend
the adoption of that draft resolution by the General
Assembly.

18

The second report, submitted under agenda item
82, “International cooperation in the peaceful uses of
outer space”, is contained in document A/58/471.
During its consideration of the item, the Fourth
Committee held a number of informal meetings of an
open-ended working group, chaired by the delegation
of Chile. The working group formulated the draft
resolutions contained in paragraph 14 of the report.
In the first draft resolution, the General Assembly
would, among other things, endorse the report of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and
urge States that have not yet done so to become parties
to the five treaties governing the uses of outer space.
The General Assembly would also urge States, in
particular those with major space capabilities, to
actively contribute to the goal of preventing an arms
race in outer space, as an essential condition for the
promotion of international cooperation in the peaceful
uses of outer space.
In the second draft resolution contained in that
report, the Assembly would decide to conduct a review
of the progress made in implementing the
recommendations of the Third United Nations
Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space (UNISPACE III). The review would be
conducted in plenary meeting in October 2004 under a
separate agenda item, entitled “Review of the
implementation of the recommendations of the Third
United Nations Conference on the Exploration and
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space”.
The third report of the Committee, submitted
under agenda item 83, “United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East”, is contained in document A/58/472. The Fourth
Committee considered the report of the CommissionerGeneral of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
contained in document A/58/13 and Add.1, as well as
the report of the Working Group on the Financing of
UNRWA and other relevant reports by the SecretaryGeneral. Under this item, the Committee adopted five
draft resolutions related to various aspects of the work
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East. Their adoption, in
place of the customary seven resolutions, would ensure
the continuation of the important functions of UNRWA
in alleviating the sufferings of the Palestine refugees,
while streamlining the work of the Fourth Committee
on this question. Those draft resolutions are contained

A/58/PV.72

in paragraph 32 of the report. The Fourth Committee
recommends the adoption of the draft resolutions to the
General Assembly.
The fourth report, submitted under agenda item
84, “Report of the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories”, is contained in document A/58/473. The
Fourth Committee considered the report of the Special
Committee concerning the protection and promotion of
the human rights of the Palestinian people and other
Arab inhabitants of the occupied territories, as well as
other reports by the Secretary-General submitted under
that item. In the course of the debate on that item, the
activities of the Special Committee were widely
supported by many States, although some delegations
expressed concern about the work of the Special
Committee.
Under that item, after due deliberation, the Fourth
Committee adopted five draft resolutions, which can be
found in paragraph 25 of its report. The Fourth
Committee recommends the draft resolutions to the
General Assembly for adoption.
The fifth report, relating to agenda item 85,
“Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects”, is
contained in document A/58/474. The Fourth
Committee heard a comprehensive introductory
statement by the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno,
and held a general debate under that item. It also held
informal interactive discussions with the UnderSecretary-General and other senior officials of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. Many of the
issues raised during the general debate and the
interactive discussions will be further considered by
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations at
its forthcoming session early next year.
The sixth report, submitted under agenda item 86,
“Questions relating to information”, is contained in
document A/58/475. The Fourth Committee considered
the report submitted by the Committee on Information
(A/58/21) and the report of the Secretary-General
(A/58/175).
The
Under-Secretary-General
for
Communications and Public Information, Mr. Shashi
Tharoor, delivered a comprehensive introductory
statement and responded to questions raised by
delegations during the general debate on the ongoing

and fundamental reorientation of the focus and
structure of the Department of Public Information at
Headquarters and in the field. The Fourth Committee
adopted, without a vote, two draft resolutions and one
draft decision, which are contained in paragraphs 10
and 11 of the report.
In draft resolution A, the Assembly would urge
Member States, inter alia, to enhance regional efforts
and cooperation among developing countries, as well
as cooperation between developed and developing
countries; and to strengthen communication capacities
and
improve
the
media
infrastructure
and
communication technology in the developing countries,
especially in the areas of training and dissemination of
information.
In draft resolution B, the Assembly would, among
other things, welcome the restructuring of the
Department of Public Information, encourage the
Secretary-General to continue its reorientation,
emphasize the importance of multilingualism and
endorse the new programmatic priorities of the
Department.
Here, I would like to draw the attention of
delegates to a technical change in the draft resolution.
In paragraph 82 of the draft resolution, at the end of
page 16 of the English version of the report, the words
“main part of its fifty-eighth session” at the end of the
paragraph, should be changed to, “twenty-sixth session
of the Committee on Information”.
The draft decision would also appoint Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname and Switzerland
members of the Committee on Information, increasing
its membership to 102. The Special Political and
Decolonization Committee recommends that the
General Assembly adopt both draft resolutions and the
draft decision.
With regard to the cluster of items on Non-SelfGoverning Territories and the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
People, agenda items 87, 88, 89, 90, 12 and 19, the
Fourth Committee considered these items together. The
Committee had one single general debate on the cluster
of items and heard one representative and 13
petitioners
from
various
Non-Self-Governing
Territories. Under these items, the General Assembly
has before it five reports.

19

A/58/PV.72

The report submitted under agenda item 87,
“Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations”, is contained in document A/58/476.
The draft resolution submitted under this item appears
in paragraph 7 of the report. The Fourth Committee
recommends it to the General Assembly for adoption.
The report relating to agenda items 88,
“Economic and other activities which affect the
interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories”, is contained in document A/58/477. Under
this item, the Fourth Committee adopted one draft
resolution entitled “Economic and other activities
which affect the interests of the peoples of the NonSelf-Governing Territories”, contained in paragraph 7
of the report. The Fourth Committee recommends this
draft resolution and the draft decision to the General
Assembly for adoption.
The report relating to agenda item 89,
“Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the
specialized agencies and the international institutions
associated with the United Nations”, and item 12,
“Report of the Economic and Social Council”, is
contained in document A/58/478. In paragraph 7 of the
report, the Fourth Committee recommends one draft
resolution to the General Assembly for adoption.
The report relating to agenda item 90, “Offers by
Member States of study and training facilities for
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories”, is
contained in document A/58/479. Under this item, the
Fourth Committee recommends one draft resolution,
which is contained in paragraph 6 of the report, for
adoption by the General Assembly.
The report submitted under agenda item 19,
“Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples”, is
contained in document A/57/480, which contains the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples relating to specific territories not covered by
other agenda items.
In this context, the Fourth Committee adopted
four draft resolutions and one draft decision. The draft
resolutions on the “Question of Western Sahara”;
“Question of New Caledonia”; “Question of Tokelau”;
the consolidated omnibus draft resolution concerning

20

the 11 territories; as well as the draft decision on the
“Question of Gibraltar” all were adopted without a vote
by the Fourth Committee.
Here, I should like to pay tribute to the spirit of
cooperation that prevailed in the Committee after
lengthy consultations on the question of Western
Sahara. The four draft resolutions are contained in
paragraph 25 of the report, and the draft decision is
contained in paragraph 26. The Fourth Committee
recommends that the General Assembly adopt those
draft resolutions and the draft decision.
Before concluding, I should like to recall the high
level of cooperation prevailing in the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee. Though the work of
the Committee was prolonged an additional week in
order to enable it to reach a successful conclusion, the
Committee was able to fulfil the mandate entrusted to
it by the Assembly and to complete its work effectively
and constructively.
I should like also to express, on behalf of the
Bureau of the Fourth Committee, our profound
appreciation to those delegations that coordinated the
efforts on the consolidation of the draft resolutions
adopted by the Committee. I should like also to thank
all delegations that participated in our efforts to reach
consensus on many draft resolutions and decisions.
I should like to pay particular tribute here to the
Chairman of the Fourth Committee, Mr. Enrique
Loedel of Uruguay, whose knowledge and experience
in multilateral forums, enhanced by his consummate
diplomatic skills, enabled the Committee to consider in
depth all the agenda items allocated to it by the General
Assembly, and whose focus and determination greatly
facilitated our deliberations on a number of sensitive
issues. This was particularly important given the wideranging and often difficult issues assigned to this
Committee. Other members of the Bureau, namely Ms.
Jasna Ognjanovac of Croatia, Mr. Ibrahim Assaf of
Lebanon, and Mr. Isaac Lamba of Malawi, with whom
I had the pleasure of working, have also contributed
greatly to the successful conclusion of the work of the
Fourth Committee.
I should like also to place on record our
appreciation for the excellent assistance provided by
Mr. Saijin Zhang, the Secretary of the Committee,
Ms. Christa Giles and the very competent team from
the Secretariat. It is thanks to their efforts that the work
of the Committee always proceeded smoothly and in an

A/58/PV.72

atmosphere of genuine cordiality and efficiency. We
are very grateful to them for ensuring that we were able
to complete our work successfully.
I now have the honour to submit to the General
Assembly for its consideration and adoption the
recommendations of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee set out in the reports
contained in documents A/58/470 to A/58/480.
The President: If there is no proposal under rule
66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
which are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee have been made clear in the
Committee and are reflected in the relevant official
records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that,
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee, I
should like to advise representatives that we are going
to proceed to take decisions in the same manner as was
done in the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee, unless the Secretariat is notified to the
contrary in advance.
This means that where recorded votes were taken,
we will do the same. I should also hope that we will
proceed
to
adopt
without
a
vote
those

recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee.
Agenda item 81
Effects of atomic radiation
Report of the Fourth Committee (A/58/470)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/88).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 81?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 82
International cooperation in the peaceful uses of
outer space
Report of the Fourth Committee (A/58/471)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 14 of its report.
Draft resolution I is entitled “International
Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space”. The
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
adopted draft resolution I without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 58/89).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Review
of
the
implementation
of
the
recommendations of the Third United Nations
Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space”.

21

A/58/PV.72

The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution II without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
58/90).
The President: I call on the representative of
Thailand, who wishes to speak in explanation of
position following the adoption of the draft resolution.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): In July 1999, the
United Nations held its Third Conference on the
Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
(UNISPACE III), which set out a series of important
and
far-reaching
recommendations.
Having
participated in that Conference, Thailand subsequently
joined some of the action teams established to
implement the recommendations of UNISPACE III.
Those include action teams on disaster management
and on knowledge-sharing through the promotion of
universal access to space-based communication
services.
Furthermore, Thailand also co-organized in
November 2002, with the Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the Committee
on Earth Observation Satellites, the European Space
Agency and France the second United Nations
Regional Workshop in Bangkok on the Use of Space
Technology for Disaster Management. Last September,
Thailand also hosted in Bangkok a United Nations
workshop on the contribution of space communication
technology to bridging the digital divide.
With regard to matters related to the remote
sensing of the Earth via satellite, including applications
for developing countries and the monitoring of the
Earth’s environment, Thailand is also cooperating with
a number of countries under the planned disastermonitoring constellation. It is also worth mentioning
that the Thailand ground receiving station has been
providing satellite data to a number of countries in the
region.
Those activities reflect Thailand’s interest and
readiness to participate actively and fully in the work
of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.
It is therefore our fervent hope that the resolution on
international cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer
space (A/58/471), which was just adopted without a
vote, will pave the way for the future enlargement of
the Committee, taking into account the principle of

22

equitable geographical distribution as well as previous
work and accomplishments in the field. In so doing, we
also hope that such enlargement would not preclude
any interested State, including Thailand, from
presenting its case to serve the Committee as a full
member in the near future.
Furthermore, with the adoption of the resolution
on the review of UNISPACE III, adopted without a
vote, Thailand welcomes the decision made by the
Assembly to conduct the review at its fifty-ninth
session. Thailand looks forward to participating
actively in that review.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 82?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 83
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/58/472)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the five draft resolutions recommended by
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 32 of its report.
After all the votes have been taken,
representatives will again have the opportunity to
explain their vote. We turn to draft resolution I entitled
“Assistance to Palestine refugees”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,

A/58/PV.72

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro,
Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan,
Suriname,
Swaziland,
Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel
Abstaining:
Cameroon,
Honduras,
Marshall
Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, Papua
New Guinea, Tuvalu, United States of America
Draft resolution I was adopted by 167 votes to 1,
with 8 abstentions (resolution 58/91).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Somalia and
Uganda informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Persons displaced as a result of the June 1967 and
subsequent hostilities”.

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe

23

A/58/PV.72

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Honduras, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda
Draft resolution II was adopted by 168 votes to 5,
with 3 abstentions (resolution 58/92).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Somalia and
Uganda informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour; the delegation of
Nauru informed the Secretariat that it had
intended to abstain.]
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian

24

Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Burundi, Cameroon, Costa Rica, El Salvador,
Honduras, Nicaragua, Papua New Guinea,
Rwanda
Draft resolution III was adopted by 162 votes to
5, with 8 abstentions (resolution 58/93).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Somalia
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
vote in favour; the delegations of Nauru and
Uganda informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to abstain.]
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Palestine refugees’ properties and their revenues”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,

A/58/PV.72

Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon,
Rwanda

Honduras,

Papua

New

Guinea,

Draft resolution IV was adopted by 164 votes to
5, with 4 abstentions (resolution 58/94).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Somalia and
Uganda informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour; the delegation of
Nauru informed the Secretariat that it had
intended to abstain.]
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Assistance to Palestine refugees and support for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East”.

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Bahamas,
Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador,
Egypt,
El
Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lesotho,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia
and Montenegro, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Spain, Sri Lanka, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Bahrain, Belize, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, China, Comoros, Cuba, India,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Morocco, Myanmar, Nauru, Oman, Pakistan,

25

A/58/PV.72

Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa,
Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia,
Turkey, Tuvalu, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Yemen
Draft resolution V was adopted by 133 votes to
none, with 35 abstentions (resolution 58/95).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Honduras,
Nauru and Uganda informed the Secretariat that
they had intended to vote in favour; the
delegations of Algeria, Bangladesh, Benin,
Botswana, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Lesotho,
Maldives, Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria,
Somalia and Togo informed the Secretariat that
they had intended to abstain.]
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
83.
Agenda item 84
Report of the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/58/473)
The President: The Assembly has before it five
draft resolutions recommended by the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee in paragraph 25 of its
report.
We now turn to draft resolution I, entitled “Work
of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Angola,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape

26

Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Madagascar,
Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Bhutan,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cameroon, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany,
Greece,
Guatemala,
Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan
Draft resolution I was adopted by 87 votes to 7,
with 78 abstentions (resolution 58/96).

A/58/PV.72

[Subsequently the delegation of Uganda informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled,
“Applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, to the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, and the other occupied Arab
territories”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,

Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Cameroon,
Rwanda

Honduras,

Papua

New

Guinea,

Draft resolution II was adopted by 164 votes to 6,
with 4 abstentions (resolution 58/97).
[Subsequently the delegation of Uganda informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled,
“Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem and the Occupied
Syrian Golan”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,

27

A/58/PV.72

Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad
and
Tobago,
Tunisia,
Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Costa Rica, Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras,
Nicaragua, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda,
Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu
Draft resolution III was adopted by 156 votes to
6, with 13 abstentions (resolution 58/98).
[Subsequently the delegation of Uganda informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled,
“Israeli practices affecting the human rights of the
Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,

28

Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Japan,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad
and
Tobago,
Tunisia,
Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United
Republic
of
Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Albania, Australia, Cameroon, Costa Rica, Czech
Republic, Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Georgia,
Germany,
Guatemala,
Honduras,
Nicaragua, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Rwanda,
Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 150 votes to
6, with 19 abstentions (resolution 58/99).

A/58/PV.72

[Subsequently the delegation of Uganda informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“The Occupied Syrian Golan”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro,
Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and

Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel
Abstaining:
Cameroon,
Equatorial
Guinea,
Honduras,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Nauru, Palau, Rwanda, Tonga, Tuvalu,
United States of America
Draft resolution V was adopted by 163 votes to 1,
with 11 abstentions (resolution 58/100).
[Subsequently the delegation of Uganda informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 84?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 85
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/58/474)
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) contained in document A/58/474?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
85.
Agenda item 86
Questions relating to information
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/58/475)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the

29

A/58/PV.72

Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 10 of its report and on the draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 11 of its
report.
The draft resolution entitled, “Questions relating
to information” is in two parts; part A is entitled
“Information in the service of humanity”, and part B is
entitled “United Nations public information policies
and activities” and has been orally revised.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft resolution as orally revised?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/101 A and B).
The President: We now turn to the draft decision
entitled, “Increasing the membership of the Committee
on Information”. The Special Political and
Decolonization Committee adopted the draft decision
without a vote. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 86?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 87
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/58/476)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,

30

Austria,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Angola, France, Israel, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
The draft resolution was adopted by 163 votes to
none, with 6 abstentions (resolution 58/102).

A/58/PV.72

[Subsequently, the delegation of Uganda
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
vote in favour.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 87?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 88
Economic and other activities which affect the
interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/58/477)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,

Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
France, Micronesia (Federated States of), United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The draft resolution was adopted by 164 votes to
2, with 3 abstentions (resolution 58/103).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Uganda
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
vote in favour.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 88?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 89 and agenda item 12 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
by the specialized agencies and the international
institutions associated with the United Nations
Report of the Economic and Social Council

31

A/58/PV.72

Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/58/478)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report.
The draft resolution is entitled “Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated
with the United Nations”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Argentina,
Australia,
Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador,
Egypt,
El
Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe

32

Against:
None
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia and
Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The draft resolution was adopted by 116 votes to
none, with 55 abstentions (resolution 58/104).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Uganda
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
vote in favour.]
The President: I call on the representative of
Antigua and Barbuda, who wishes to explain his vote
on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Lewis (Antigua and Barbuda): My delegation
voted in favour of the resolution because it serves as
the continuing legislative mandate for the wider United
Nations system to provide support for the Non-SelfGoverning Territories. The Economic and Social
Council continues to adopt a similar resolution on this
issue.
In that connection, we are pleased to note that a
number of United Nations bodies have specific
provisions within their rules of procedure to provide
such assistance, including the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the World Meteorological Organization and
the United Nations regional commissions. The United
Nations Development Programme is to be especially
commended for its effective coordination of assistance
from the wider United Nations system. We call on
other United Nations bodies to follow suit by
reviewing and adjusting their mandate to provide a

A/58/PV.72

mechanism
for
assisting
Non-Self-Governing
Territories in their development process, consistent
with the extensive mandate of the General Assembly.
We are concerned that the number of reports on
the implementation of this resolution requested from
United Nations bodies continues to be insufficient. We
call on the agencies concerned to respond to the
request of the Secretary-General to report on their
assistance to the Territories.
Finally, it is regrettable that this important
resolution has carried a number of abstentions in the
General Assembly and in the Economic and Social
Council. We are hopeful that future consultations will
yield consensus on a streamlined companion text that
would garner the full support of the General Assembly,
consistent with the critical role of the wider United
Nations system in providing assistance to the Non-SelfGoverning Territories.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 89?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 12.
Agenda item 90
Offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/58/479)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/105).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 90?

It was so decided.
Agenda item 19 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/58/480)
Note verbale from Saint Kitts and Nevis
(A/58/601)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the four draft resolutions recommended by
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 26 of its report and on the draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 27 of the
same report.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Question of New
Caledonia”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution I without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution
58/106).

I

was

adopted

(resolution

The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Question of Tokelau”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution II without a vote.
May I take it that Assembly wishes to likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
58/107).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Questions of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda,
the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam,
Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and
Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands”.
The draft resolution is in two parts. Part A is
entitled “General”; part B is entitled “Individual
Territories”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution III without a vote.
May I take it that Assembly wishes to likewise?

33

A/58/PV.72

Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
58/108).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Question of Western Sahara”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution IV without a vote.
May I take it that Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
58/109).
The President: We now turn to the draft decision
entitled “Question of Gibraltar”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote.
May I take it that Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 58/526).
The President: I should now like to draw the
attention of the General Assembly to document
A/58/601, which contains a note verbale dated
12 November 2003 from the Permanent Mission of
Saint Kitts and Nevis to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the General Assembly.
By this note verbale, the Permanent Mission of
Saint Kitts and Nevis to the United Nations advises me
of the interest of Saint Kitts and Nevis in becoming a
member of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.
As delegations are aware, pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 1654 (XVI) of 27 November
1961, members of the Special Committee are
nominated by the President of the General Assembly.
After consultations with regional groups, I have
nominated Saint Kitts and Nevis as a member of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
May I take it that the Assembly takes note of this
nomination?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
19.

34

The Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
before it.
Agenda item 19 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Draft resolutions (A/58/23 (Part III), chapter
XII, section G, para. 7, A/58/L.21)
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
the draft resolution contained in Part III, chapter XII,
section G, paragraph 7, of document A/58/23 and draft
resolution A/58/L.21.
I now call on the representative of the United
States, who wishes to speak in explanation of vote
before the voting. May I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Gilman (United States of America):
Regrettably, the United Sates cannot support the draft
resolution on implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples. By adopting a narrow definition of
decolonization, the draft resolution fails to take into
account the complex reality of Non-Self-Governing
Territories. For the United States, the very term “nonself-governing” seems inappropriate for those who can
establish their own constitution, elect their own public
officers, have representation in Washington and choose
their own economic path.
The United States fully supports countries that
choose independence, and we are proud to welcome
them as equal and sovereign partners. However, not all
Territories choose independence, and we equally
support their right to a full measure of selfgovernment, including the rights to integration and free
association. The world encompasses a wide variety of
people, places and political circumstances. That
richness does not allow for just one path. The United
States believes that a single standard should be applied
to every Territory, and we call upon Member States to
respect the choices that are made by residents of NonSelf-Governing Territories.
In conclusion, we look forward to a significant
dialogue with the Committee of 24 in 2004, and it is

A/58/PV.72

our hope that all parties will cooperate so that a
reduction in the number of Non-Self-Governing
Territories can be achieved.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will take a decision on the draft
resolution entitled “Dissemination of information on
decolonization”, contained in Part III, chapter XII,
section G, paragraph 7, of the report of the Special
Committee.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Japan,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,

Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
The draft resolution was adopted by 162 votes to
3 (resolution 58/110).
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/58/L.21, entitled
“Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, France, Gambia, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,

35

A/58/PV.72

Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri
Lanka,
Sudan,
Suriname,
Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Belgium, Estonia, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Israel, Micronesia (Federated States of)
Draft resolution A/58/L.21 was adopted by 154
votes to 2, with 8 abstentions (resolution 58/111).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Portugal and
Uganda informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour; the delegations of
France, Italy and the Netherlands had intended to
abstain.]
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote on the resolution just adopted. May I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Pisa (United Kingdom): I should like to
explain the United Kingdom’s votes on the resolutions
on dissemination of information on decolonization and
on implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. As
Members will have seen, the United Kingdom voted
against both of those resolutions.
With regard to the resolution on dissemination of
information on decolonization, the United Kingdom
remains of the view that the obligation that that text
places on the Secretariat to publicize decolonization
issues represents an unwarranted drain on the scarce
resources of the United Nations. The resolution is,
therefore, unacceptable to the United Kingdom. The
United Kingdom also continues to find some elements

36

of the text of the resolution on the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples to be unacceptable.
However, despite our negative votes on those
resolutions, the United Kingdom remains committed to
modernizing its relationship with the overseas
Territories, taking fully into account the views of the
peoples of those Territories and continuing to further
the process of informal dialogue with the Special
Committee of 24 on decolonization over the coming
year.
Mr. Lewis (Antigua and Barbuda): My delegation
voted in favour of the resolution on the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, because of its
importance in reiterating the relevance of the principles
of self-determination and decolonization to the
remaining
Non-Self-Governing
Territories,
in
particular, the small island Territories in the Caribbean
and the Pacific.
We take particular note of the reference in
operative paragraph 8 calling for implementation of
actions approved by the General Assembly regarding
the First and Second International Decades for the
Eradication of Colonialism. In this connection, we are
pleased with the insertion in the proposed programme
budget for Political Affairs for 2004-2005 of an added
indicator of achievement, namely, the effectiveness of
research and analytical studies and reports on
conditions in the Territories, and the effectiveness of
publicity campaigns.
Information derived from these studies would be
critical to the understanding of the often complex
nature of the situation on the ground in the Territories
themselves, if we are to make informed decisions in
this Assembly to bridge the democratic deficit which is
inherent in even the most benevolent of colonial
models. Accordingly, we call on the Department of
Political Affairs to ensure that it carries out this
unimplemented mandate by arranging for the
completion of these important studies and analyses.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 19?
It was so decided.

A/58/PV.72

Agenda item 40 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
(e) Assistance to the Palestinian people

Draft resolution (A/58/L.33)
The President: I should like to inform members
that due to the late hour, action on draft resolution
A/58/L.33, under agenda item 40 (e) will be taken at a
later date.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

37
